---
layout: default
title: 
---
# SCARCITY OF "LEADERS"

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Jan. 2, 1912\

T he torn-up condition in which the Republican and Democratic Parties
find themselves has furnished the text to Democratic, Republican and
insurgent papers to indulge in sundry jeremiads over the past, when a
"Republican leader like Pratt" held the Republican factions united, and
an "equally powerful Democratic leader, David B. Hill," led the
Democratic hosts in a solid phalanx. The jeremiads of these philosophers
are but exhibitions of bourgeois shallowness.

It is not leaders who make movements; it is movements that make leaders.
While, no doubt, there is quite a perceptible element that is blindly
led in all movements, the movements themselves would not be, but for an
element among the led that really leads, and whom the visible leader
symbolizes rather than leads.

What makes leadership possible is the unity of interests in those that
are led. Pratt could lead the Republicans, Hill the Democrats, and,
before these leaders, their predecessors, the Tildens and the Dixes, the
Seymours and the Thurlow Weeds, could lead their respective parties,
because each group was of itself held together by the hoop of their
special economic interests.

Socialists contend that Democrats spell R-e-p-u-b-l-i-c-a-n, and
Republicans spell D-e-m-o-c-r-a-t. The economic interests of the two are
one---but only in the fundamentals. For instance, both are solid against
the working class. Apart from this and some other fundamentals, the
bourgeoisie is not a solid, but a mob of mutually competing units.

Even today, when concentration has reached its seeming climax in
individual industries, it has not yet reached the point of perfection
where all the industries are under one hat. These several industries,
being mutually tributary, and still being held separate in many
instances, naturally fight one another. In order to conduct their fight
with organized effectiveness, these interests have grouped themselves
roughly and respectively under the Democratic and Republican banner.

So long as the group has approximately an economic foundation for unity,
the grouping is solid---and the leader can lead. What is happening today
is that, everywhere in the land, the state of New York foremost, the
economic foundation for the two groups is melting away. The hoop that
held the two groups being sundered, the one-time solidarity of each is
no more. Hence the leader is absent.

From the present distracted condition of the two old parties, the
socialist derives comfort only. Not the comfort that one feels for the
distress of another, but the comfort that comes from the proof that his
foundation is solid.

Only the socialist has a constituency that time can only solidify, never
loosen---the working class.

While the foundation for the capitalist parties needs must shift and
sink, the foundation for the Socialist Labor Party can only gain in
breadth, depth, and in firmness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
