---
layout: default
title: 
---
# BRANDEIS AND EFFICIENCY

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Oct. 20, 1912\

I n *Collier's Weekly* for Sept. 14, Louis D. Brandeis utters the maxim
that "efficiency does not grow indefinitely with increasing size" in a
capitalist plant. Whereby Mr. Brandeis tells a truth, but one of the
most dangerous type which consists in suppressing, or ignoring, the
other half of the truth.

Efficiency is not an inseparable accompaniment of increasing size. Size
may increase without efficiency; efficiency may increase without size.
The illustrations of these facts are too numerous to need mention. Nor
is that the fact of importance. The matter of importance is whether that
efficiency that human progress demands can be reached without size.

Progress demands large production of wealth. The volume of wealth is the
measure of the possibilities for progress. The measure of efficiency is
the volume of wealth produced with least waste, and with the least
amount of toil possible. Is such efficiency possible without size? It is
not.

Physically, the perfection of electricity, for instance, may diminish
the size necessary for a machine to do its work. The elephantine steam
engine may be, and is being, supplanted by the relatively diminutive
motor. But that is not what is meant by size.

The size of its plant is its value---the amount of crystalized
socially-necessary labor for its production. Size, accordingly, implies
value. Nor yet does efficiency grow with size, properly understood. But
the efficiency that society demands is inseparable from properly
understood size.

It is in this matter as with armies. A small army skillfully managed may
rout a larger one in the hands of skill-less captains. But that is not
to say that a large army cannot have a skilled captain, or that, so
captained, a larger army need not outclass a smaller, and scatter it.

The analogy of the army may be pursued further. The larger an army, all
the larger are the demands upon the captain's skill; and the point is
imaginable where the army becomes too large for any one captain, in
which case the army's efficiency would not keep step with its size. At
the same time, the increased size of an army beyond its immediate
management by one captain does not preclude, on the contrary, it
dictates, the army's subdivisions under immediate captains, who, in
turn, are under one field marshal.

The limit to the size of an army, efficient for its purposes, is purely
speculative. Likewise speculative is the size of a plant of production,
efficient for its purpose. For the same reason that efficiency can keep
step with an army's increasing size, the efficiency of a plant of
production need not suffer, and can grow, and will grow, with the
plant's increasing growth.

There is no help to be looked for by capitalism from a perspective
"breakdown" of efficiency due to size. Size in incited by efficiency.
efficiency flows from size. And size will wax and wax to the point when
capitalism will "break down," not because of the stoppage of efficiency,
but because the human agency of efficiency, the wage-slave class, in
whose hands, from captainships down to "high privateships,\" the
administration of the plants will be found more and more completely
lodged, will discontinue administering for a parasite class, and will
administer for themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
