---
layout: default
title: 
---
# DIVORCE

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Dec. 3, 1912\

E ither the socialists are right and society is *rising* by a return to
the social standards of the old-time tribal communities; or the
socialists are wrong, and bourgeois philosophy is right, to the effect
that a return to the social standards of the olden days is a decline,
and then society must be in the course of *dissolution*.

The social status of women under class rule stands out in marked
contrast to her status in the tribal and pre-class-rule era.

From being, in the tribal era, the mistress in her home, she became a
chattel under class rule. From being the owner of her children, she
became the breeder of heirs for her husband, lord and master, whom she
pledged herself at the altar to obey. From being the namer of her
children, she lost her own name-identity, the same going up into that of
her husband.

The new status was extolled as "chastity," "virtue," "duty," and
whatnot, the praises bestowed upon it being but cloaks to conceal the
actual vassal if not chattel status of the wife.

It goes without saying that, where such a state of things exists, two
different standards of morality are raised"one for the vassal, the wife,
a strict standard; one for the master, the husband, a loose standard.
The fact came into strongest prominence in the matter of divorce.
Chastity was demanded of the wife"a breach of the same at first
forfeited her life, later punished her with a forfeiture of home. And
all this was put down as the top-flower of civilization.

All the time, socialism has been holding a different language. It tore
the veil that covered woman's degradation, and it pointed the finger
upon the degradation itself. It denied that what was extolled as choice
flowers of civilization was such. Socialism did more. It pronounced the
"flowers" thorns, and it foretold that the "flowers\" would wither to
make room for the restoration of woman's freedom; along with that, as a
consequence, the purification of man.

By degrees, the socialist position is being made good; its prognostics
are being realized. The changing laws on divorce are the beam which
denotes the current's steady direction. Quite such a beam is the report
of the British Royal Commission recommending positively drastic changes
in the existing laws on divorce. Leaving aside the minute considerations
of details that rather tends to confuse than enlighten, the
recommendations of the Royal Commission"beginning with the placing of
husband and wife on an equality of duty in the matter of chastity"look
to the restoration of conjugal relations to where the same stood in the
pre-class-rule tribal days. Then, marriage lasted as long as it had the
consent of both the parties, and it ended when the consent ended.

It is an easy matter to yell "free love!" and look the picture of
"outraged decency." Those from whom the yell and the look usually
proceed are well known to be "stop, thief!" criers. Upholders of a
social order under which prostitution is "a necessary evil" can earn
contempt only for the hypocrisy of their yell and look.

The fact remains that, with developing material conditions, the race is
steadily retracing its steps, and, consciously or unconsciously, is
endeavoring to regain the social status that it abandoned temporarily
\-- though the temporariness covers thousands of years"in order to
secure the material basis (plentiful wealth with absence of arduous
toil) whereby to free the pre-class-struggle status from the ills that
beset it.

The report of the British Royal Commission enlarging the field of
divorce is an unmistakable sign of the times. As society tends with ever
more powerful tendencies toward socialism"the sublimated communism of
the pre-class-struggle status of the tribal social order \-- inevitable
are the manifestations of the tendency to free conjugal life of the ills
of class-rule conditions.

It is better for the man, it is better for the woman, it is better for
the children, it is better for society that matches that have suffered
shipwreck be not perpetuated by shams.

Whether, indeed, the change is for the better or for the worse, there
will be differences of opinion, according as class interests or habits
of thought may dictate. Upon one thing there can be no difference of
opinion"society increasingly recognizes the immorality of keeping them
coupled whom love has uncoupled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
