---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Sweating System

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 3 June 1899.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We are unfeignedly glad to see the members of the tailoring trade in
Dublin bestirring themselves to put an end to the sweating system in
connection with that industry. Unfortunately in a great many of our most
important trades any discontent which exists is too often attributed to
merely imaginary causes, and the money and energy of the workers
frittered away in a foolish effort to win the co-operation of the
employers in an attempt to better the condition of Labour.

In this move of the tailoring craft, however, there are to be found the
tokens of a recognition on the part of the men that, from whatever
quarter assistance may voluntarily come, from the side of the masters
nothing can be hoped for, -- except by pressure of the Union on the one
hand or the threat of withdrawal of custom on the other. This fact helps
to clear the air and will, no doubt, be highly beneficial to the men in
so far as it will serve to solidify their ranks and compel them to
realise that it is only by the financial and moral strength of their
organisation they can hope to achieve success, and not at all by any
reliance upon the goodwill of employers.

For the benefit of the general public we may here set down some of the
principal factors in the dispute alluded to. The central grievance upon
which attention is directed, if not the only one at present, lies in the
employment of what are known as 'outworkers'. Such outworkers are men or
women for whom the employer provides no workshop or other facilities,
but who execute at home whatever work they receive. This system has a
double disadvantage for those workers who work only in the shop, or as
it is technically termed, on 'the board'. In the first place, it makes
impossible any effective supervision of the conditions under which the
work is performed -- and thus opens the way for all manner of inroads on
the 'log', or price list, and provides the employing class with a
reserve of unorganised labour continually competing with the organised
workers, and continually offering facilities to the employer in his
struggles with his workmen. In the second place, whereas the regular
union worker can only work for one employer at a time, and must take all
chances incidental to the fluctuations of that employer's business, the
outworkers can serve two or three firms at once and thus assure
themselves of work, if not from one, then from the other. The result
being that the union worker, having insecurity of employment to reckon
with, must necessarily seek for such a rate of wages as will
counterbalance such insecurity, but the outworkers having greater
facilities for procuring work can, and do, accept lower wages. Add to
this the fact that even if both sections of workers got the same wages
IN CASH yet, owing to their peculiar circumstances, the outworkers would
be the less costly to the employer as they would be providing their own
workshop, fires, etc. Under such conditions it is no wonder that the
regularly organised members of the tailoring craft regard the existence
of the outworking, or sweating, system as a danger to their best
interests. Indeed it were a wonder were it otherwise, for the facts
herein set forth give but the faintest outline of the evils contained in
the system of outworking. For instance the fact of such work being
performed within the small compass of a working-class 'home' is fatal to
the health of those employed upon it, and engenders fever and other
contagious diseases which, through the medium of the garments, are
spread throughout the entire community. Then, like all other 'home'
work, it invariably leads to female and child labour -- all the members
of the family being pressed into the service. Thus a crop of evils of
the most serious nature are fostered by this system of sweating against
which our friends of the tailoring craft are now arrayed.

But what of the remedy? We might, were we so minded, placidly -- and
quite correctly -- point out to our tailoring friends that the only
remedy is Socialism, that nothing short of the public ownership and
democratic control of the means of life will finally rid them of their
industrial troubles; that sweating is but the natural child of
Capitalism, and that to get rid of the one you must abolish the other.
But this is not our attitude, nor is it the attitude of the scientific
Socialist wherever he is found. Socialism is indeed the only permanent
remedy, but Socialists seek for a mitigation of present evils even
whilst pressing for the abolition of the source from whence they sprung.
Indeed, Socialists are the most imperative of all in agitating for
immediate reforms because we know that no measure of relief to the cause
of Labour is to-day possible, which does not carry within it the germ of
Socialist principles -- is not in a greater or less degree an
application to industrial life of the Socialist idea. Thus the only
radical and effective remedy for the evils of sweating, viz the entire
suppression of outworking, is perhaps too herculean a task for mere
trade-union effort to accomplish, but lies well within the range of what
the workers might accomplish by political action *as a class*. And as
the regulation of industrial activity by the workers themselves, instead
of by a dominant class, is the very essence of the Socialist conception
so even that partial application of the principle which would be shown
in the spectacle of working-class representatives in the House of
Commons forcing this upon the employers, lies along those lines of
progress we desire to travel. We would advise our friends to study that
fact well, and then ask themselves why it is that our Home Rule
representatives, so ready to serve the class interests of the tenant
farmers, are so utterly indifferent to the class interests of the town
workers.

Meanwhile in every effort their union may make towards abolishing the
evils of sweating, the tailoring trade can count upon our heartiest
co-operation.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
