---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1899

# Our Goal

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Le Socialiste*, April 23 and 30, 1899;\
[Translated]{.info}: for marxists.org by Mitch Abidor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socialism is the science that brings a solution to the situation created
by capitalist centralization.

Socialism proclaims that no change beneficial to the workers of the shop
floor, the fields or the offices can be carried out as long as the
political and administrative leadership of the country are monopolized
by the capitalist class, and as long as the producers, organized in a
class party, have not taken control of public powers, the first and most
powerful instrument of social reforms.

Socialism maintains and proves that there is only one solution to the
social question as it presents itself in capitalist civilization: it's
that all the centralized labor instruments, such as the railroads,
factories, textile works, mines, large farming properties, banks, etc,
become national property and be given over to the associated workers,
who will operate them with a contract laying out conditions, not for the
profit of a few capitalists, do-nothings and thieves, but for the profit
of the entire nation.

The international socialist party, which organizes and fights in all the
civilized countries, has only undertaken the conquest of public powers
in order to fulfill this goal, which is not a utopia, but to the
contrary is the inevitable outcome of the movement of capitalist
production. One need only look around to see that the state --- which is
nothing but the thing of the capitalists --- has already taken from
private industry the railroads, metal works, telegraphs, post offices,
tobacco, the manufacturing of money, etc, and that inevitably other
private industries will also fall under its control in a more or less
near future.

If the industries already taken over by the state --- which instead of
representing the interests of all the classes of the nation function for
the profit of the capitalist class alone --- don't fulfill the socialist
ideal, it's because they aren't run by the associated workers in the
interests of the nation, but by functionaries in a budgetary interest.
But this monopolization, which takes place against the private interests
of categories of capitalists, indicates the march that industrial and
commercial evolution necessarily follows in our era.

Expropriate the capitalist class for the profit of the nation; put the
major instruments of labor at the disposition of workers organized in
production societies, taking in all the intellectual and manual
capacities indispensable for their sound operation; this is the goal of
the Worker's Party.

This transformation of capitalist property into national property will
create social well-being.

The anarchic production of capitalist civilization , which only knows
how to engender the poverty of the producers with its overabundances of
merchandise and its periods of overwork and of unemployment, will be
replaced by nationally and internationally regulated production,
calculated according to the needs that are to be satisfied. Industrial
inventions and improvements , no longer serving to enrich a few
individuals, will increase the means of leisure and enjoyment of all
members of society.

Capitalism has only known how to cause humanity unhappiness; socialism
will establish peace and happiness among men.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
