---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Rulers and Labour

### A Remonstrance Addressed to English Socialists

#### (1901)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, October 1901.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A few months ago we called attention in the columns of the **Workers'
Republic** to the extraordinary utterances of certain English Socialists
concerning the Home Rule party and its attitude towards Labour and
Socialism. We pointed out that this Home Rule party was essentially a
capitalist party, inspired solely by a consideration for capitalist
interests, and that the few 'Labour men' in that party were of the type
of the Woods, Burts and Pickards of the English Liberal party -- were
baits to lure the workers on to the official party hook. We also
expressed the opinion that the action of English Socialists in giving
such commendatory notices to the enemies of the Irish Socialists was
nothing short of treason to the International Labour movement. This
remonstrance of ours has been as entirely disregarded as if it had been
but the fulmination of a Liberal conference. That section of the English
Socialists to whom we refer are apparently as ready to sacrifice the
interests of the Irish Socialists to suit their party convenience as
their English masters have always been to sacrifice Ireland to suit
their class interests. The phrase 'International Solidarity of Labour'
which they mouth so glibly does not take in Ireland in its scope.

Have we no remedy? We have, and if the present remonstrance is as little
heeded as the first we shall take that remedy into our own hands with
results that we have no doubt will be somewhat disastrous to the
election prospects of future ILP candidates in British constituencies
where the Irish working class reside in any numbers. But first to
explain the position. For some time past Mr Keir Hardie MP and his
colleagues on the **Labour Leader** newspaper have been assiduously
instilling into the minds of the British Socialists the belief that Mr
John Redmond's Home Rule party are burning with enthusiasm for labour
and are favourably inclined towards Socialism. (We beg our readers in
Ireland not to laugh at this; we are not exaggerating the case one
whit.) Mr Keir Hardie has appeared on the platform with the Home Rule
MPs at Irish gatherings, has given his most unqualified praise to them
at gatherings of his own party -- praise as staunch Labour men, please
mark! -- and in his paper, the aforesaid **Labour Leader**, he and
another writer signing himself 'Marxian' have for the past few months
left no stone unturned to imbue their readers with the belief that the
Home Rule party are staunch democrats and socialistically inclined.

When Mr Keir Hardie was last in Parliament he on one occasion moved an
amendment to an address to the throne -- the amendment being in favour
of finding work for the unemployed. The Home Rule members refused to
support him. He moved an amendment to an address of congratulation on
the birth of some royal baby, observing it should rather be a vote of
condolence to the families of the Welsh miners who had just then been
lost in a colliery disaster in Wales; the Home Rule members voted
against him and in favour of royalty. The men who are leaders of the
Home Rule party now, were the leaders of the party then also. This
session they have voted in favour of several Labour measures, and Mr
Hardie and his friends seek to make great capital of this fact. But,
paradoxical as it may seem to say so, their vote is not cast in favour
of these measures, but against the Unionist government which opposed
them. Had a Home Rule government been in power in England and opposed
these Labour measures, the Home Rule Irish party would have supported
the government against Labour as they did in the past.

The present leader (?) of the Home Rule party, Mr John Redmond, is the
gentleman who made himself notorious in Ireland by denouncing (at
Rathfarnham) the agricultural labourers for forming a trade union. He is
the gentleman who, when the Irish Working Class first got the Municipal
franchise granted them in 1898, stumped this country asking the workers
to vote for landlords to represent them -- in order, he said, to show
the English people that we would not make a revolutionary use of our
power.

The Irish working class answered him by forming independent Labour
Electoral organisations, and sending landlords and middle class Home
Rulers alike about their business. Mr Keir Hardie praised them in the
**Labour Leader** for doing so; he now praises as the leader of the
Irish democracy the very man whose insidious advice they rightfully
scorned.

Mr Tim Harrington MP, and Lord Mayor of Dublin by the intrigues of the
Home Rulers, is the gentleman who is notorious for having declared that
sixteen shillings a week was enough wages for any working man. He is
also the gentleman who ousted from the Mayoral chair another Home Ruler,
Lord Mayor Pile, whom he declared to be a traitor, and then became
treasurer of a committee organised to present this 'traitor' with a
valuable testimonial for his services to the city.

One of the most highly placed men of the Executive of the United Irish
League, the official Home Rule party, is Mr P. White, MP, who is well
known to be the most detested employer of scab labour in the tailoring
trade of the city of Dublin.

During last municipal election in Dublin the Home Rule party ran as
candidate for the North City Ward one Alderman McCabe who had earned the
detestation of every trade unionist by voting in favour of giving
painting contracts to non union firms. Three Home Rule members of
parliament, Messrs Tim Harrington, Pat O'Brien the Home Rule Whip, and
Peter White were specially detailed to support this friend of blackleg
labour against McLoughlin his Socialist opponent, although the latter
had the unanimous endorsement of the Dublin Trades and Labour Council.

But have not the Home Rulers declared in favour of Labour, has not Mr
Redmond at Westport declared the fight against landlordism in Ireland to
be a 'trade unionist fight'? The meaning of phrases can only be
understood when you study the conditions out of which they arise. The
Home Rule party in Ireland is today fighting for its very existence. The
'scenes' in Parliament are but the distant echo of the fight made by the
Home Rulers to regain the support of the Irish Democracy. Despite all
the puffing and booming of the press, despite the lavish expenditure of
money on bands and faked up demonstrations, the United Irish League has
not caught on in Ireland, and has not forty sound branches in all the
country. The intelligent Irish Working Class despise the politicians.
When after the first Local Government election in Ireland the
professional politicians saw that the Irish workers had turned their
backs upon them they took alarm, and in order to sidetrack the Labour
movement in the next two elections they ran bogus labour candidates on
their tickets in opposition to the independent candidates ran by genuine
Labour organisations. This fact involved two sets of rallying cries. The
Home Rule politician's election cry in such contests was, "Nationality
and Labour should go together"; that of the genuine Labour candidates
was voiced by the then President of the Dublin Trades Council, Mr Leahy,
when he said in reply that "Labour should stand alone." We need not
insist upon asking which side English Socialists should agree with.
Imagine then our surprise and amusement when we found such utterances as
that of Mr Redmond at Westport, and the Home Rule rallying cry we have
quoted, both in their essence piteous appeals to the Irish workers to
return to the Home Rule fold to be shorn, reproduced in the **Labour
Leader** and ILP speeches, as "magnificent utterances in favour of
Labour". When an English Liberal says "we are fighting the cause of
Labour", the ILP laughs him to scorn, and when an Irish Home Ruler says
the same thing it is accepted as gospel truth. But not in Ireland, we
know our men.

But we are told the Home Rulers are at least staunch democrats. So was
Mr John Morley, yet Mr Keir Hardie made special efforts to defeat him at
Newcastle because he was not sound enough on the Labour question.
Staunch democrats! indeed, when they allowed an Irish National journal,
the **United Irishman**, to be suppressed three times for its fight
against the war, and refused to bring the matter up in the House of
Commons, but made the world ring with denunciations when one of their
own papers, the **Irish People**, was confiscated once.

We ask Mr Keir Hardie to consider these facts; we challenge any of his
Home Rule friends to dispute either the statements of the inference
drawn therefrom. We do not agree with Hardie's general policy, would
most decidedly not adopt it as our own, but we believe in his honesty of
purpose. We ask nothing from the English democracy but we do not wish to
cross one another's path. We believe the Irish working class are strong
enough and intelligent enough to fight their own battles and we would be
the last to advise them to trust to outside help in the struggle that
lies before them. We do not propose to criticise Hardie's voting
alliance with the Home Rulers, but a voting alliance need not be
accompanied by indiscriminate praise of your temporary allies.

Finally if this is not heeded we shall have to take other methods of
enforcing attention to our protest.

We shall ask the editors of the various Socialist papers of Great
Britain to publish the above, and we shall take their attitude towards
that request as an indication of the strength of that international
Solidarity of which we hear so much and see so little.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Signed\                           |
|                                   | Executive Committee\              |
|                                   | Irish Socialist Republican        |
|                                   | Party,\                           |
|                                   | 138 Upper Abbey Street, Dublin    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.2.2004
