---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1910

### Cowardly Idealism

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 424-54. Prepared for
the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The article on Joseph Petzoldt's book Das
Weltproblem von Positivistischem Standpunkte Aus (The Problem of the
World from the Standpoint of Positivism) was written by Plekhanov for
the collection of articles From Defence to Attack, which appeared in
1910. Joseph Petzoldt (1862-1929) --- German idealist philosopher, pupil
of Mach and Avenarius.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Review of: Joseph Petzoldt, *The Problem of the World from the
Standpoint of Positivism* (translated from the German by RL, edited by P
Yushkevich, Shipovnik Publishers, St Petersburg, 1909).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

This book is apparently destined to have conspicuous success among
certain circles of our reading public. First, it provides an exposition
of a philosophy now fashionable in these circles. According to J
Petzoldt, the aim of the book is

\... to explain the usually falsely construed central point of the
positivist understanding of the world, substantiated by Wilhelm Schuppe,
Ernst Mach and Richard Avenarius, ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ and to comprehend this
world-outlook as historically necessary, logically inevitable and
therefore, most probably, final in its essential features. (p vi)

That will suffice at present to attract the attention of numerous
readers to the work concerned; and apart from this, Petzoldt knows how
to write with great clarity. True, it is not that scrupulous clarity
which helps one to overcome the difficulties of the subject, but that
deceptive clarity which tends to conceal them from the reader. It is the
clarity of very superficial thinking, which brings its work to a halt
just where its main task begins. But this is not a bad thing. A very
superficial philosophy is just what we need at present. The reading
public which is buying up the works of the Bogdanovs, Valentinovs and
Yushkeviches, ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ and leaving unsold in book stores such a
splendid work as Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach* --- this reading public does
not have and never will have the slightest need of profound
philosophical works. Hence there is every reason to expect that
Petzoldt's *The Problem of the World* will quickly run into several
editions.

But since I do not share the philosophical infatuation fashionable just
now, and since I am not content with the sort of clarity that conceals
the difficulties of a subject instead of helping to overcome them, I
consider it worthwhile subjecting to criticism the principal ideas set
forth in Petzoldt's book. Who can tell? Perhaps I shall find a reader
who prefers to use his own brains for thinking rather than to follow the
latest fashion in philosophy. Anything can happen in this world!

The fundamental idea of Petzoldt's whole book is expressed by the author
himself in the following words:

There is no world-*in-itself*, there is only a world *for us*. Its
elements are not atoms and not other absolute beings, but the
'sensations' of colour, sound, touch, space, time, etc. In spite of
this, things are not only subjective, not only phenomena of
consciousness --- on the contrary, we must conceive of the parts of our
environment, composed of these elements, as existing in the same manner
both at the moment of perception and when we no longer perceive them. (p
v)

I leave aside for the time being the question of what is meant exactly
by the proposition that 'sensations' must be regarded as fundamental
elements of the world. I will dwell at present on the following: 'There
is no world-*in-itself*, there is only a world *for us*.' So Petzoldt
assures us. We believe him and say: 'Since there is no world-in-itself,
there is nothing objective; all things are subjective and the world is
only our idea of it.' We wish to be consistent, but Petzoldt does not
want that. No, he objects, in spite of there being only the world *for
us*, this world is not only our idea of it, and things are not only
subjective; they are not only phenomena of our consciousness. Let us
admit that too: we believe Petzoldt. But what is the meaning of: things
are not only subjective, they are not only phenomena of our
consciousness? It means that in spite of there being only the 'world for
us', there is also the 'world-in-itself'. But if there is the
world-in-itself, then Petzoldt is wrong in proclaiming that the
world-in-itself does not exist. What are we to do now? What are we to
believe? To extricate us from this difficulty, our author advises us, as
we know, to conceive of the parts of our environment as 'existing in the
same manner both at the moment of perception and when we no longer
perceive them'. But unfortunately this advice does not in the least get
us out of our difficulties. The question here is not *what* things are
like at the moment we do not perceive them, but whether they exist
independently of our perception. According to Petzoldt, this question
can only be answered affirmatively; yes, things exist independently of
our perception, that is to say, they do not cease to be when we stop
perceiving them. But this reply does not correspond to what *Petzoldt
himself* thinks and says. To say that a thing does not cease to exist
even when we cease to perceive it is the same as saying that it has
being which does not cease even when the thing no longer exists '*for
us*'. Then *what sort* of being is this? The answer is as clear as twice
two are four: it is *being-in-itself*. But Petzoldt assures us that
there is no being-in-itself. Again I ask: what are we to do, *which*
Petzoldt are we to believe? The Petzoldt who reiterates that there is
'no world-in-itself' or the one who proves that the world exists even
independently of our perception of it, that is, that there is a
world-in-itself? This is a question truly in the mood of Hamlet! Let us
work out the answer for ourselves, since it is useless to expect help
from our author --- he himself does not 'sense' the contradiction in
which he is so *ludicrously* struggling.

### II: Thesis

There is no world-*in-itself*, there is only the world *for us*; there
is not only the world *for us*, there is also the *world-in-itself*.
Such is the antinomy in which Petzoldt is entangled. In order to see
where exactly he committed his sin against logic, we shall have to
examine separately what he says in favour of each of the two sides of
the antinomy.

There is no world-*in-itself*, there is only the world *for us*. Why
does Petzoldt think so?

Because he believes the *doctrine of substance* to be completely
untenable. He says:

The idea of substance contradicts experience. Not in a single thing do
we find such a something that underlies the thing, something that would
constitute its inner essence and remain unaltered in it under all
changes determined by time and circumstances\... We can only resolve
things into a number of exclusively changeable qualities --- which
psychology calls sensations, into what can be seen, what can be touched,
what produces sound, what has taste, and so on, which in the course of
time are replaced in everything by something else which can be seen,
touched, and so on; but never, even with the most perfect instruments,
do we discover a part which is indefinable by its quality, to say
nothing of such an indefinable something underlying all things. It is a
pure thought-thing about which reality knows nothing. (pp 60-61)

Further, in characterising the development of the philosophy of
antiquity, Petzoldt asserts that the notion of substance leads
inevitably to dualism:

Heraclitus and Parmenides, ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ however differently they
conceived of *what* properly speaking, that is which only is present in
appearance --- being in a state of rest, or *becoming* which knows no
rest --- nevertheless agreed that it is the eye and the ear and the
senses in general which conjure up before us a false picture of the
world and are the cause of all error\...; that we can expect truth from
reason only. This dualism also is an inevitable consequence of the idea
of substance. (p 93)

Somewhat further on it appears that the idea of substance, developing in
the most logical way, changes into the idea of something which is within
things much in the same way as the soul is within the body according to
the views of the animists:

Since substance, in the final analysis, is everything, then it must also
contain the principle of motion and of change in general; and as it,
generally speaking, cannot be perceived by the senses --- on the
contrary, visual appearance, appearance perceived by the senses conceals
it from us, but since it nevertheless is the essential in every thing,
then it is hidden in the thing, as the soul, as it were, of the thing.
(pp 113-14)

This, of course, is quite untrue. But the important point to me is not
that it is untrue but that it seems to Petzoldt to be true. I set myself
the task of expounding in his own words the principal arguments he
advances in favour of the thesis: there is no world-*in-itself*, there
is only a world *for us*. To accomplish this task, I shall have to make
one more extract in which the question of substance is also dealt with:

The knowledge of the real world could have developed in a straight line
after Protagoras ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ only if we had been able to free
ourselves completely from the idea of substance, if we had realised that
the strong tendency of philosophical teachings to diverge was based only
on fruitless efforts to find an imaginary absolute world, only on the
unjustified belief in an absolute being, an absolute truth, not
dependent upon anything subjective, on the delusion that behind the many
there must lie a one, behind the heterogeneity of being and reality ---
something homogeneous, immutable, persistent. Had Protagoras omitted or
been unable to cast this conception, which he had arrived at more by
brilliant intuition than by logical analysis, into propositions
unassailable in all respects and thereby made it relatively easy to pass
them on, it would have been the task of his wise followers to elevate
the new knowledge to the full light of consciousness and think it out to
the end. (p 110)

Now we are sufficiently well acquainted with the arguments advanced by
Petzoldt in defence of his thesis. It must be admitted that within the
limits of this defence our author is logical after his own fashion.
Actually, to say that there is no such thing as substance is to assert
that there is no world-in-itself, but only a world for us, for the
perceiving subjects. But who exactly are these 'we', these perceiving
subjects? Should we not attach *substantial* significance to them? Must
we not assume that the human ego is the *substance* underlying
*phenomena*? If Petzoldt would say 'yes' to these questions, that tiny
word would mean the total renunciation of all he has said *against* the
existence of substance. But, like his teachers --- Mach, Avenarius and
Schuppe --- he will not pronounce that tiny word. He will not accord
substantial significance to the human ego. He says:

Protagoras knew already that the soul is nothing outside of its content
and, consequently, this content does not require a special vehicle. He
was also aware that the sensual perceptions are the basis of the
spiritual elements, with which everything else is associated. Thus he
held in principle the point of view of our contemporary 'psychology
without the soul', and thus the prerequisites were provided for fruitful
investigation of the facts of the soul. (p 111)

Here again he is logical; but if there is no 'ego' as a substance
*undergoing* sensations, and no thing-in-itself as a substance *causing*
these sensations, what are we left with? We are left with nothing but
these sensations, which are thus transformed into the basic elements of
the world. He who denies the conceptional substance comes logically to
'Machism'.

Having substantiated his *thesis*, Petzoldt breaks into a song of
victory. He says:

Once science has fully overcome the idea of substance, a whole period of
thought, stretching over many thousands of years, has been brought to an
end. Philosophy's main previous task has been resolved. The history of
philosophy in its former sense has ended, since it was primarily the
history of the idea of substance, the history of metaphysics. (pp
211-12)

In a certain sense, this is true. If the concept of substance has been
eliminated, then by the very fact the most important of the problems
with which philosophy had struggled so long has also been eliminated.
Among these first place is held by the problems of the subject, the
object and their mutual relationship. If Petzoldt's 'positivism'
entitles us to dispense with these most difficult problems as empty
'metaphysical' concoctions, it lifts a considerable load off the
shoulders of the philosopher. Unfortunately, it does not and cannot
entitle us to disregard these problems. We very clearly see this from
the example of Petzoldt himself, whose *thesis* is followed by an
*antithesis*.

### III: Antithesis

There is not only a *world for us*; there is also a *world-in-itself*.
Our author proves this at least as successfully as he has substantiated
his thesis.

He rejects decisively Kant's concept of reason dictating its laws to
nature:

'It is not thinking that is determined by things, but things by
thinking', he exclaims. That is the proud and fateful Copernican
reversal through which the rationalistic passion, held in check in Kant
by his wide knowledge of and interest in the natural sciences, was to be
unfettered anew in his successors of theological origin. (p 181)

That is quite true. And Petzoldt's following remark is no less true:

If the laws governing phenomena originated only in the brain, then we
are at a loss to answer the question: how was the development of
organisms possible before the formation of the brain? From this it is
clear that whoever holds that things are determined by thinking delivers
himself body and soul to the devil of transcendentalism, of that
metaphysics which Kant most earnestly wished to see banished from all
genuine science, although he himself had completely fallen to it. (p
182)

But if it is absurd to say that things are determined by *thinking*, it
is no less absurd to assert that they are determined by *sensation*; and
if he who says that they are determined by thinking delivers himself
'body and soul to the devil of transcendentalism', then he who contends
that things are determined by sensation cannot hope to escape the same
terrible fate. To the first of these two rather poor thinkers, it is
indeed necessary to put the question: 'How was the development of
organisms possible before the formation of the brain?' But it is also
necessary to ask a similar question of the second of our poor thinkers:
how was the development of the universe possible before the formation of
organisms capable of having sensations? He can have only one answer to
this question: the universe then consisted of those elements which
later, in the organism, were to become sensations. But this is nothing
more than the height of 'transcendentalism\'!

However, that by the way. My task here is not to refute Petzoldt but to
indicate the arguments he uses to prove the correctness of his
antithesis. Let us follow him.

The most important of these arguments is contained, in my opinion, in
the following remarkable passage:

Let us try then to draw as clear a picture as possible of what results
when we cease to believe in the existence of things independent of
ourselves. I have only to close my eyes, and all the objects I now see
before me will vanish not only from the sphere of my perception but
vanish altogether. I have only to open my eyes again and they are there
anew; they arise again. In deep sleep the universe is annihilated, and
when I awake it arises again out of absolute nothingness. Is it not
clear that ideas of such possibilities can enter the head only of one
accustomed to think of everything in terms of ideas which come and go?
Could anyone lend himself to such fancies who, from the very beginning,
ascribes just as much independent existence to the physical, corporeal,
'non-ego' as he does to the psychical, the soul, the 'ego\'? Where in
this case is the consideration for the fact that independently of
whether my eyes are open, things always appear again either where they
were or in another place independent of my thinking, for the fact that
there is a fully consistent and law-regulated connection between the
things perceived? (pp 197-98)

This is a triumphant refutation of the views of people who refuse 'to
believe in the independent existence of things', that is to say, in the
existence of the world-in-itself. But Petzoldt does not rest on his
laurels. He gives no quarter to the idealism he has vanquished, and
finishes it off with arguments that combine overwhelming logical
thoroughness with the acidity of malicious satire:

Of course \[he continues\], the true idealist cannot be content with his
experience alone. In fact, the present moment is all that he is sure of.
It is in no way established for him that the world and human history
exist, that something must develop, that he himself was once a child and
grew up physically and mentally, that he lived yesterday --- more than
that, that he was living a moment ago --- all this might perhaps be but
a delusion, only a chain of ideas being lived through at the given
moment, a clever hypothesis created for the sole purpose of interpreting
logically that which is being perceived at the present moment --- just
try to prove to him the opposite! (p 198)

Whoever does not wish to get lost in this labyrinth of absurdities must
certainly recognise that things exist independently of our notions of
them, that is to say, not only for us, that is, also in themselves.
Which is what was to be proved. But if the antithesis is proved, what
about the thesis? If the world exists also in itself, if it existed
already prior to the coming of man, that is, if it exists *not only for
us*, how can Petzoldt claim that it exists *only for us*? We now know
how the thesis is proved and how the antithesis is proved: we are
familiar with both sides of the antinomy, but we do not see any way out
of it. There is not even a hint of synthesis, and this absence of a way
out is a bitter reproach to our logic. A way out must be found, cost
what it may!

### IV

All the difficulties of conceiving of the range of elements of the
optical and tactile qualities (such as red, blue, round, angular,
prismatic, conical, hard, soft, rough, etc) as existing outside of our
perceptions of them \[says Petzoldt\] spring from the difficulty we have
in detaching ourselves from the concept of absolute being and immersing
ourselves sufficiently in the idea of relative existence. Until recent
times, the great idea of Protagoras exerted only very insignificant
influence. Even Hume failed because he could not find a way to
relativism in principle. In his works (as in those of Hobbes before him)
we find only feeble rudiments of relativism, and only *Mach* and
*Avenarius* rediscovered the deeply buried truth and made it the main
factor in their world outlook. (pp 199-200) ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

This passage gives us to understand that the way out of the antinomy
wherein we have lost ourselves must be sought, not in the direction of
the antithesis, but in that of the thesis. The world also exists
independently of us, but this existence can in no way be acknowledged as
being-in-itself. The world exists *not only for us*, but its existence
*not only for us* is identical with its existence *only for us*. We
assert the antithesis but we do so only for the greater glory of the
thesis. Such is the solution implicit in the passage just quoted from
Petzoldt. Do you think it is an impossible solution? You are mistaken.
You are not well enough acquainted with 'modern' positivism.
^[\[6\]](#n6)^ Listen to Petzoldt:

Imagine observer A standing before a blossoming apple-tree and
describing to us what he sees. His description coincides with our own
observations. Let us assume that he turns away from the tree, and that
he no longer perceives it. This does not affect in the least our own
perception of the tree. The tree goes on existing for us, and in its
existence for us it is independent of A's perception. Moreover, by
eliminating the concept of substance we cease to make a distinction
between our perception, the 'image' of the tree in our perception, and
the perceived part of the tree itself: in perception we apprehend the
object immediately in its perceptible parts. If we now assume that
observer A is in principle entirely like ourselves, that he is a
sensitive and thinking person like ourselves, and that in principle we
find ourselves exactly in the same position in relation to the tree as
he, we at the same time also assume the existence of the tree
independently of our own perception of it; just as the tree continued to
exist after A had turned away from it, so it will go on existing if we
ourselves turn away from it. But if we deny or doubt this independent
existence, we also deny or doubt the existence of other people. So long
as we do not decide to do this, we have no possibility of denying the
continued existence of things even if we no longer perceive them. (p
200)

Now you see *how* the contest between thesis and antithesis is brought
to an end. You understand also *why* it ends in favour of the thesis.
Having eliminated the concept of substance, we cease to make any
distinction between our 'image' in the perception of the tree and the
part of the tree perceived. The dualism of being-in-itself and
being-for-us has given way to the kind of monism in which
being-in-itself is indistinguishable from being-for-us. True, this
monism smacks strongly of extreme subjective idealism: if we do not
differentiate being-in-itself from being-in-our-perception, the
existence of the 'blossoming apple-tree' must be considered to cease as
soon as we turn our backs on it, that is, when we cease to perceive it.
However, this would hold true only in the case when we denied the
existence of other people or, at least, had doubted it. But we do not
commit this sin at all. Quite the contrary! Without a moment's
hesitation, we 'imagine' observer A who perceives the 'blossoming
apple-tree' on our behalf while we stand with our backs to it. Since the
tree continues to exist in his perception of it, it follows that it
exists independently of us; which means that we have maintained all the
lawful rights of the antithesis. But, on the other hand, since the
tree's existence independently of 'us' is no more than its existence in
the perception of observer A, that is to say, existence only for 'us',
it follows that the tree has no being-in-itself. In other words, it
turns out that, although the antithesis seems to have maintained all its
lawful rights, so brilliantly defended by Petzoldt, the contest was won,
not by the antithesis, but by the thesis. How easily this truly
perplexing affair has been resolved! All that was required was the use
*in one and the same argument* of the word '*we*' in two different
senses: at first (in proving the antithesis) in the sense of a pronoun
in the first person singular, that is, instead of '*I*', and then (from
the moment observer A came on the scene) in the sense of the same
pronoun in the first person plural, that is, in the sense of the proper
'*we*' signifying not one person but many. *Eins, zwei, drei,
Geschwindigkeit ist keine Hexerei!* ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

But no matter how amazing our author's *Geschwindigkeit*, I take the
liberty of reminding him of the terrifying question he asked when
defending his antithesis and which he used like the cudgel of some hero
of old to strike down the idealists: 'How was the development of
organisms possible before the formation of the brain?' In the present
instance this question takes on the following form: 'How was the
development of "blossoming" trees possible before the appearance of
observer A, who went on looking at one of them at least, while "we" and
Mr Petzoldt turned our backs on it?' There can only be two possible
answers to this terrifying question. One of them runs: before 'we' and
observer A appeared there were no trees. This reply has the great
disadvantage of being in contradiction to the conclusions of geology, or
to be more exact, of paleophytology; but on the other hand it also has
the great advantage of being fully in accord with the fundamental
principle of Petzoldt's book, viz: there is no being-in-itself, the
world exists only for us. The other possible reply has a meaning
directly opposite to the first: the tree existed already at the time
when 'we' did not yet exist. This reply is fully confirmed by the
conclusions of paleophytology but causes 'us' and Mr Petzoldt this
unpleasantness, that it knocks down like a house of cards the whole
doctrine of 'modern' positivism. For if trees really did exist at the
time when we did not, that means that the world exists not only for us
but also in itself.

Incidentally, if we recognise the independent existence of the world
*only* because we believe in the existence of other people, we continue
to stand with both feet on the ground of 'pure phenomenalism'. But on
the admission of Petzoldt himself, 'pure phenomenalism' is nothing else
than one of the varieties of idealism (see above our author's
contemptuous reference to Auguste Comte and Mill). Therefore, Petzoldt
himself must be placed among the idealists. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ But his
idealism does not acknowledge its own existence and is afraid of its own
essence. This is unconscious and cowardly idealism.

This cowardly idealism is imagined to be *monism*, since it thinks it
has eliminated the '*dualism*' of being-in-itself and being-for-us. But
by what manner of logic was this imaginary dualism 'eliminated\'? By
admitting that the existence of the object independently of our
perception is but its existence in the perception of other people. The
blossoming apple-tree exists independently of me: this is proved by its
existence not only in my perception but also in that of 'observer A' and
of other egos. But if it exists in the perception of each of these
individuals, without having any 'being-in-itself', it must have as many
existences as 'we' have observers. In place of *monism* we arrive at
something in the nature of a parody of *pluralism*. But again 'we' do
not notice this 'turn of events', since 'our' idealism is not only
cowardly but unconscious.

### V

Not without reason is it said: know thyself. Petzoldt's unconscious
idealism has the shortcomings characteristic of idealism in general. But
to the shortcomings characteristic of all brands of idealism, Petzoldt
adds particular defects caused by its being unconscious. Conscious
idealism does not refuse to solve the fundamental question of all modern
philosophy, that of the mutual relation of subject and object, although
the solution it offers is a bad one. Petzoldt's unconscious idealism
evades the examination of this question on the excuse that the question
loses its meaning as soon as we renounce the concept of substance. But
just because Petzoldt's unconscious idealism, which calls itself modern
or real positivism, evades the problem of the mutual relation of subject
and object, the problem makes itself felt in the most unexpected and
unceremonious fashion in the arguments of his followers. Drive it out of
the door and it flies in through the window.

Indeed, the reader will recall that, on Petzoldt's invitation, we
imagined observer A to be 'in principle entirely like ourselves', and
standing beside a blossoming apple-tree. We did so hoping that this
gentleman would extricate us from the difficult situation in which we
found ourselves, stuck fast in the antinomy between Petzoldt's thesis
and his own antithesis. Now we know that he did us a very doubtful
service by taking us directly into the domain of idealism, which
Petzoldt and we were repudiating with all our might. But this did not by
any means exhaust the unpleasantness caused us by his appearance 'beside
the apple-tree'. His seemingly so innocent appearance there meant, in
fact, that we were unexpectedly confronted with the very same question
concerning the mutual relations of subject and object which Petzoldt and
we were hoping to evade. His appearance demonstrated to us that serious
philosophical problems, like things, exist quite independently of
whether men wish to consider them or not.

Observer A is 'in principle entirely like ourselves\'; he is just as
sensitive and thinking person like ourselves. That is splendid. But one
asks: does he exist only '*for us*' or does he exist also '*in
himself*\'?

To answer this question, let us assume for a minute that observer A
exists only in our imagination (Petzoldt's invitation to 'imagine'
observer A did not come by chance). In that case, observer A has, of
course, only being '*for us*' and any being '*in himself*' is alien to
him. He bears no resemblance at all to any kind of substance. That is
also good. But what is bad is that in that event his appearance (in our
imagination) does not offer us even that illusory solution of the
antinomy torturing us which our author had hoped to find in inventing
this gentleman; for in this case observer A exists, true, for us, but in
no way independently of us. But what is still worse is that if all
'other people', like gentleman A, exist only in our imagination, we
prove to be incurable solipsists; and then we have not the least right
logically to believe in the existence (that is, the real existence, and
not as the products of our imagination) of 'other people'. But even
Petzoldt himself, of course, would not dream of agreeing that solipsism
can solve a single question of philosophy, or represents anything more
than a mockery of philosophy.

It remains for us now to assume that gentleman A exists *not only* in
our imagination. But in making this hypothesis, we recall the sad
consequences that followed from the duality of the tiny word 'we' when
used by Petzoldt. Therefore, we should like, to begin with, to get
agreement on terminology.

The word 'we' signifies here all people apart from gentleman A. The
assumption that gentleman A exists not only in our imagination means
that he would exist even if we had *no* idea of him. Are we entitled to
make such an hypothesis? We are not only entitled, we are obliged to
make it because, as we have seen, the contrary hypothesis is utterly
untenable. But what is the upshot of our now being able to make this
hypothesis? The upshot is that gentleman A has not only being '*for us*'
but also being '*in himself*'.

The problem is now solved, but in quite a different way from that
planned by Petzoldt. He sought a solution proceeding from the idea that
being-in-itself was impossible. It turned out that the question could be
solved --- short of resorting to the absurdities of solipsism --- only
on the basis of the idea that it is essential to assume being-in-itself.
In other words, if you want to find the truth, you should proceed in the
opposite direction to that in which the 'positivist' Petzoldt is calling
you.

We shall bear that in mind. Now let us go on. What exactly is this
being-in-itself which we were compelled to recognise in spite of our
author's arguments? To whom does it apply? It applies, as a matter of
fact, to me, to you, to observer A, who, according to Petzoldt, is 'just
as sensitive and thinking person like ourselves', and, lastly, to all
'other people'. Now tell me, do you and I and all other people represent
something that is beyond the reach of knowledge? It would seem not. Why
then did Petzoldt think that being-in-itself is an attribute only of
unknowable substance? Simply because he has a wrong notion of
being-in-itself. He would like us to believe that he is a positivist in
its newest sense, but in fact turns out to be an idealist who clings to
an utterly obsolete, utterly bankrupt theory of cognition. This seems
improbable, but it only seems so because 'philosophers' of the school to
which Petzoldt belongs have been shrieking themselves hoarse about their
positivism. They were taken at their own valuation, which was very very
imprudent.

We have assumed that observer A exists, in spite of the fact that all
the rest of mankind have not the foggiest notion of him. Now let us
assume that 'we' have finally discovered that he does exist. In
consequence of this, he has begun to exist '*for us*'. Do 'we' have any
reason to think that on account of this he has ceased to exist in
himself? No, since to discover the existence of gentleman A does not
mean to destroy him. If this is so, it turns out that our gentleman now
exists in dual form: 1) *in himself*, 2) *for us*. In the first
instance, he is a thing-in-itself, and in the second instance, he is a
phenomenon. Nor can it be otherwise. All that I assert here in regard to
observer A, I assert also in regard to you, reader. First of all, you
exist in yourself, and, secondly, for me, that is to say, in my
imagination. Am I right? Perhaps, if you are a 'positivist' in the
newest sense, you will find my assertion to be 'metaphysical' and will
tell me that such duality is 'unnecessary\'? ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ Maybe you
will demand that I repudiate your being-in-itself and acknowledge that
you exist only for me, that is to say, in my imagination? I say in
advance that I will never agree to this, because if I did, I should
arrive at solipsism, and both Petzoldt and I reject solipsism decidedly.

What does all this mean? It simply means that Petzoldt is hopelessly
entangled in contradictions and that his 'positivism', which promised
radically to eliminate the very question of the mutual relation of
subject and object, has quite unexpectedly run up against this important
question and smashed itself to smithereens.

### VI

Now I invite the reader to recall the arguments our author used to
defend his thesis.

He said (see above) that the idea of substance contradicts experience,
since:

\... we can only resolve things into a number of exclusively changeable
qualities --- which psychology calls sensations\... but never, even with
the most perfect instruments, do we discover a part which is indefinable
by its quality\...

This reasoning, which he believes to be irrefutable and to which he
returns on almost every page of his book, in fact proves that he himself
has not yet emerged from the sphere of an obsolete and truly scholastic
theory of cognition.

For people who have outgrown this scholastic theory --- for example, the
materialists, at whom Petzoldt turns up his nose without the least
justification --- the question is not whether anything remains after we
have 'resolved' a thing into its 'qualities'. According to their
doctrine, it is quite ridiculous to pose the question in this way. The
quality of a thing is by no means a component part of it. This may be
easily verified if we take the example of, say, such a commonly known
thing as water. If we resolve this water into its component parts we
shall get oxygen and hydrogen. These two elements are component parts of
water. But can we describe them as *qualities*? This would really be
excusable only on the part of Gogol's Poprishchin. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^

What do we mean when we refer to the qualities of a thing? Its qualities
--- or, to use a more common and, in this case, more exact term, its
properties --- we materialists describe as the capacity of a thing to
modify itself in a certain way, under certain conditions, and to induce
corresponding modifications in other things connected with it in one way
or another. For example, water at 0°C freezes. That capacity to freeze
at the temperature mentioned is undoubtedly one of the properties of
water. Further: frozen water (ice) coming into contact with one's body
produces certain changes in the condition of the body, frequently
leading to illness, for instance, inflammation. This capacity of ice to
promote certain processes in one's body under conditions of more or less
continuous contact must also be regarded as its property. Those changes
in the state of the body which are produced by contact with ice are
accompanied by a *sensation of cold*. The capacity of ice to arouse this
sensation is again called its property. To Petzoldt, all properties of
all bodies are 'reducible' to sensations. He thinks so because, as we
know already, he takes the standpoint of idealism, although he is afraid
to admit it either to himself or to others. In fact, sensation is but
the subjective side of the process which begins when a given body ---
shall we say, ice --- starts to influence another body organised in a
certain way, for example, the human body. For a very long time past, the
idealists have been advancing the proposition, in opposition to the
materialists, that man is 'given' only his sensations and ideas, and
that therefore he can know only his sensations and ideas; whereas the
things-in-themselves, which, in the opinion of the materialists, are the
cause of sensations, are beyond the reach of knowledge. The idealists
look upon this proposition as of paramount importance. However, it
cannot withstand the faintest breath of serious gnosiological criticism.
What does it mean to know a given thing? It means that one must have a
correct idea of its properties. This idea of its properties is always
based on the sensations we experience when subjected to its influence.
Knowledge, like sensation, is always subjective, because the process of
cognition is nothing more than the process of forming certain ideas in
the subject. One must have a great deal of naïveté in philosophical
matters to believe that the discovery of what is presupposed in the very
concept of knowledge is a highly important gnosiological revelation. To
repeat that our knowledge is subjective is simply tautology. The
question is not whether knowledge is subjective: that is self-evident.
The question is: can knowledge be true? To put it another way: can the
ideas of the properties of a thing formed in the subject correspond to,
that is, not contradict, its real properties? This question presents
little difficulty when we remember that our ideas of a thing are created
on the basis of the sensations we experience when we come into contact
with it in some way or other. On the basis of our previous contact with
a thing we may have formed an idea of its properties that does not
conform to reality; in that case, sooner or later we shall feel this
lack of conformity when we again come into contact with the thing. Thus
if we thought that water could not solidify --- the savage natives of
the tropical countries actually have no idea of this property of water
--- we should realise our mistake at our first opportunity of seeing
water freezing. Experience is the judge which decides in the last resort
whether the idea of an object formed in the mind of a subject
corresponds to the properties of the object. Sometimes the judge needs
much time to solve one or other of the innumerable questions of this
sort. The old man is sometimes exasperatingly slow. But, generally
speaking, the older our judge becomes the more he sheds this defect.
Besides, no matter how long he takes to 'go into it', he must none the
less be recognised as a quite reliable judge. Should the subject's
conceptions, say those of our friend observer A, of the world
surrounding him not correspond even to a part of the real properties of
the world, he simply could not exist; he would perish in the struggle
for existence, in the same way as all other incompatible organisations
perish in it. Thus the very fact that subjects *exist*, that is, exist
in reality and not in the heads of some philosophising super-subjects or
other --- is our guarantee that their knowledge is not only 'subjective'
but is also true, at least partly, or in other words, that it, at least
partly, corresponds to the real properties of the world. This thought
could be expressed in another way: *the very fact that there exist
thinkers who proclaim the unknowability of the external world* (that is,
the world lying beyond sensations) *is our guarantee of its
knowability*.

Completely at a loss on this question, Petzoldt, being nurtured on
idealist prejudices, decided that, if the subject is 'given' only his
sensations, there is absolutely no need to assume the existence of any
kind of external cause for these sensations. He repudiated the existence
of things-in-themselves. But after doing so he admitted, as we have
seen, the existence of 'other people'. And by admitting the existence of
'other people', he *thereby admitted* the existence of
things-in-themselves, because each given person is, as we have seen, a
person (and, consequently, a thing) in himself, and at the same time is
a person (and, consequently, a thing) for another, that is, for his
fellow-man. There is no dualism of any kind here, no unnecessary
duality, since from the time other people came to be, not even one of
them, as far as we know, 'doubled' himself as a consequence of existing
not only in himself (and as a conscious being, for himself) but also for
others. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ If Petzoldt got himself involved in
contradictions, it was precisely because he knew nothing of the
materialist theory of cognition. He knew only that idealist gnosiology
which claims that knowledge based on sensations is not real knowledge,
since it supposedly does not reveal to us the true nature of things, but
tells us only about their external appearance. He was simple enough to
believe that all thinkers who recognise the existence of
things-in-themselves, must be agreed among themselves 'that it is the
eye and the ear and the senses in general which conjure up before us a
false picture of the world and are the cause of all error'. In clinging
to the utterly mistaken conviction that things which had the property of
being-in-themselves could not be perceived by the external senses ---
'on the contrary, appearance perceived by the senses conceals them from
us' --- he took up arms against the doctrine of being-in-itself, making
the struggle with this doctrine the principal task of philosophy. After
what I have said above, reader, about your and my being-in-ourselves, I
see no necessity to prove that Petzoldt was mistaken in attributing to
all thinkers who acknowledge such being the striving 'to find an
imaginary absolute world', accompanied by the belief in some kind of
absolute being, in some kind of absolute truth that is dependent on
nothing subjective. This enormous error, extremely unfortunate in its
results, arose from the fact that Petzoldt, as I have already remarked,
had a very poor understanding of the materialist theory of cognition,
and knew only the idealist gnosiology which, indeed, has committed from
time to time --- for example, in the person of Plato --- all the sins he
himself refers to. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ And only because he knew so little
about the materialist theory of knowledge, which had already acquired a
systematised form in the works of Feuerbach, did he turn to Protagoras,
whose well-known principle 'Man is the measure of all things', won him
over by its deceptive simplicity and obviousness. But we already know
that this proposition of Protagoras' was not fated to guide our author
out of a maze of insoluble and often highly comic contradictions.

### VII

In characterising the philosophy of Parmenides, Petzoldt says
reproachfully that it did not even consider the question, 'whether, and
how, the world of appearance, which after all exists in some manner and
is governed by laws, is related to the real world of the one which has
being' (p 85). Yet, adds our author, anyone who did not think formally
would regard this question as most important. I am very pleased to be
able to agree with Petzoldt, if only on this point. The question is, in
fact, one of cardinal importance. But it is a pity that, as we have
seen, Petzoldt himself was not only unable to cope with this question,
but could not even approach it. It does not occur to him either that
man's sensations and ideas can be related in a law-governed manner to
the external world. I shall not go as far as to say that Petzoldt could
not even approach this question because he has one of those 'minds that
think formally'. Of course, his thinking is distinguished by a strange
formalism, but the matter does not end there. Petzoldt's formal mind, in
addition, did not have the proper information. Quite unconsciously, he
continued to be under the influence of the idealist theory of knowledge
*even while he was rebelling against it*. And it was only because he
remained under its influence that he could maintain the belief that if
the world exists not only '*for us*', but also '*in itself*', then its
being-\'in-itself' is beyond the reach of our external senses. This is
just the same belief he chides Parmenides for holding: the belief in the
absence of any relation conforming to law between being 'in itself' and
being 'for us'. By clinging to this belief, he naturally discerned
dualism where in fact there was none. To get rid of this illusory
dualism, and lacking knowledge of the materialist theory of cognition,
he could think of nothing better than to deny 'being-in-itself'. And
this was tantamount to reconciliation with idealism. The only difference
was that one idealist theory of cognition was replaced by another still
less satisfactory and still more contradictory. He wanted to move
forward, but instead he moved backward, extremely pleased with himself
and imagining that his retreat practically solved the most difficult
philosophical question 'once and for all'. All the arguments advanced by
Petzoldt in defence of his thesis are constructed on a proposition
borrowed from the idealists, viz, that 'being-in-itself' cannot be
accessible to our external senses. The more often he repeats this
proposition, the more clearly revealed is the kinship of 'modern'
positivism with idealism of the purest water. True, Petzoldt is afraid
to admit this kinship, but fear is not a reason, and not even an
extenuating circumstance. Idealism, having turned cowardly, has not then
ceased to be idealism.

How poorly Petzoldt is acquainted with materialism may be seen,
incidentally, from the following passage in his book. While noting that
'the preservation of spiritual substance only', which is characteristic
of spiritualism, is empirically and logically impossible, he proceeds:

Matters are no better with the corresponding materialist reduction, the
elimination of the spiritual substance in favour of the material. To
assert that the perception of a colour, a sound, a pain, or the concepts
of loyalty, valour, science, war are identical with the process of
motion within the brain, that these sensations are one and the same as
this motion and not merely caused by it, is just as insufferable as to
assert that the world is only an idea, something without extension. (pp
162-63)

Our author would find himself in a real quandary if we were to ask him
which materialist exactly and in which work asserted that perception and
thought *are identical* with motion within the brain. True, two pages
further he writes that Hobbes 'explicitly denies spiritual phenomena, as
being immaterial'. But that is a very inept reference. Hobbes looked
upon spiritual processes as the inner states of matter in motion and, of
course, appropriately organised. Anyone who goes to the trouble of
reading his books may confirm this for himself. Petzoldt would
apparently have been far more justified had he cited the well-known
dictum: 'thought is matter in motion'. But, first of all, this phrase
was coined by someone who was by no means an authority on questions of
materialist philosophy, ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ and nothing similar to that
assertion will be found in the works of any one of the classical
materialists of the seventeenth, eighteenth or nineteenth centuries.
Secondly, even this awkward phrase did not suggest the identity of
thought and motion but that motion is a necessary and adequate condition
of thought. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ Thirdly, how does Petzoldt himself not
understand that one cannot flay the same ox twice, and that in reproving
the materialists for dualism on the ground that they distinguish
'being-in-itself' from being-in-perception, he had not the slightest
logical ground for accusing them at the same time of making these two
concepts identical? Fourth: 'What need acquaintances to reckon, when you
within the mirror writhe and beckon?' If anyone is guilty of identifying
sensation and motion --- or more exactly, identifying motion with
sensation --- it is precisely the modern 'positivism' of Mach, Avenarius
and Petzoldt. To reproach the materialists with having identified
sensation and thought with motion is to thrust on them that '*doctrine
of identity*' whose bankruptcy was so well exposed by Feuerbach, who
also demonstrated that this doctrine is a necessary component part of
idealist 'philosophy'.

To cap everything, Petzoldt himself believes it is necessary to include
among the materialists those scientists 'who regard spiritual
experiences as the products or physiological functions of material
substance, without however identifying them with material phenomena' (p
165). But if this be true, to what then is 'reduced' the reproach hurled
at materialism that 'it eliminates spiritual substance in favour of the
material\'? Simply to a failure to understand what the materialists are
talking about.

Petzoldt corrects himself:

It would be even better to define the essence of the problem by the
following delimitation. If the fundamental ideas or concepts which have
been developed to explain or describe natural phenomena are applied to
explain or describe spiritual processes then we are dealing with
materialism. (Ibid)

This correction only makes matters worse. If spiritual phenomena cannot
be described or explained by means of the ideas or concepts which were
developed to explain or describe *natural* phenomena, then the dualists
are right, since we then have, firstly, natural phenomena and, secondly,
spiritual phenomena not included in the first-named. In short, we then
have the dualism of nature and the soul or spirit. A fine 'monism' this
is, that so frequently and so unwittingly lands in the domain of 'ideas
or concepts' that are typical of dualism! But let us assume that
Petzoldt is simply expressing himself badly, and that when he speaks of
natural phenomena he is thinking of motion in the proper meaning of the
word. The question then arises: which of the prominent representatives
of materialism has explained or described spiritual phenomena with the
help of ideas or concepts that were developed to explain or describe
motion? Not one of the materialists of modern times! All the foremost
materialists of these times said that spiritual phenomena and motion are
two aspects of the one and the same process taking place in the
organised body (belonging, of course, to nature). One may or may not
agree with this. However, it cannot but be recognised, without
committing the most glaring injustice, that in this there is neither the
identification of one series of phenomena with another, nor the
admission that it is possible to explain or describe one series of
phenomena by the ideas or concepts 'developed' to explain or describe
another. Petzoldt defines materialism badly because he knows it badly.
As a result, it is not surprising that he makes laughable errors every
time he takes to criticising it. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

### VIII

Petzoldt has no better reason either for the reproaches he levels at
Spinoza. He says:

Spinoza\... understands both substances, not as products of God's
creation, but as aspects of his being. God does not only think, he also
has extension; he has not only a soul, but also a body; he is identical
with nature, that is, for Spinoza, with the world. This pantheism
signifies the lessening and perhaps the complete elimination of the
power of the anthropomorphic conception of God, but it leaves untouched
the main problem of the theory of cognition. For if to our philosopher
matter and spirit are really not two distinct substances, but only
attributes of the one and only substance of God, then for our problem
this is essentially only a mere renaming of old concepts. We still do
not know how material brain processes give rise to immaterial spiritual
processes and vice versa, or how relationships conforming to law are
established between these aspects which, even according to Spinoza, have
nothing in common; and for the elucidation of all this it is a matter of
indifference whether they are called substances or only attributes. (p
141)

No, it is not a matter of indifference; far from it. Difference in name
is of no significance only where it is not accompanied by difference in
the corresponding concept. To Spinoza, the new name means a new concept.
In eliminating the doctrine of two substances, Spinoza expelled from the
domain of philosophy that animism to which Descartes had paid such heavy
tribute, to which every idealist pays equally lavish tribute, and which,
in Petzoldt's opinion (a justifiable one this time), constitutes one of
the greatest errors of human thought. Further, it is strange to reproach
Spinoza with not having explained how material brain processes give rise
to immaterial spiritual processes. Did not the author of *Ethics* say
outright that the second kind of processes *are not caused* by the first
kind, but only *attend* them. 'The soul and the body', said Spinoza,
'are but one and the same thing, conceived now under the attribute of
thought, now under the attribute of extension.' ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ Take
stock of these words of Spinoza and see if there is even an iota of
sense left in the question of how spiritual processes are *caused* by
corporeal processes. You see that the question is absolutely devoid of
all meaning. The attribute of thought is *not caused* by the attribute
of extension, but is simply the reverse side of 'one and the same
thing', one and the same process. Petzoldt's censure of Spinoza is
tantamount to blaming this brilliant Jew for not explaining *how* one
and the same process, conceived of from the angle of varying attributes,
may present itself quite differently. But Spinoza never undertook this
task. The fact that extension and thought are essentially two attributes
of one and the same substance was for him an established fact, which
explains many other facts, but is not itself subject to explanation. It
is remarkable that the same Petzoldt credits Spinoza with eliminating
'the so-called interaction of body and spirit'. He says that having got
rid of this interaction, Spinoza thereby prepared the ground for the
latest views (p 141). But surely it must be clear that Spinoza could
only have postulated the question of how material brain processes *give
rise* to immaterial spiritual processes if he had recognised the
interaction of body and spirit. Petzoldt reproves Spinoza for not
tackling this question, and simultaneously praises him for having
refuted the interaction of body and spirit. A wonderful power of logic!

Petzoldt avers that 'already in Spinoza's works we encounter the idea to
which Leibniz later gave the appellation pre-established harmony' (p
142). As a matter of fact, Spinoza was spurned by the theologians of all
countries, to use Lessing's phrase, 'like a dead dog', because he had
left no room in his philosophy for a being who could establish
'harmony'. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ Petzoldt calls Spinoza's teaching on the
mutual relationship of thought and extension the doctrine of
pre-established harmony:

Thus, two series of completely independent processes flow side by
side\... When a physical phenomenon recurs, there will recur with it the
spiritual phenomenon which previously manifested itself together with
it, and vice versa. (p 142)

Well, isn't it true? Is it a 'metaphysical' invention by Spinoza? A man
drinks a bottle of vodka: that is a 'physical phenomenon'. He gets drunk
and all sorts of nonsense comes into his head: that is a 'spiritual
phenomenon'. Some days later he drinks another bottle of vodka: again a
'physical phenomenon'. Once again he gets drunk, and again his head is
filled with all kind of nonsense: this again is a 'spiritual
phenomenon'. 'When a physical phenomenon recurs, there will recur with
it the spiritual phenomenon which previously manifested itself together
with it.' Surely everybody knows that? But what do the words 'and vice
versa' mean which Petzoldt attaches to the sentence I have just quoted?
I must confess their meaning is beyond me. It must be that we have to
see the example of the drunken man like this: the man gets drunk and the
full bottle is found to be empty. Otherwise 'and vice versa' is
meaningless. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ But however that may be, it is a fact that
certain relationships conforming to law exist between psychical
phenomena on the one hand and physiological phenomena on the other.
Petzoldt himself, of course, does not deny this. But he finds that
Spinoza explained these relationships badly. Let us agree with him for
the time being and ask: are these relationships explained any better in
idealist philosophy? Petzoldt will say no. What remains? 'Modern'
positivism! We turn to 'modern' positivism.

Petzoldt contends that the mistake of all philosophical teachings prior
to this positivism consisted in the following:

They could not conceive of any other mutual dependence of natural
phenomena than that of sequence in time: *first A, then B*; but not as
in geometry: *if A, then B*. According to the geometrical method, if the
sides of a triangle are equal, then the opposite angles are also
equal\... If attention is directed to this completely general functional
dependence of both geometrical and physical determining elements, then
it is not difficult to conceive as analogous the relationships between
spiritual and bodily phenomena (or determining elements), thereby
bridging the gulf separating the two worlds. But Spinoza, although he
set forth the basic principles of his main work and proved them,
following strictly the model of Euclid's geometry, and although he
weakened the contrast between the two substances, reducing them to the
level of two aspects of one and the same substance, nevertheless was
very far from the aforesaid analogy. He was unable to think of
parallelism between the spiritual and bodily processes in the form of
the interrelation between x and y in the equation: y equals f (x), but
needed a connective member between the two variable quantities, namely
the conception of substance. (pp 142-43)

So there we are: *if* A, *then B*; if the sides of a triangle are equal,
then the opposite angles are also equal. That is indeed very simple.
*If* a man has drunk a litre of vodka, *then* he has become intoxicated:
which was to be proved. But does it answer the question with which
Petzoldt has just been pestering Spinoza? Do we now know --- thanks to
'modern' positivism --- '*how*' the given relationships conforming to
law are established between A and *B*? Do we now know *what determines*
the reciprocal relationship of spiritual and bodily phenomena? No, we do
not. And it is all too clear that *if* we in turn began to worry
Petzoldt with these questions, *then* he would decline to answer, on the
ground that science discovers that phenomena are regulated by laws, but
does not explain *why* there is this conformity to law. And he would be
right. However, as the Germans justifiably say, *was dem einen recht,
ist dem anderen billig*. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^ Here also is a sort of 'if ---
then'. *If* Petzoldt cannot be reproached for having an inclination
towards the doctrine of pre-established harmony, *then* neither can
Spinoza; for both of them leave one and the same question unanswered.

The only difference is that Spinoza 'needed a connective member between
the two variable quantities, namely the conception of substance', and
Petzoldt did not. But it is now clear from what has been said that the
difference is not at all in Petzoldt's favour.

In analysing Hume's views on the relationship of the 'inner world' to
the external world, Petzoldt thus formulates his own theory on this
subject:

Both worlds emerge from indifferent elements in the process of mutual
differentiation and interrelationship. And this already indicates that
they exist in relations of mutually functional dependence, while at the
same time having a common independent root. (p 172)

Whatever these 'indifferent elements' may be, the differentiation of
which leads, in Petzoldt's words, to the emergence of the external world
on the one hand, and the inner world on the other, one thing is clear:
these two worlds have no sooner emerged than a relationship is
established between them which is usually referred to as the
relationship of the object to the subject. We already know just how
badly the 'new' positivism explains --- or it would be better to say:
how much it confuses --- the conception of this relationship.
Consequently, I shall not enlarge upon it. I will only remark that, here
also, our author does not explain to us *why* certain reciprocal
relationships are established between the 'inner' world and the
'external' world: that is to say, he is guilty --- if one can speak of
guilt in this case --- of doing exactly the same thing he accused
Spinoza of doing. However, there is a morsel of truth in the remark
cited above. The two worlds really 'do have a common root'. To the
degree that this is correct, it comes nearer to Spinoza's doctrine that
thought and extension are essentially two attributes of one and the same
substance. Petzoldt is not in error only when he repeats the materialist
doctrine of Spinoza which he has repudiated, albeit presenting that
doctrine in an extremely muddled form.

### IX

But most interesting of all is the 'conclusion' our author draws from
Spinoza's teaching. It is so incredible that I cannot expound its
underlying argument in my own words, and must leave that to Petzoldt
himself:

This conclusion consists first of all in this: that the souls of two
people, A and B, cannot communicate anything to each other and are
completely isolated from each other. Only their bodies, in particular
the cerebra, are in mutual contact by means of their motions of
expression, in particular, the motions of the speech organs. The sounds
produced by A set the air in vibrations; the airwaves strike B's
ear-drum, and its vibrations are transferred to the auditory nerve
which, in turn, communicates its impulses to the cerebrum. There, all
kinds of complicated changes occur, which finally lead to movements of
subject B's organs of speech; and these movements, traversing now the
return journey, reach A's cerebrum. But at no time does any of these
manifestations touch the souls of the two subjects. Their cerebra alone
carry on the conversation; their souls know nothing about it. (pp
146-47)

One would have to know nothing whatever of Spinoza's philosophy to
believe this. The author of *Ethics* must, apparently, have foreseen his
Petzoldt and tried to anticipate this preposterous 'conclusion'. Theorem
XII of Part II of Spinoza's main work reads:

*Whatever comes to pass on the subject of the idea, which constitutes
the human soul, must be perceived by the human soul, or there will
necessarily be an idea in the human soul of the said occurrence*. *That
is, if the object of the idea constituting the human soul be a body,
nothing can take place in that body without being perceived by the
soul*. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

After that one may judge how profound is the conclusion reached which
has its culminating point in the words: 'Their cerebra alone carry on
the conversation; their souls know nothing about it.' If Spinoza had
taught that 'brains' could carry on a conversation about which the
'soul' knew nothing, he would have been a dualist and not a monist, and
we should again be confronted with the two independent substances, with
one of them --- the 'soul' --- having allotted to it all psychical
phenomena, while the other --- the 'body' --- would be regarded as
incapable of either sensation or thought, in which case it would be
beyond all comprehension how such material things as brains could 'carry
on a conversation'. To get out of this difficulty, it would only remain
for us to assume that matter can think, that is to say, to go back to
the teaching of the same Spinoza for whose refutation there was invented
the 'conclusion' about conversing 'brains' and 'isolated' souls.

Petzoldt himself feels that his conclusion is directly opposed to what
Spinoza said, and consequently hastens to put things right by the
following consideration:

If, in spite of this, simultaneously with the brain processes there
occur processes in the soul corresponding to those of the brain --- and
therefore to one another --- the cause of this is that pre-established
harmony, that mathematical magical term which, at the proper moment,
substitute itself for the missing concept and makes things so different,
in the sense of their premises, as soul and body, only *aspects* of one
and the same thing. (p 147)

But I said already that the doctrine of pre-established harmony is being
foisted on Spinoza by Petzoldt without the slightest justification. As
for love of mathematical magical terms, this is the distinguishing
feature of precisely the 'modern' positivists. We have seen this from
Petzoldt's example. Was it not he who told us that the mathematical
concept of functional dependence enables us to bridge the gulf
separating spiritual from bodily phenomena? But there's the rub:
Petzoldt has a flair for putting the blame on someone else. On page 143
of his book, he refers to the concept of functional dependence, claiming
that it will help us to 'bridge', etc, while on page 147 he accuses
Spinoza of having a love for 'mathematical magical terms'. Willy-nilly,
we recall Krylov's bear advising the monkey to look at itself in the
mirror, instead of counting up its acquaintances. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^

Someone will tell us, perhaps, that to Petzoldt the 'mathematical term'
*signifies* a certain concept, whereas this concept is absent in
Spinoza's teaching, having been replaced by this mathematical term. It
is obvious that this is exactly what Petzoldt himself wishes to convey.
But this reproach has no more basis than any of the others. First, one
may disagree with Spinoza's doctrine of the two attributes of a single
substance, but it is decidedly out of the question to describe this
doctrine as lacking in content. Secondly, we have seen that Petzoldt
himself, in his theory of the relationship between psychical and
physical phenomena, avoids falling into contradictions only when he
reproduces Spinoza's idea, though in a distorted form. Finally --- last
but not least ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ --- notwithstanding Spinoza's geometrical
method of *presentation*, he very seldom had recourse to 'mathematical
terms' in his *reasoning*, as is known to all who have read his
*Ethics*. Why throw the blame on someone else? I pass over such logical
conclusions from Spinoza's teaching as these:

Souls are isolated both in relation to each other and in relation to the
external world. Just as in fact they cannot hear, neither can they see
or have any kind of perception of the world around them. (p 147)

We already know that *such* conclusions may be drawn from Spinoza's
teaching only with the aid of that strange logic which makes itself felt
on every page of Petzoldt's book. But I cannot resist the temptation to
point to the following 'inevitable conclusion from Spinoza's teaching'.
This conclusion winds up the chapter devoted to the author of *Ethics*,
and I should like to leave the reader with a happy memory of this
chapter:

I myself am a soul, completely cut off from the external world. What,
then, gives me the right to speak at all of a world existing outside
myself? Nothing, absolutely nothing. The world *may* exist --- that
cannot be denied. It could be, however, that I alone exist in the world,
that I myself am this world, a world composed exclusively of ideas
coming and going. And even if a world outside myself did exist, there is
nothing I could presume regarding its arrangement. I shall never know
whether there exist other beings like myself. I know now that those whom
I formerly took to be beings like myself are only my ideas. But even if
I did know that there were such beings, it would not make things easier
for me. I could never really have intercourse with them. It must,
therefore, be to me a matter of extreme indifference whether they exist
or not. In my world I am alone --- the world is my own. (p 148)

As an example of the 'logical conclusions' to be drawn from Petzoldt's
*thesis*, that is not at all bad. And since we are aware that the
antinomy between the antithesis and the thesis was resolved in favour of
the thesis, the above passage may be described as a caricature by
Petzoldt of his own philosophical theory. Painters are often known to
paint their own *portraits*. But as far as I know philosophers have
hitherto not drawn *caricatures* of their own views. Petzoldt is a real
innovator in this respect, and therein lies the true originality of his
book. It deserves great and sympathetic attention.

### X

Mr P Yushkevich has written his own preface to this book, heading it *On
the Question of the World Enigma*. It is worthwhile saying a few words
about this preface.

Mr P Yushkevich finds Petzoldt's book interesting because it is devoted
to 'one of the fundamental questions of philosophy', the question of the
existence of things independently of us. Generally speaking, he is
satisfied with the reply given to this question by Petzoldt; but he
thinks it needs some 'correction', since without this Petzoldt's
solution 'does not by any means eliminate all doubts' (pp 17, 28). We
know by now that this is indeed so, even more so; in fact, Petzoldt's
'solution' does not eliminate a *single* doubt. But why is Mr P
Yushkevich not fully satisfied with it? In his book, Petzoldt frequently
refers to Protagoras' proposition: 'To each man the world is as it
appears to him.' ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ It is in respect of this proposition
that Mr P Yushkevich suggests his correction:

If we are to proceed from Protagoras' principle \[he says\], it must be
taken in the most general and, therefore, the most relative form: to
each man the world is as it appears to him *at each given moment*\... A
tree to me is not simply green. At such and such a moment it has such
and such a shade of green; at another moment --- a different shade\...
If at different moments *t*1*, t*2*, t*3*,*\... *t*n I have different
images of the tree: *A*1, *A*2*, A*3*,* \... *A*n, and if I do not take
their arithmetical mean, do not take their end image A (= 'the tree is
green'), then at which of these images must I stop when I am speaking of
the existence of trees outside myself? At none in particular, which
means at them all. (pp 17, 18, 19)

From this Mr P Yushkevich draws the justifiable conclusion that absolute
relativism devours itself. What then? Mr P Yushkevich says that
relativism too has to be regarded from a 'relativist' point of view;
relativism must restrict itself, otherwise it will degenerate into
absurdity. Mr P Yushkevich writes:

Heraclitus taught that one cannot swim in one and the same river twice.
One cannot swim in the same river once, taught Cratylus,
^[\[24\]](#n24)^ elevating his dynamism into a certain absolute. Since
everything is fluid, is constantly changing, there is nothing recurring.
There is no 'one and the same thing', there is only diversity: nothing
can be said about anything, since a word is also 'one and the same' and
when we use a word we are fixing something which recurs, that is to say,
which does not exist. A thought, once spoken, is a lie. But this
thought, too, being spoken, is a lie --- it negates itself. (pp 19-20)

Mr P Yushkevich is speaking the truth here, but it is a truth,
incidentally, that was much better expressed by Hegel who said that
existence (*Dasein*) is the first negation of negation. But to state
this incontestable truth still does not mean that we have solved the
question of things existing independently of ourselves. Mr P Yushkevich
is quite right when he says: 'Extreme relativism coincides with extreme
solipsism --- a solipsism of the moment, knowing only the one present
moment.' (p 21) More than once we have had occasion to witness how
Petzoldt's illusory positivism leads fatally to solipsism. But what
exactly is the correction which, in Mr P Yushkevich's opinion, could
lead us out of the blind alley of solipsism?

He asserts that the question of the existence of the objective world,
independent of our perceptions, presupposes the existence of 'some
fairly significant community of organisation'. He repeats Protagoras'
phrase: man is the measure of all things, and goes on:

By the same right, we could say that 'a worm is the measure of all
things' --- 'the amoeba is the measure of all things', and so on. If we
do single out man in this connection, it is only because he is a measure
which is *conscious* of being a measure. This consciousness is the
product of the social elaboration of experience, presupposing a high
degree of agreement between human organisations. 'Social man is the
measure of things.' Only this social man, who has recognised himself to
be a measure, later endows each separate personality, every living
creature, with its special individual measure of being. (pp 23-24)

That is truly a brilliantly simple solution. In order to get out of the
blind alley of solipsism, all we have to do is to imagine that we are
not in this dreary alley, but in the pleasant company of human beings
like ourselves. All our troubles have disappeared as with the waving of
a magic wand. There is but one regret: we still do not know by what
logical right we give such freedom to our imagination. But if we do not
insist upon this painful question, everything will go swimmingly:

Confronting us \[Mr P Yushkevich reassures us\] are most diverse
individual pictures of the world, some similar, some different; before
us also is the collective system of experience, the social image of the
world, derived from these similarities. This social picture of the world
is, of course, not an 'absolute' one. It changes in accordance with the
acquisitions of knowledge, to the extent that the constantly widening
collective experience discovers new diversities for us, but also new and
more profound similarities between the diverse individual experiences.
But no matter how far from the absolute the social human conception of
the world is, in our eyes it has its special importance alongside the
individual images of the world. It is precisely to this that we refer
when we speak of the 'real', the 'independent', the 'objective', etc,
world. (pp 24-25)

This is, perhaps, a slight improvement on absolute relativism. But what
is new in Mr Yushkevich's 'correction\'? Absolutely nothing. It is an
old idealist tune: that which exists in the minds of all people is
objective. But to exist in the minds of all people is to exist in a
conception common to all. And if our 'picture of the world' is objective
only because it exists in the minds of all people, we are idealists,
regarding the world as a conception. Meanwhile, Petzoldt, with whom Mr P
Yushkevich is in full agreement, apart from the exception indicated,
categorically declares that 'the doctrine of the world as a conception'
is a 'colossal absurdity' (p 146). Try and understand that! Amazing
compliments these gentlemen of 'modern' positivism pay one another.

A word or two more. Mr P Yushkevich admits that, if man is the measure
of things, then a worm is a measure of things too, an amoeba is a
measure of things, and so on. Man is singled out 'by us' in this respect
'only because he is a measure which is *conscious* of being a
*measure*'. We have to suppose that neither the worm nor the amoeba are
in fact conscious of themselves as measures, and do not study
philosophy. But although in this respect they do not resemble man, a
fact is still a fact and is admitted as such even by Mr P Yushkevich:
the 'worm' does not have the same 'picture of the world' as the
'amoeba', and the 'amoeba' has not the same picture that man has. How
does this come about? It is because the material organisation of man
does not resemble the material organisation of the other two 'measures
of things'. What does this mean? It means that *consciousness* ('the
picture of the world' peculiar to each particular 'measure of things')
is determined by *being* (the material organisation of that 'measure').
And that is pure materialism which our 'modern' positivists refuse to
have anything to do with. Against this, of course, it may be objected,
as is done in no uncertain fashion by all adversaries of materialism,
that the amoeba and the worm, as well as the material organisation of
one and the other, are nothing more than our conceptions. But if this is
true, where does logic come in? For then it will turn out that to
explain the character of 'our picture of the world', that is to say, the
totality of 'our' conceptions systematised in some way or other, we and
Mr Yushkevich are referring to the difference between all of this
picture, on the one hand, and the 'picture of the world' as seen by some
of its component parts --- in this instance, the worm and the amoeba.
Our imagination is first of all our imagination, and then the
imagination of the picture of the world peculiar to the worm. In other
words, we imagine to ourselves an image peculiar to some of our
imaginations --- and this is what constitutes 'our entire scientific
method', and everything that we can oppose to materialism reduces itself
to this 'scientific method'. It isn't very much! But Petzoldt imagines
that the 'world-outlook' elaborated by this method, absurd in the true
sense of the word, may perhaps be recognised as 'final in all its main
features'. To be sure, he has thought of a fine ending to the history of
philosophical thought! ^[\[25\]](#n25)^

However, I repeat: Petzoldt's book is evidently assured of great success
among some circles of our reading public. In it is enunciated the very
miserable philosophy of cowardly idealism. But this miserable philosophy
is well suited to our miserable times. Hegel justly remarked that any
philosophy is but the ideological expression of its time. The Russian
people has expressed, if you like, that same thought, but in a more
general form by saying: 'Senka has the cap that fits him!'

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. Wilhelm Schuppe (1836-1913) --- German philosopher,
subjective idealist; Ernst Mach (1838-1916) --- Austrian physicist and
idealist philosopher, one of the founders of empiric-criticism; Richard
Avenarius (1843-1896) --- German idealist philosopher, formulated the
basic principles of empiric-criticism --- Editor.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Alexander Alexandrovich Bogdanov (Malinovsky)
(1873-1928) --- Russian Social-Democrat, philosopher and sociologist,
tried to create his own philosophical system --- empiriomonism (a
variant of Machism); N Valentinov (Nikolai Vladislavovich Volsky)
(1879-?) --- Social-Democrat, Menshevik and Machist philosopher; Pavel
Solomonovich Yushkevich (1873-1945) --- Russian Social-Democrat,
revisionist of Marxist philosophy, which he sought to replace with
empirio-symbolism, a variety of Machism --- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Heraclitus of Ephesus (c 530-470 BC) --- Greek
materialist philosopher, one of the founders of dialectics; Parmenides
(late sixth century-early fifth century BC) --- Greek philosopher, chief
representative of the Eleatic school --- Editor.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. Protagoras of Abdera (481-411 BC) --- Greek sophist
philosopher, ideologist of slave-holding democracy --- Editor.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. David Hume (1711-1776) --- Scottish philosopher,
subjective idealist; Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) --- English materialist
philosopher --- Editor.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. I call Petzoldt's positivism *modern* because he
severs connection with the old positivism of Auguste Comte and Mill.
'Alongside of the Kant variety of idealism', we read on page 195 of the
book under review, 'there is also positive idealism. It knows no *a
priori* conditions of experience (Comte, Mill) but, as pure
phenomenalism, is as untenable as the first.' I earnestly beg the reader
to note the reason given by Petzoldt for the rupture of the 'modern'
positivism with the old. \[Auguste Comte (1798-1857) --- French
philosopher and sociologist, founder of positivism; John Stuart Mill
(1806-1873) --- English bourgeois economist and positivist philosopher
--- Editor.\]

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. Literally 'One, two three; speed is not sorcery!' It
would be better translated as 'One, two, three; speed is no sleight of
hand!' or 'Nothing up my sleeve!', that is, 'Because I can do it quickly
doesn't mean there's trickery involved.' Plekhanov was being his usual
sarcastic self here. Thanks to Chris Gray for the explanation --- MIA.

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. Indeed, in his attempt to solve the antinomy we are
discussing he does not pass beyond the limits of *Schuppe*'s well-known,
purely idealist principle: '*Kein Gegenstand ausserhalb des
Bewusstseins.*' \['there is no object outside of consciousness.'\]

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. 'If, in this way, Kant does not break with the
unnecessary duality of the world into the thing-in-itself and
phenomenon', says Petzoldt, 'if he even goes backward in comparison with
his predecessors\... \[etc\].' (Page 188 of the book under review.)

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. Poprishchin --- a character from Gogol's *Notes of
a Madman* --- Editor. \[Poprishchin is a minor civil servant who slowly
goes insane and is committed to an asylum --- MIA.\]

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. 'Das Ding ist hiernach für sich, und *auch* für ein
anderes, ein *gedoppeltes* verschiedenes Sein; aber es ist auch *Eins*.'
\['the Thing is, hence for itself and *also* for another, a Being that
has difference of a dual kind. But it is also *one*.\'\] (Hegel,
*Phänomenologie des Geistes* (Bamberg and Würzburg, 1807), p 51) See my
remark above on Petzoldt's *pluralism*.

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. To be just, I should mention, however, that even
materialists have sometimes not refused to repeat idealist phrases about
the unknowability of things-in-themselves. Holbach, for instance, was
sometimes not innocent of this. But what was simply inconsistency on the
part of materialists, was the foundation of the entire idealist
gnosiology. Quite a big difference. Let me add that the difference
between idealist gnosiology and the materialist theory of knowledge was
apparent already in ancient philosophy. W Windelband, in elucidating the
'main distinction' between Plato and Democritus in respect to theory and
knowledge, says: 'The last-named also demanded, together with knowledge
gained through perception (σκοτίη γνωμη) understood and evaluated in
Protagoras' sense, also true knowledge (γνησίη γνωμη) obtained by
thinking; but he believed that one could be deduced from the other; he
established a difference between them only of degree, but not in
essence. Thus by thinking, operating with concepts\... he found, not a
new incorporeal world, but only the fundamental element of the same
corporeal world --- the atom.' (W Windelband, *Plato* (St Petersburg,
1904), p 84, footnote) \[Paul Henri Holbach (1723-1789) --- French
materialist philosopher, atheist; Plato (427-347 BC) --- Greek
philosopher, objective idealist; Democritus (c460-370 BC) --- Greek
materialist philosopher --- Editor.\]

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. Plekhanov apparently has in mind the French
sensualist Cabanis (1757-1808) who reduced all mental phenomena to
physiological ones and maintained that the brain secretes thought as the
liver does bile. This proposition was repeatedly criticised and in fact
became a 'celebrated phrase'. Cabanis was a precursor of the vulgar
materialists in Germany of the 1850s, Büchner, Vogt and Moleschott, who
repeated in particular this proposition of his --- Editor.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. Regarding a similar expression of Vogt's, 'the
brain secretes thought as the kidneys secrete urine', even Lange, who
was never kindly disposed towards the materialists, remarked: 'Es ist
bei den zahlreichen Erörterungen von *Vogts* berühmtem Urin-Vergleich
wohl klar genug geworden, dass man nicht den "Gedanken" als ein
besonderes Produkt *neben* den stofflichen Vorgängen ansehen kann,
sondern dass eben der subjektive Zustand des empfindenden Individuums
*zugleich* für die äussere Beobachtung ein objektiver, eine
*Molecularbewegung* ist.' \[\'Vogt's much discussed comparison of
thought with urine clearly reveals that "thought" cannot be regarded as
a special product *on a level* with material processes, but that the
subjective state of the perceiving individual is *at the same time*
objective for external observation, is *molecular movement*.\] (FA
Lange, *Geschichte des Materialismus und Kritik seiner Bedeutung in der
Gegenwart*, Volume 2 (seventh edition, Leipzig, 1902), p 374) True, in
other parts of his work Lange writes as though he never even suspected
the possibility of such a remark. But that has to do with his logic,
which we are not discussing at the moment. \[Friedrich Albert Lange
(1828- 1875) --- German philosopher, neo-Kantian; Karl Vogt (1817-1895)
--- German naturalist, vulgar materialist --- Editor.\]

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. I may be told that this very concept of matter must
be changed radically in view of the striking discoveries in physics
during recent years. There is a point there. But not one of these
discoveries vitiates the definition of matter according to which matter
is that (in 'itself' existing) which directly or indirectly acts, or in
certain circumstances can act, on our external senses. That is good
enough for me at the moment.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. Spinoza, *Ethics* (St Petersburg), 1894, p 121.
\[Baruch (Benedict) Spinoza (1632-1677) --- Dutch materialist
philosopher, rationalist, atheist; René Descartes (1596-1650) --- French
deist philosopher, mathematician and naturalist --- Editor.\]

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. Theologians were not satisfied, and could not be,
with Spinoza's use of the word 'God', since by this word he meant
Nature. He said so: 'God or Nature' (\'*Deus sive natura*'). From the
point of view of terminology, it was of course incorrect, but that is
another question which does not concern us here.

[[18]{#n18}]{.info}. The influence of the physical condition upon the
physiological processes is often spoken about. Nowadays, the medical
profession dilate much and readily on this influence. I think that the
facts prompting this idea are often quite correctly *indicated*. But
they are altogether wrongly *explained*. Those who talk much of the
influence of the 'psychical' upon the 'physical' forget that each
particular psychical condition is only *one* side of the process, the
*other* side being physiological, or to be more accurate, a whole
combination of physiological phenomena in the proper meaning of the
term. When we say that a particular psychical condition has influenced
in a certain way the physiological functions of a particular organism,
we have to understand that this influence we speak of was caused,
strictly speaking, by those phenomena (which are also purely
physiological) the *subjective side* of which constitutes this psychical
condition. If it were otherwise, if this or that psychical conditions
could serve as the real cause of physiological phenomena, we should have
to renounce the law of the conservation of energy. This has already been
adequately dealt with by FA Lange in his *Geschichte des Materialismus*,
Volume 2, p 370 *et seq*. See also note 39 on pages 440-42 of the same
volume. True, Ostwald's pupils would revolt against my remark concerning
the law of the conservation of energy, but I cannot start wrangling with
them here. I hope soon to devote a special article to analysing
Ostwald's theory of knowledge. \[Wilhelm Friedrich Ostwald (1853-1932)
--- German chemist and idealist philosopher; exponent of energism, a
variety of Machism --- Editor.\]

[[19]{#n19}]{.info}. What is right for one, is right for another ---
Editor.

[[20]{#n20}]{.info}. *Ethics*, p 66, Spinoza's italics. It would be
useful to contrast this with Theorem XIV in the same Part: '*The human
mind is capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is so in
proportion as its body is capable of receiving a great number of
impressions*. --- Proof: The human body (*by Postulations III and VI*)
is affected in very many ways by external bodies, and is capable in very
many ways of affecting external bodies. But (*Theorem XII in the same
Part*) the human mind must perceive all that takes place in the human
body; the human mind is, therefore, capable of perceiving a great number
of things, and is so in proportion, etc --- which was to be proved.'
(Ibid, p 75)

[[21]{#n21}]{.info}. A reference to Krylov's tale *The Mirror and the
Monkey* --- MIA.

[[22]{#n22}]{.info}. These words are in English in the original ---
Editor.

[[23]{#n23}]{.info}. This proposition of Protagoras' is interpreted by
Petzoldt in the sense of extreme subjectivism, even though the latest
historians of ancient philosophy are advancing arguments which cast
doubt on the correctness of such an interpretation. (See, for example,
Théodore Gomperz, *Les penseurs de la Grèce*. *Histoire de la
philosophie antique* (Lausanne), pp 464-501, especially pp 483 *et
seq*). Mr P Yushkevich says nothing about Petzoldt's views on
Protagoras; evidently he agrees with them.

[[24]{#n24}]{.info}. Cratylus (fifth century BC) --- Greek idealist
philosopher --- Editor.

[[25]{#n25}]{.info}. Mr Yushkevich's 'worm' and 'amoeba' remind me of
the question once put by FA Lange: 'If a worm, a beetle, a man, and an
angel look at a tree, do we have *five* trees?' He replied that we
should have, in all probability, *four* very distinct *conceptions* of
the tree, but that all four of these would relate to one and the same
*object* (*Geschichte des Materialismus*, Volume 2, p 102). Lange was
right, although it cannot be said that his correct reply could have been
very well substantiated with the aid of his (Kantian) theory of
cognition. What will Mr Yushkevich reply to this question? How many
trees will *he* have? I suppose he will have as many as Petzoldt would
have got; we already know that Petzoldt aspires towards monism but
arrives at pluralism. In passing I shall add this: if the tree 'in
itself' does not exist, whereas the worm, the beetle, the man and the
angel have simultaneous, though distinct impressions of it, we have a
highly interesting case of 'pre-established harmony'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
