---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1910

### On the Study of Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 455-58.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article appeared in June 1910 in *Dnevnik
Sotsial Demokrata* (*Diary of a Social-Democrat*), no 12.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In an interesting letter to me a comrade makes a rather flattering
proposal which I think should be answered in print. This is what he
writes.

Pointing to the strong interest in *belles lettres* ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ and
philosophy among the class-conscious proletarians, he proceeds:

It seems to me that thought on philosophical questions is being
stimulated not only by the gloomy political conditions, but also by the
concrete material which is forcing itself on the consciousness of the
masses. This has to be put in order. That is why they are taking so
eagerly to philosophy, why such facts are possible. I am told in a
letter from Kazan: 'above all, they are interested here in philosophical
questions', and he adds in inverted commas: 'it's the topic of the
day\...'. In Vienna, a report is to be delivered at the Russian
emigrants' May Day meeting on no other subject than philosophy.

Now political interests are awakening again, but philosophical matters
will still predominate for a long time and, of course, will remain to a
significant extent, also in the new conditions, one of the most valuable
conquests of our present gloomy epoch.

It is interesting to do everything possible to encourage these quests
and to capture the interest of the masses in favour of a more real
world-outlook.

Recently, a worker (from hereabouts) wrote to me: 'I try to read about
philosophy; I try all I know. I think and I can't understand. And I have
little time. The factory takes it all. Haven't you intellectuals written
anything simpler, easier to understand\...'

An 'introduction to philosophy' is needed, which on the basis of
scientific Marxism and the natural sciences, is systematically\... if
not setting forth, then at least posing all the most essential questions
of this subject.

No one could do this better than you, if you are not already working at
it, or something similar. Then those who now have to grope their way
through the Paulsens and the Wundts ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ and the like will
begin with Marxist works.

That is my proposal and the desire of my friends.

I shall begin with the proposal made by my correspondent expressing the
wish of his friends. However flattering it is to me, unfortunately,
because of numerous other obligations, I cannot accept the proposal at
present. And then is it necessary that I should be the one to do it? For
more than two years an *Introduction to the Philosophy of Dialectical
Materialism*, written by a very competent comrade, has been lying here.
In spite of all my efforts I cannot find a publisher for it.
^[\[3\]](#n3)^ Why? Evidently because the publishers whom I have
approached -- and I have approached very many -- have no hope of selling
an *Introduction* written by a materialist. But if a publisher could be
found, the demand which my correspondent rightly notes would be
satisfied to a considerable extent. I say 'to a considerable extent' and
not completely, because the *Introduction* which is lying here may not
be as popularly written as my correspondent wishes. But I can guarantee
that it would dispel a multitude of harmful prejudices. If any of the
comrades interested in philosophy could find a publisher for this work,
we should have less reason for complaint about the absence of a proper
handbook on philosophy.

The publishers are well acquainted with the reading public. They know
that materialism is not an advantageous proposition at the present
moment. But if the publishers, in their own way, are right, we
Social-Democrats -- those of us who purchase books on philosophy -- are
partly to blame. Here is an interesting example. In the summer of 1892,
I published abroad a Russian translation of Engels' classic work *Ludwig
Feuerbach*, together with my notes to it and, as an appendix, a chapter
of the famous book *The Holy Family*. By the summer of 1905, another
edition was required. At almost exactly the same time, my translation
(with the exception of some footnotes) was published in St Petersburg.
This was a period when the reading public hungrily bought up every
printed work bearing the name of a more or less well-known socialist
writer. I was confident that *Ludwig Feuerbach*, which had been issued
in a fairly limited quantity in St Petersburg, would be sold out in no
time. It turned out that there was very little demand for it. The only
explanation I can find for this is that even socialist readers were
seeking something 'more up-to-date' than the philosophy of dialectical
materialism. So that when comrades bemoan the absence of authoritative
philosophical works in the Russian language, I invariably ask them: 'And
have you read Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach*?' More often than not they
reply: 'No, I haven't.' This kind of reply is often given even by people
well acquainted with the 'philosophical' works of some Bogdanov or
other. When I hear these replies, I lose all inclination to talk about
what to read on philosophy.

What the author of the letter says is the honest truth. Our reading
public will be devoting almost their main attention to philosophical
matters for a long time to come. That is understandable. Today,
philosophy is the most reliable weapon we have in Russia for adapting
our social consciousness to our social being. This being, after all, is
assuming a bourgeois character. Consciousness, too, must assume the same
character. And philosophy is actively assisting in this.

But not every philosophy is suitable for adapting bourgeois social
consciousness to bourgeois social being. Just now only *idealist*
philosophy can serve this purpose. Hence the absence of demand for
philosophical works written by *materialists*.

But surely there are *socialists* too among the reading public? Of
course, there are. Are they, too, turning their backs on materialist
works? As we have already said, they are. But why? Obviously because
they themselves are coming under bourgeois influence.

This influence is the clue to why Frederick Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach*
lies on the shelves at the publishers, while the wretched Bogdanov is
printed in many editions.

And Engels is not the only one selling badly. L Axelrod's splendid
*Philosophical Essays* are hardly any better, and all for the same
reason, all through the fault of the socialist readers. This is
something well worth thinking about. It is our business as socialists,
not to adapt social consciousness to bourgeois social being, but to
prepare the minds of the workers for the struggle against that bourgeois
being. In this cause, Engels and L Axelrod will be much more useful, not
only than the ridiculous and arch-foggy Bogdanov, but also than any of
the most prominent philosophical representatives of the bourgeois
world-outlook.

It is a shame to have to say so, but it would be a sin to hide it: we
make it extremely difficult for ourselves to acquire sound philosophical
conceptions. How do our comrades study philosophy? They read, or I will
say, for politeness' sake, they 'study' the now fashionable
philosophical writers. But these philosophical writers who are now in
fashion are thoroughly saturated with idealism. It is quite natural that
our comrades 'studying' these works become infected with idealist
prejudices. And those same Socialists who are fairly well acquainted
with the Machs, Avenariuses, Windelbands, etc, etc, have not the
slightest notion about the philosophy of Engels, Marx and Feuerbach. So
the process finally leads to attempts to build a new 'philosophical
foundation' for the theoretical structure of Marxism.

In other words: we must begin to study philosophy from a different end
altogether. Neither Mach nor Avenarius, neither Windelband nor Wundt,
nor even Kant must lead us to the sanctuary of philosophical truth, but
only Engels, Marx, Feuerbach and Hegel. Only from these teachers can we
learn what we need to know.

I shall speak of this in more detail some other time. Now I want to
reply, even if briefly, to the interesting letter from the comrade who
honoured me with the proposal mentioned above.

PS: All the same, I cannot conceal from this comrade that his proposal
is very, very attractive for me. A year or two ago I toyed for a long
time with the idea of writing in as popular a way as I could a criticism
of the philosophical works of Max Verwörn. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ It seemed to
me that such a criticism would lay a direct and not very difficult path
to the understanding of the fundamental truths of materialist
philosophy. I should like to think that I shall still carry out that
intention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by the Moscow editors of this edition of the work, which are
noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. Purely literary essays, etc -- MIA.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Friedrich Paulsen (1846-1908) -- German educationist
and neo-Kantian philosopher; Wilhelm Max Wundt (1832-1920) -- German
bourgeois psychologist and idealist philosopher -- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Plekhanov refers to AM Deborin's book *Introduction
to the Philosophy of Dialectical Materialism* which was published by
Zhizn i Znaniye (Life and Knowledge) Publishers in Petrograd in 1916,
with a preface by Plekhanov -- Editor.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. Max Verwörn (1863-1921) -- German physiologist --
Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
