---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1910

### On Mr Windelband's Book

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 419-23.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov's review was published in *Sovremenny
Mir*, no 1, 1910. *Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary World*) -- a literary,
scientific and political monthly published in St Petersburg from 1906 to
1918. Wilhelm Windelband (1848-1915) -- German neo-Kantian philosopher.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wilhelm Windelband, *Philosophy in the Spiritual Life of
Nineteenth-Century Germany* (authorised translation from the German by
MM Rubinstein, Zveno Publishers, Moscow, 1910).

This book comprises a series of lectures delivered in 1908 in the Free
German Higher Institute at Frankfort-on-the-Main. The task of the
lectures was, 'in the context of the general historical development of
the German nation during the nineteenth century to elucidate the
elements of a world-outlook which play a definite role in this
development, and in which life itself is reflected'. Obviously a very
interesting and important task. But in order to fulfil it, in order to
elucidate how German social life in the nineteenth century was reflected
in the German world-outlook of that period, it is necessary, first of
all, to master thoroughly the basic proposition of materialism: that it
is not thinking which determines being, but being which determines
thinking. Wilhelm Windelband is a talented writer, but he is far from
having grasped this proposition. His views on materialism in general and
historical materialism in particular are the views of a prejudiced
idealist who remains blind to the most important and strongest sides of
the theory he is trying to refute. Consequently, first, all the pages of
his book which deal with materialism are totally unsatisfactory.
Secondly -- and this is even more important -- the task set in the study
remains unfulfilled. As a matter of fact, Windelband furnishes only a
few more or less apt hints as to how the development of the German
world-outlook in the nineteenth century must be explained by the
development of modern Germany's social life. But he provides no
explanation which is to any degree consistent and cohesive; and as for
the development of German social thought during the last third of the
nineteenth century, his exposition, as we shall see in a moment, suffers
from quite serious errors. It could not be otherwise. Whoever takes up
the study of the history of social thought in one or more of its
manifestations cannot now with impunity ignore materialism.

However, we shall deal first of all with what we have called our
author's more apt hints. Here are the most noteworthy of them.
Windelband says:

We have the right to see at all times the most noble task of philosophy
precisely in this, that it forms the self-consciousness of developing
cultural life. It does this indirectly and involuntarily, unconsciously
and semi-consciously even where the thinker, to all appearances, follows
-- and thinks that he follows -- exclusively his individual yearning for
knowledge, the motives, as free as possible from all the requirements of
the surrounding world, of his own intellectual satisfaction. Precisely
because of this, the significance of philosophical systems lies, in the
last analysis, not in the transient formulas of their conceptions, but
in those contents of life which find their explanation in it\...

Similarly also here, in observing the course of development through
which our people passed in the nineteenth century, we must everywhere
regard theories as the sedimentary deposit of life -- and this is not
only permissible, it is even imperative, the more so since this is one
of the pivotal questions of that development itself. (pp 5-6)

Nothing could be more true. And since this is the case, one must regard
as particularly naive those people who wonder at the terms 'bourgeois
philosophy', 'proletarian theory' and the like. For if philosophy does
represent 'the self-consciousness of developing cultural life', it is
natural that in the period of cultural development characterised by the
predominance of the bourgeoisie in social life, philosophy itself -- all
its dominant trends -- bears the stamp of the bourgeoisie. That goes
without saying. No less understandable is the fact that when the
proletariat begins to revolt against the rule of the bourgeoisie,
theories expressing its anti-bourgeois aspirations begin to spread in
its midst. Of course, every scientific view may be understood
superficially and one-sidedly. Its superficial and one-sided
understanding by particular individuals or whole groups of people can
produce distorted, ludicrous, caricatured conclusions. We know this,
having seen it in the examples of our Shulyatikovs, Bogdanovs,
Lunacharskys, etc, etc. But is there, can there be, any scientific view
that is proof against wrong understanding by people ill-prepared to
assimilate it? There is not and there cannot be such a view. No matter
how ridiculous are the Shulyatikovs, Bogdanovs and Lunacharskys, no
matter how much they distort Marx's teaching, this teaching still
remains correct. No matter how this or that 'mind still unripe, fruit of
yet scant learning', ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ misuses expressions such as
proletarian theory, bourgeois philosophy and the like, these expressions
do not cease to be theoretically valid; proletarian theories as well as
bourgeois philosophy really do exist as distinct aspects of 'the
self-consciousness of developing cultural life'. There is nothing one
can do about this, beyond accepting it for information and guidance. To
take it for guidance means to understand that the contemporary
philosophy of Western Europe, in which the bourgeoisie hold such
powerful sway, cannot but be the self-consciousness of the bourgeoisie.
The pity is that this very simple truth finds great difficulty nowadays
in penetrating the minds of even those who, generally speaking, take the
side of the working class. Hence the reason why such people both in
Russia and in Western Europe very often disseminate with great zeal
philosophical theories that are the last word of bourgeois reaction
against the proletariat's strivings for emancipation. This is a very
sorry spectacle which we are forced by the very course of European
cultural development to contemplate.

But to get back to Windelband with his more or less apt hints. Here is
yet another one of them:

When reading the arguments on the basis of which Schiller, in his
letters on the aesthetic upbringing of man and in his treatise on naive,
sentimental poetry, extolls, in accordance with his aesthetic theory,
the Hellenic world as the true humanity, one clearly feels throughout an
action of contrasts, in which everything which the present lacks in
terms of the ideal is asserted as reality in antiquity. Escaping into
the past is, properly speaking, the same as escaping into the ideal. (p
30)

This again is very true and very well put. The 'action of contrasts',
which Hegel spoke of in his day, explains very much in the history of
the intellectual development of every society divided into classes. It
is so great that he who does not sufficiently take it into account risks
making the most crude errors in study of such history. Unfortunately,
Windelband himself is not always able to define correctly the 'action of
contrasts' he acknowledges. Needless to say, this reduces the 'value' of
his investigation quite considerably.

Here is a vivid example to confirm what I have just said. In
characterising the social life of Western Europe in the nineteenth
century, Windelband writes:

Hegel's words have come true: the masses are moving forward. They have
entered into the historical movement which, in essentials, was
previously playing itself out above their heads, in the thin upper
layers of society. The masses are asserting their rights not only in
political development, but in all spheres of spiritual history, in the
same measure as in the economic sphere. All strata of the body politic
are demanding for themselves, with all seriousness and energy, full
participation in all the benefits of society, both spiritual and
material, launching out in every sphere of social life with the claim to
participate in it and to assert their interests. Thus, our life has been
given a completely new cast, and this social expansion forms the most
important basis for the extensive and intensive enhancement of life
which mankind experienced in the nineteenth century. (pp 136-37)

This is true, of course. Contemporary social life in Western Europe has,
in fact, been given a 'completely new cast' as a result of the 'masses
moving forward'. But the author forgot that this onward movement of the
popular masses has encountered, and continues to encounter, strong
resistance from the upper classes. Once having forgotten this, naturally
he also lost sight of the fact that the resistance of the upper classes
to the onward movement of the masses was bound to find its reflection in
the whole course of Europe's intellectual development, and especially in
the history of literature, art and philosophy. Consequently, he has
given a quite incorrect interpretation of that preaching of
individualism which brought fame to the name of Friedrich Nietzsche.
Windelband says:

Thus, we are undergoing a levelling down of historical distinctions, and
the establishment of a uniformity of life, about which not one of the
previous ages in human history had the faintest notion. But from this
there now emerges the grave danger that we shall thereby lose what is
most valuable, that which, strictly speaking, first constitutes and at
all times constituted culture and history, viz: the life of personality.
The sense of this danger pervades deep down the whole spiritual life of
the last decades, and bursts out from time to time with passionate
energy. Alongside this outwardly magnificently developing material
culture there is growing a fervent need for one's own inner life, and
together with the democratising and socialising life of the masses there
is springing up an ardent opposition of individuals, their upstriving
against suppression by the mass, their primitive striving to disburden
their own personality. (pp 142-43)

The question arises: how can 'individuals' be suppressed by the 'mass'
who themselves are suppressed in class-divided capitalist society? It
would be a waste of time searching in the book under review for the
answer to this inevitable question. Windelband does not want to
understand that in so far as modern individualism, which found its most
brilliant representative in the person of Friedrich Nietzsche, is a
protest against the forward movement of the *mass*, it voices not fear
for the rights of *personality*, but fear for *class privileges*. This
is not only *true*; it is gradually becoming *common knowledge*. Take
literature, for example, Professor Leon Pineau in his book *L\'Evolution
du roman en Allemagne au XlX-e siècle* (Paris, 1908), portrays modern
individualism -- the individualism of the 'neo-Romanticists' -- as a
reaction against the contemporary socialist movement (see, in the book
mentioned, Chapter XV -- 'Le roman néo-Romantique: symbolique, réligieux
et lyrique'). There is no doubt at all about his being right. But the
contemporary socialist movement is not directed against 'personality' at
all. Quite the reverse. It strives to defend those rights -- which are
being constantly violated as a result of the dependent position of the
enormous majority -- of 'personality' in contemporary society, that is,
of the proletariat. Therefore contemporary individualism cannot be
considered in any respect a movement in favour of the rights of the
individual in general. It is a movement in favour of the rights of the
individual belonging to a particular class. And it very well understands
-- for example in the person of the same Friedrich Nietzsche -- that the
interests of *such personality* can be protected only by suppressing the
'personality' of another and incomparably more numerous class, viz: the
proletariat. But Windelband remains blind to all this. This may seem
strange, but it is explained by the fact that his own philosophical
views reflect some negative aspects of social life today.

Mr M Rubinstein has translated Windelband's book not at all badly, which
is surprising, since we seldom find even moderately tolerable
translations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by the Moscow editors of this edition of the work.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. The first line of AD Kantemir's (1708-1744) satirical
poem *To My Intellect* (on those who disparage learning) -- Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
