---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## Georgi Plekhanov

# On the Alleged Crisis in Marxism

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Georgi Plekhanov, **Selected Philosophical Works,** Vol.II, Moscow
1976, pp.316-325.\
Summary of a lecture delivered by Plekanov in various town in
Switzerland and Italy during late spring & early summer 1898.\
Scan & OCR by [\@At
Leninist.Biz](http://www.leninist.biz){target="new"}.\
Proofreading & mark-up mark-up [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Citizens: the socialists of today possess the rare gift of evoking, from
time to time, feelings of joy and hope in that very bourgeoisie which
usually considers them -- with good reason -- their mortal enemies. What
is the origin of this strange phenomenon? It springs from the imaginary
splits in the socialist camp. In just the same way, the German
bourgeoisie were gladdened some seven or eight years ago by the
dissensions between the so-called *young* [\[1\*\]](#na){#fa} and *old*
Social-Democrats, seeing in the former an antidote to the latter; they
hoped that, with help from on high and the police, the "young"
Social-Democrats would neutralise the "old", thus enabling the
bourgeoisie to gain mastery of the field of battle and reduce both the
"old" and "young" to silence.

The bourgeoisie are now rejoicing at the polemic created by several
articles by Eduard Bernstein in **N**\[**eue**\] **Z**\[**eit**\]
[\[2\*\]](#nb){#fb}, and by Conrad Schmidt in **Vorwarts!**.
[\[3\*\]](#nc){#fc} The bourgeoisie's theorists have lauded these two
authors as reasonable and courageous men who have realised the falseness
of the socialist theory, and have not been afraid to reject it. Thus,
Professor Julius Wolf, a fairly well-known socialist-baiter, has tried
to reject the theory of Karl Marx, in a series of articles published
this year in **Zeitschrift fur Socialwissenschaft** *under the* title of
*Illusionisten und Realisten in der Nationalökonomie*, making use
therein of arguments borrowed from Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt.
Professor Masaryk, too, in a speech at the University of Prague, spoke
of the crisis in the Marxist school and contrasted certain ethical views
expressed by Conrad Schmidt to what he considers immoral in the writings
of Frederick Engels.

These gentlemen see new allies in Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt, and are
grateful to them for this unexpected alliance. That is quite natural.
However, I do not think that their joy at Bernstein's and Schmidt's
articles will, or *can* be, long-lived. On the contrary, I think it will
be of the same brief duration as the joy aroused by the discord between
the "young" and the "old" Social-Democrats. Just as the expulsion of
several young people who were undisciplined and incapable of obeying
discipline was the only significant consequence of that dissension, so
the polemic raised by Bernstein's and Conrad Schmidt's articles will at
most end in these two gentlemen ultimately joining the ranks of the
bourgeois democrats. That will be a loss to the German workers' party,
but socialist theory will remain what it is: an impregnable fortress all
hostile forces hurl themselves against in vain. Consequently, the joy
felt by the bourgeoisie's theorists is too premature.

Indeed, what have Bernstein and Schmidt actually said? Have they
advanced any genuinely new arguments against the theory of Karl Marx?
That is something we shall now see.

As has been so excellently said by Victor Adler, the celebrated Austrian
socialist, Marx's socialism is not only an economic theory, it is a
world theory; the revolutionary proletarian movement is only a sector of
the revolution in thought that marks our century. It has its own
philosophy, as well as its own understanding of history and its own
political economy. In what they call their criticism, Bernstein and
Schmidt have attacked present-day socialism as a whole. We shall follow
them through all the arguments they have brought forward, and shall, of
course, *begin from the beginning, i.e., with philosophy*.

You are all, no doubt, aware that the founder of modern socialism was a
firm supporter of *materialism*. Materialism was the foundation of all
his doctrine. Bernstein and Schmidt call materialism in question, for
they see it as an erroneous theory. In an article recently published in
**N**\[**eue**\] **Z**\[**eit**\] [\[4\*\]](#nd){#fd}, Bernstein called
upon socialists to return to Kant *bis zu einem gewissen Grad.*
[\[1\]](#n1){#f1} He thinks, incidentally, that the socialists of today
have already abandoned *pure or absolute* (the expression is his)
materialism. Unfortunately he does not explain to us what is meant; by
pure or absolute materialism, but he cites the words of a present-day
materialist, a certain Strecker who, according to Bernstein, has said
fully in the spirit of Kant: *Wir **glauben** an das Atom*, which means,
"we merely *believe* in the atom". It may hence be assumed that the
*pure* or *absolute* materialists have spoken of the *atom* with less
circumspection: they have claimed to have seen, felt or smell it. This
assumption, however, is quite groundless. Several brief quotations will
bring that home to you.

The eighteenth-century materialists were of the "*pure*" variety. Let us
begin with La Mettrie, that *enfant perdu* of materialist philosophy, a
man whose boldness frightened even the boldest.

"The nature of movement," he says (**L'homme-machine**), "is just as
unknown to us as is the nature of matter."

"The essence of Soul in man and animals," he says in his **Traité de
l'âme**, "is and will always he just as unknown as the essence of matter
and bodies," and further: "Though we have no idea of the essence of
matter, we cannot deny recognition to the properties that our senses
discover in it."

Thus, La Mettrie frankly acknowledges that he does not know the essence
of matter and that he knows only some of its properties discovered by
the senses. This is equivalent to La Mettrie merely *believing* in the
atom. Yet he was "*pure*" and "*absolute*".

We shall now go over to another representative of eighteenth-century
pure and absolute materialism.

"We recognise," Holbach says in his **Système de la Nature**, "that the
essence of matter cannot be understood or, at least, that we understand
it only poorly, in the measure that it affects us \... We know matter
only from the perceptions, sensations and ideas it gives us; it is only
from them that we can judge of it, well or poorly, according to the
specific arrangement of our organs," and further: "We know nothing of
the essence or true nature of matter though we are able to recognise
some of their properties or qualities through the effects they have on
us."

This too seems to be fully in the spirit of Kant, does it not? Only it
was written *before* the appearance of his **Critique of Pure Reason**.

But what about Helvetius, who has often been recognised as the most
absolute representative of eighteenth-century materialism?

Oh, this one was most circumspect! In his book **De l'Esprit**, he says,
in respect of the controversies over the relation of soul to body, that
words *should not be misused*, that everything possible should be drawn
from observation, and that "one should advance only together with it,
stopping the moment it abandons us and having the courage of not knowing
what one cannot yet know."

I shall add that, to Helvetius, what in *philosophy* is called the
reality of the sensual world, was only *probability*.

Next to all this, Strecker's word *Wir glauben an das Atom*, which
Bernstein has cited as a sign of the great changes that have taken place
of late in materialist theory, produce a really comical impression.
Bernstein sees in these words a confession recently forced out of
materialism under the influence of Kant's philosophy. He thinks that the
*pure* or *absolute* materialists never said anything of the kind, and
did not even suspect it. *You see that this is absolutely untrue.* And
when Bernstein says to us: "Let us return to Kant '*bis zu einem
gewissen Grad*'," we say in reply: "Comrade Bernstein, return *bis zu
einem gewissen Grad* to your classroom; make a study of the theory you
wish to criticise, and then we will discuss the matter."

But perhaps you will ask me what is meant by eighteenth-century
materialism? What is meant by the materialism of Karl Marx?

The enemies of materialism will reply for me.

Go to the National Library in Geneva, consult Volume 28 of **Biographie
universelle ancienne et moderne**, and look up the article on La
Mettrie. The author of this article says that, besides other books, La
Mettrie wrote **L'homme-machine**, a vile work in which the pernicious
materialist theory is set forth without the least restraint. But what
kind of pernicious theory is it? Listen carefully:

"On noticing, during his illness, that his spiritual faculties had
become impaired following the weakening of his bodily organs, he drew
therefrom the conclusion that thought is nothing but a product of the
physical organisation, and he had the audacity to make public his
surmises on this score."

Thus thought is nothing but a product of organisation: such is the true
meaning of the theory held by La Mettrie and the other materialists.
This may seem audacious, but is it false?

Let us see what Professor Huxley, one of the most outstanding and
best-known representatives of present-day biology, has to say on the
matter:

"Surely no one who is cognisant of the facts of the case, nowadays,
doubts that the roots of psychology lie in the physiology of the nervous
system. What we call the operations of the mind are functions of the
brain, and the materials of consciousness are products of cerebral
activity. Cabanis may have made use of crude and misleading phraseology
when he said that the brain secretes thought as the liver secretes bile;
but the conception which that much-abused phrase embodies is,
nevertheless, far more consistent with fact than the popular notion that
the mind is a metaphysical entity seated in the head, but as independent
of the brain as a telegraph operator is of his instrument."

La Mettrie is descended from Descartes; not from the latter's
*metaphysics*, which was quite idealistic, but from his physiology. Here
is what the selfsame Huxley says about the physiology of Descartes:

"In truth, Descartes' physiology, like the modern physiology of which it
anticipates the spirit, leads straight to Materialism, so far as that
title is rightly applicable to the doctrine that we have no knowledge of
any thinking substance, apart from extended substance; and that thought
is as much a function of matter as motion is." (**Les sciences
naturelles et l'éducation**, Paris 1891, article sur le **Discours de la
methode**, de Descartes, pp.25-26). [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}

It is true, citizens, that materialism, as evolved in the eighteenth
century and accepted by the founders of scientific socialism, is a
theory that toadies us thai "we have no knowledge of any thinking
substance, apart from extended substance; and thai thought is as much a
function of matter as motion is". But this is a negation of
philosophical dualism, and returns us direcl to old Spinoza, with his
single substance, of which extension and thought are merely attributes.
Indeed, present-day materialism is a Spinozism that has become more or
less aware of itself.

I say "more or less aware of itself" because some materialists have been
little aware of their kinship with Spinoza. *La Mettrie* was one of
these, but even in his lifetime there were materialists who were well
aware that they wore descended from Spinoza. Diderot is an example, who
said the following in a short article entitled *Spinosisme*, published
in Volume 15 of **l'Encyclopédie**. [\[5\*\]](#ne){#fe}

Here is what Spinoza says in Theorem XIII of Part Two of his **Ethics**:
"*Omnia individua quamvis gradibus diversis animata sunt*".
[\[3\]](#n3){#f3} This is what Diderot said.

Feuerbach (*Spiritualismus and Materialismus*) and Engels were also
Spinozists.

But what is the difference between a materialism thus interpreted, and
Kantianism? The difference is a vast one. It all lies in that which
refers to the unknowable.

According to Kant, things in themselves are not what we perceive them to
be, and the relations between them in reality are not what they seem to
us; if we abstract ourselves from the subjective organisation of our
senses, all the properties and all the correlations of objects in space
and time, and space and time themselves, *vanish*, because all this
exists only as a *phenomenon*, i.e., only in us. The nature of things,
regarded in themselves and independently of our own faculty of
perception, is wholly unknown to us. Of such things, we know only the
manner on which we perceive them: consequently, things belong to the
area of the *unknowable*. In this, the materialists are far from
agreement with Kant.

According to Kant, what we know about things is only the way we perceive
them. But if our perception of things does take place, that, again
according to Kant, is because *things affect us.* Phenomena are the
products of the effect on us of things-in-themselves, *noumena*.
However, the exertion of an affect already means being in some
relationship. One who says that objects (or tilings) in themselves
affect us is saying that he knows some of the relations of such objects,
if not among themselves then at least between them, on the one hand, and
us, on the other. But if we know the relations existing between us and
things-in-themselves, we also know -- *through the mediation of our
faculty of perception* -- the relations existing between the objects
themselves. This is not direct knowledge, but knowledge it is; once we
possess it, we no longer have the right, to speak of the impossibility
of knowing things-in-themselves.

Knowledge means prevision. If we are able to foresee a phenomenon, we
shall foresee how some things-in-themselves will affect us. All our
industries and all our practical life are based on that prevision.

Consequently, Kant's proposition cannot be supported. Everything correct
in it had already been voiced by the French materialists *prior to*
Kant: the essence of matter is incomprehensible to us; we gain an
understanding of it only in the measure in which it affects us.

This is what Engels said in his book **Ludwig Feuerbach**, and what
Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt have failed to understand.

This distinction between materialism and Kantianism may seem
inconsequential to you, yet it is highly important, not only from the
theoretical point of view but also -- and perhaps particularly -- from
the practical.

Kant's "unknowable" leaves the door wide open to *mysticism*. In my
German book **Beiträge zur Geschichte des Materialismus**, I showed that
this "unknowable" is nothing else but God, a scholastic God. *Matter*,
on the contrary, of which we gain a knowledge in the measure it affects
us, totally precludes all and any *theological* interpretation. It is a
revolutionary concept, which is why it is not to the liking of the
bourgeoisie, who prefer -- and very much so -- Kant's agnosticism and
our present-day Kantians.

When Bernstein calls us back to Kant, and when he criticises present-day
materialism witli the words "Wir glauben \[an das Atom\]", he is thereby
proving nothing but his own ignorance. Consequently, this alleged crisis
presents no danger from the philosophical viewpoint.

Let us now pass on to the materialist understanding of history.

What is meant by that understanding?

That "understanding" has often been very poorly understood and, if that
is possible, has been interpreted still more poorly. In its false
interpretation, it is vilely defamatory of the human race; but where is
that theory which, poorly understood and badly interpreted, will not
seem vile and absurd? In reality, the materialist understanding of
history is the only theory that enables us to understand human history
as a law-governed process. In other words, it is the only *scientific*
explanation of history.

To give you an exact idea of the Marxist understanding of history, I
shall first ask: what is meant by the idealist understanding? I shall
begin by quoting from an eighteenth-century French author, now
completely forgotten, but one who wrote a curious book. He was Cellier
Dufayel and the book was entitled: **Origine commune de la littérature
et de la législation chez tons les peuples** (Paris 1786).

"Just as literature is the expression of the litterateur's thinking," he
says, "law is, in its turn, the expression of the thinking of the
legislator, taking that word in the broadest sense.

"There is then a common source both for literature and for
legislation\... and that source is thought, whose origin is in man's
nature, which should be studied first and foremost, if one would proceed
with method and advance with some certitude towards the goal one has set
oneself." (p.7)

Here is an understanding of history that is completely *idealistic*:
human thought is the source of law, i. e., of all social and political
organisation. The development of that organisation is determined by
human thought, which, in its turn, originates in man's nature.

This idealistic interpretation of history is, with few exceptions,
peculiar to all philosophers of the eighteenth century, even to the
materialists.

The weak point, the heel of Achilles, of this understanding of history
will easily be seen. I shall describe it in a few words.

Were one to ask an eighteenth-century writer, say Cellier, how man's
ideas take shape, he would reply that they are a product of the social
environment. But what is a social environment? It is the totality of
those very social relations which, Cellier Dufayel himself asserts,
originate in human thought.

Hence we have before us the following antinomy:

1.  The social environment is a product of thought;
2.  Thought is a product of the social environment.

As long as we are unable to escape from this contradiction, we shall
understand nothing either in the history of ideas or in the history of
social forms.

If you take, for instance, the evolution ot literary criticism in the
nineteenth century, you will see it has been, and in part remains, quite
powerless to solve this antinomy. Thus, Sainte-Beuve holds that every
social revolution is accompanied by a revolution in literature. But
where do social revolutions come from? They are caused by the
development of human thought; since, in civilised societies, the
evolution of thought finds expression in the evolution of literature, we
come up against the same antinomy: the development of literature hinges
on social development, while social development is conditioned by the
development of literature. Hippolyte Taine's philosophy of art suffers
from the same shortcoming.

We shall now see how Marx's understanding of history successfully solves
this antinomy.

Marx's materialist understanding of history is the direct opposite of
the eighteenth-century understanding.

In a comparison of his own method with that of Hegel, Marx says in the
*Afterword* to the Second German Edition of **Capital**:

"*To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, i.e., the process of
thinking, which, under the name of 'the Idea', he even transforms into
an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real world, and the real
world is only the external, phenomenal form of 'the Idea'. With me, on
the contrary, the ideal is nothing but the material world reflected by
the human mind, and translated into forms of thought.*"
[\[6\*\]](#nf){#ff}

This is a *materialist* understanding of the history of human thought.
Engels expressed the same in a more popular form when he said that it is
not consciousness that determines being, but being that determines
consciousness.

It may, however, be asked: what does a way of life derive from if it is
not determined by the mode of thought?

Social man's way of life is determined by his means of subsistence,
which in their turn depend on the state of the productive forces at the
disposal of social man, i.e., of society.

The productive forces a tribe of savages dispose of determine that
tribe's way of life; the productive forces at the disposal of Europeans
in the Middle Ages determined the structure of feudal society; the
productive forces of our times determine the structure of present-day
society, capitalist society, bourgeois society.

You are all no doubt well aware that the types of weaponry determine the
organisation of an army, the plans of campaigns, the disposition of
units, the orders issued, and so on and so forth. All this creates the
profound distinction between the military system of the ancients and
that of our days. In exactly the same way, the state of 1he productive
forces, and the means and modes of production, determine the relations
existing among producers, i.e., the entire social structure as well. But
once we have a social structure as a fact, the way in which it
determines the state of men's mores and ideas will be readily
understood.

Let us take an example the better to bring the point out.

The reactionaries have often accused the French philosophers of the
eighteenth century -- the Encyclopedists -- of their propaganda having
laid the ground for the French Revolution. That propaganda was no doubt
a sine qua non of the Revolution. It may, however, be asked: why was it
that such propaganda should have started only in the eighteenth century?
Why was it not conducted in the times of Louis XIV? Where is the answer
to be sought? In the general properties of human nature? No, for they
were the same in the times of Bossuet and in those of Voltaire. But if
the French of Bossuet's times did not hold the same views as did the
French of Voltaire's times, it was because of the change in France's
social structure. But what brought that change about? It was France's
economic development that did so.

I shall take another example, this time borrowed from the history of
French art.

Kindly look at these two engravings made after Boucher, and at these two
photographs of two celebrated pictures painted by Louis David. They are
representative of two completely different stages in the history of
French painting. Note the distinctive features in Boucher's art, compare
them with the distinctive features in David's art, and tell me whether
the difference that exists between these two painters can be accounted
for by the general properties of human nature. For my part, I do not see
any possibility of that. Neither do I understand how those properties of
human nature could explain to me the transition from Boucher's paintings
to David's. Finally, I fail to understand which of the properties of
human nature had to lead to the transition from Francois Boucher's
paintings to those of Louis David happening at the end of the eighteenth
century, and at no other time. Human nature can explain nothing here.
Let us see what the materialist understanding of history will show.

Again, it is not *psychology* but *political economy* that has to
account for the evolution of social forms and human thought; it is not
consciousness that determines being, but being that determines
consciousness.

This understanding of history, which has so often come under attack from
bourgeois theorists, has also come under fire from Conrad Schmidt, and
will doubtlessly come in for the same treatment from Bernstein in the
series of articles he is now publishing in **N\[eue\] Z\[eit\]**.

Incidentally, these gentlemen are not attacking in the open. On the
contrary, they style themselves as adherents of this understanding of
history; only they interpret it in a way that makes us appear to be
retreating, together with them, from the materialist understanding of
history and returning to idealism, or rather to eclecticism.

That was exactly what Conrad Schmidt said in the German journal **Der
sozlalistische Akademiker**: society's economy is merely an emanation of
human nature; the latter is the supreme synthetic unity (*höhere
zusammenfassende Einheit*), the foundation on which rests the operation
of all the factors of historical development. Only, he goes on to say,
lhat supreme unity always reveals ilself in various forms. To understand
the falsity of this view, one has only to ask oneself: what are the
forces thanks to which man's nature goes over from certain forms to
others? What arc the forces that make the American Yankee's nature so
profoundly different from that of the Redskin? Whatever they may be,
those forces evidently do not lie in human nature. Consequently, the
latter is not the supreme synthetic unity that Conrad Schmidt speaks of.

The economic structure of Yankee society is utterly different from the
Redskins' economic organisation. To say that the latter is an emanation
of human nature means saying absolutely nothing, since the question that
has to be answered is: why is one emanation of nature so vastly
different from another? On closer exam ination Conrad Schmidt's sapient
remark means nothing but the following: there would be no history but
for the existence of the human race. This is what is known as a *La
Palisse* truth. [\[7\*\]](#ng){#fg}

Thus, Conrad Schmidt's criticism is far from dangerous to the
materialist understanding of history, or, to put it more exactly. it can
be dangerous only if Conrad Schmidt is taken for a Marxist.

Let us draw the conclusion. From this angle, too, it is not very
difficult to overcome the crisis of the Marxist school. At our next
session, we shall see whether there is anything serious in the
objections raised by Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt to the *economic*
views of *Karl Marx*.

 \
[Top of the page](#top)\
 

### Footnotes

[1.](#f1){#n1} \[Up to a certain point.\]

[2.](#f2){#n2} \[Plekhanov is quoting from the French translation of
Thomas H. Huxley's, **Method and Results**, Essays. *Descartes'
discourse on method*\].

[3.](#f3){#n3} \[All individuals are animate in varions degree.\]

#### \* \* \*

### Notes

This publication is a summary of Plekhanov's lecture directed against
"critics" of Marx, particularly Eduard Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt.
Plekhanov delivered this lecture in Geneva and other towns of
Switzerland and Italy late in the spring and early summer of 1898.

Subsequently the lecture provided the basis for several articles, among
which were [*Bernstein and
Materialism*](../07/bernsteinmat.html){target="new"} and *Conrad Schmidt
Versus Karl Marx and Frederick Engels*.

[1\*.](#fa){#na} *The Young* -- a petty-bourgeois, semi-anarchical
opposition in the German Social-Democratic Party which arose in 1890.
The "young" denied any kind of participation in parliamentary activities
and disguised their opportunistic essence with the "Left"
pseudo-revolutionary phrases. The "young" were expelled from the Party
in October 1891 at the Congress of Erfurt.

[2\*.](#fb){#nb} Bernstein launched a campaign against revolutionary
Marxism with his article *Problems of Socialism*, which was published in
the theoretical organ of the German Social-Democrats **Neue Zeit** for
1898.

[3\*.](#fc){#nc} Conrad Schmidt's article *Kant, sein Leben und seine
Lehre* (*Kant, His Life and Teaching*), a review of Kronenberg's book of
the same title, was published in the third supplement to the newspaper
**Vorwarts!**, the central organ of the German Social-Democratic Party,
on October 17, 1897.

[4\*.](#fd){#nd} The reference is to Eduard Bernstein's article *Das
realistische und das ideologische Moment des Sozialismus* (*Realistic
and Ideological Moments of Socialism*) published in **Neue Zeit**,
No.34, May 27, 1898.

[5\*.](#fe){#ne} ***L'Encyclopédie*** was published in the second half
of the eighteenth century (1751-80) by Diderot and d'Alembert, whose aim
was a struggle against the "ancient regime" and clericalism, and the
development of progressive science, philosophy and arts.

The excerpt, which Plekhanov intended to cite from Diderot's
*Spinosiste* (not *Spinosisme*) is evidently the one he cited in his
article *Bernstein and Materialism*.

[6\*.](#ff){#nf} Karl Marx, **Capital**, Vol.I, Moscow 1974, p.29.

[7\*.](#fg){#ng} *La Palisse Truth* -- the truth which is evident by
itself and does not need any proofs.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 3.8.2008
