---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Arms and the Man

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Irish Worker**, 13 December 1913.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Somewhere or other we have read that every act brings its own payment;
every crime its own punishment. Recent events in Ireland would seem to
bear out the truth of that bit of philosophy. We have had on the part of
the fervent supporters of the established institutions of the British
Empire a continual and increasing fervency of appeal to the arbitrament
of force as against the verdict of constitutional government, a rising
crescendo of hysterical eloquence invoking the use of arms as against
the verdict of votes. Landlords, ex-Crown lawyers, ax-Ministers of the
Crown, aspirants to be Ministers of the Crown, Ministers of the Gospel,
smug, sweating capitalists and dear ladies living upon the sweated toll
of poor women -- all have joined in declaring with one voice that the
only course open to lovers of justice and liberty when outvoted is to
appeal to the arbitrament of arms, and to bathe with blood the hills and
dales of their native land, what time the crack of rifles and zip-zip of
machine guns rattled around the banks of our 'lazy shining rivers.'

The world has looked on amazed, the responsible Ministers of the Crown
amused, and the forces of revolution rather pleased than otherwise. But
whilst the Government twirled its thumbs rather bored at the spectacle,
something was happening in other circles on which the Government had not
counted, and which the same Government could not afford, or did not
think it could afford, to view with equanimity. That something took
shape and form on the day on which we announced that the Irish Transport
& General Workers' Union proposed to organise and drill a Citizen Army
of its own. At first looked upon as a mere piece of Liberty Hall
heroics, it assumed a different aspect when it was discovered that
regiments had actually been organised, and drilling under the command of
an experienced officer and competent noncommissioned officers was in
progress nightly. A parade through the city impressing the onlookers by
its discipline and self-control effectually dispelled all illusions as
to the deadly earnestness of purpose of the men and their chiefs.
Following this came the uprise of Volunteer forces throughout
Nationalist Ireland, and the young stalwart men who have ever cherished
high dreams for Erin commenced to learn the rudiments of drill.

And then the Government took action. To allow Orangemen to drill was all
right. Their leaders could be trusted to see that no action would be
taken which would interfere with the sacred rights of property, or to
end the right of the few to rule and rob the many. But to allow Labour
to drill and perhaps arm, to allow Nationalists to drill and arm!!! --
that would never do! Hence the Government which allowed the Orange
aristocracy to arm and drill the Orange mobs, to supply them with all
the implements of war, and to inflame them with the passions of war,
promptly and ruthlessly prevented the issue of arms to, or the learning
of drill by the people against whom the poor Orange dupes were being
armed and excited.

That was instance number one of the manner in which the crime brings its
own punishment, the counsel to arm on behalf of the Orange aristocracy
bringing inevitably with it the counsel to arm the masses of the
Nationalist democracy.

The second instance is of a more tragic as well as of a more -- striking
nature. During the progress of the present dispute we have seen imported
into Dublin some of the lowest elements from the very dregs of the
criminal population of Great Britain and Ireland. This scum of the
underworld have come here excited by appeals to the vilest instincts of
their natures; these appeals being framed and made by the gentlemen
employers of Dublin. They have been incited to betray their fellows
fighting against the imposition of an agreement denounced by the highest
Court of Inquiry, as well as by public opinion in general, as an
interference with individual liberty. And in order to induce them to act
as Judases their rascally passions were pandered to by the offer of
wages higher than were ever paid to union men, and by the permission and
encouragement to carry murderous weapons. Too much stress cannot be laid
upon this latter encouragement. There are natures so low that permission
to carry about the means whereby life may be destroyed has to them an
irresistible appeal; the feeling that they carry in their pockets the
possibility of destroying others, has to these base natures an
intoxication all its own. To that feeling the employers of Dublin
deliberately appealed. Deliberately, and with malice aforethought, they
armed a gang of the lowest scoundrels in these islands, and after daily
inflaming them with drink, sent them to and fro in the streets of the
capital, inciting and maddening all those upon whose liberties they were
helping to make war. In one of the streets on Thursday afternoon, this
cold-blooded policy of incitement to outrage had its effect. A few men
jeered at the passing scabs and made a show of hostility. Immediately a
scab drew a revolver, fired -- and shot one of the employers principally
responsible for bringing him here and principally responsible for arming
him and setting him loose primed with drink upon the streets of Dublin.
That action of the employer in importing and arming such a scoundrel was
a crime -- an anti-social crime of the foulest nature -- and surely
never more dramatically did a crime bring its own punishment. It came
like a judgment from on high, and what wonder if such was the first
thought of the workers when the news was told!

So it will ever be; no act can escape its consequences. And now let us
ask if this fearful example will be lost, or will it not help to arouse
all to a sense of the fearful dangers incident to the present warfare
upon the liberties of the working class of Dublin? Is it not time that
saner counsels prevailed and that now, having fought our battle, tried
each other's mettle and felt each other's strength, we should sit down
to devise means to terminate the present conflict and provide for the
possibility of peaceful cooperation replacing the reign of chaos and
disorder?

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
