---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # A Fiery Cross or Christmas Bells                                    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Irish Worker**, 20 December 1913.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

While we are writing this the one question agitating all Dublin is
whether this Christmas will see a relighting of the Fiery Cross or the
ringing of Christmas bells of peace and rejoicing. Possibly no more grim
commentary upon the so-called civilisation of today could be instanced
than that fact. Here we have a great city held up by a war between two
classes, and in that war the contending classes are represented, on the
one hand, by those who control the wealth, the capital, the armed forces
and all the means of coercion; whilst, on the other hand, all that is
represented is toiling men and women, with no assets except their brains
and hands, and no powers except the power and capacity to suffer for a
principle they esteem more valuable than life itself.

But to the side of this latter class has been drawn gradually as if by a
magnet all the intellect, the soul and the spirit of the nation, all
those who have learned to esteem the higher things of life, to value the
spirit more than the matter.

Publicists of all kinds, philanthropists, literary men, lovers of their
kind, poets, brilliant writers, artists, have all been conquered by the
valiant heroism of the Dublin workers, have all been drawn within the
ranks of the friends of the fighters of labour -- all have succumbed to
the magic charm of the unobtrusive men and women whose constancy amidst
sufferings has made this fight possible. Whoever signs the document of
settlement (if any is ever signed), whosoever is acclaimed as the great
one of the treaty of peace (if there ever is a treaty of peace) the real
heroes and conquerors are to be found in the shims, and in the prisons
where men, women and girls have agonised and are agonising in order that
their class may not lose one step it has gained in its upward toil to
freedom.

These thoughts come crowding upon us as we write. We think also that,
despite all the adhesion of all the brilliant ones and all those in the
highest odour of sanctity to the cause of the workers, the settlement is
still in the hands of those who control economic power. Poets, artists,
authors, humanitarians and archbishops may plead and beg for the ringing
of the bells of Christmas for ever. The final word still rests with
those who control the money bags; and thus we learn, hard facts teaching
us, that in this gross travesty of civilisation under which we live
to-day neither soul nor brains is the equal of gold.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *"The clinking of the silver dimes life\'s melody has marred,\        |
| And nature's immemorial chimes are jangled, harsh and jarred."*       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

And so Dublin lies in the grip of the power of the purse; and on this
fateful Friday the issue still hangs trembling. A few hours may
determine whether the verdict will go forth for the joyous ringing of
the Bells of Peace or for the militant call to all lovers of their kind
to grasp and pass from hand to hand again the dread but inspiring Fiery
Cross.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 20.8.2003
