---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# A Titanic Struggle

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Daily Herald**, 6 December 1913.\
Transcribed by *The Workers' Web ASCII Pamphlet Project* in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is the truth about the Dublin dispute? What was the origin of the
Dublin dispute? These are at present the most discussed questions in the
labour world of these islands, and I have been invited by the editor of
the **Daily Herald** to try and shed a little light upon them for the
benefit of its readers. I will try and be brief and to the point, whilst
striving to be also clear.

In the year 1911 the National Seamen's and Firemen's Union, as a last
desperate expedient to avoid extinction, resolved upon calling a general
strike in all the home ports. At that time the said Union as the lawyers
would say, was, more or less, an ishmael among trade unions. It was not
registered, in most places it was not even affiliated to the local
Trades Union Councils, and its national officials had always been
hostile to the advanced labour movement. They believed, seemingly, in
playing a lone land. Perhaps the general discredit into which it had
been brought by the curiously inconsistent action of its leaders in
closely identifying themselves with one of the orthodox political
parties, and at the same time calling for the aid in industrial
conflicts of the labour men when they fought and slendered in political
contests, had something to do with the general weakness and impending
bankruptcy of the National Seamen's and Firemen's Union, at the time it
issued its call in 1911.

At all events the call was in danger of falling upon deaf ears, and was,
in fact, but little headed until the Irish Transport and General
Workers' Union began to take a hand in the game. As ships came into the
Port of Dublin, after the issue of the call, each ship was held up by
the dockers under the orders of James Larkin until its crew joined the
union, and signed on under union conditions and rates of pay. Naturally,
this did not please the shipowners and merchants of Dublin. But the
delegates of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union up and down
the docks preached most energetically the doctrine of the sympathetic
strike, and the doctrine was readily assimilated by the dockers and
carters. It brought the union into a long and bitter struggle along the
quays, a struggle which cost it thousands of pounds, imperilled its very
existence, and earned for it the bitterest hatred of every employer and
sweater in the city, every one of whom swore they would wait their
chance to "get even with Larkin and his crew."

The sympathetic strike having worked so well for the seamen and firemen,
the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union began to apply it
ruthlessly in every labour dispute. A record of the victories it has won
for other trade unions would surprise a good many of its critics. A few
cases will indicate what, in the hands of Larkin and the Irish Transport
and General Workers' Union, it has won for some of the skilled trades.

When the coachmakers went on strike the Irish Transport and General
Workers' Union took over all the labourers, paid them strike pay, and
kept them out until the coachmakers won. The latter body are now
repaying us by doing scab work while we are out.

The mill-sawyers existed for twenty years in Dublin without recognition.
The sympathetic strike by our union won them recognition and an increase
of pay.

The stationary engine drivers, the cabinetmakers, the sheet metal
workers, the carpenters, and, following them all the building trades got
an increase through our control of the carting industry. As did also the
girls and men employed in Jacob's biscuit factory. In addition to this
work for others we won for our own members the following increases
within the last two years: cross channel dockers got, since the strike
in the City of Dublin Steam Packet Company, an increase of wages of 3s.
per week. In the case of the British and Irish Company the increase,
levelling it up with the other firms meant a rise of 6s. per week. For
men working for the Merchants' Warehousing Company 3s. per week, general
carriers 2s. to 3s., coal fillers halfpenny per ton, grain bushellers
1d. per ton, men and boys in the bottle-blowing works from 2s. to 10s.
per week of an increase, mineral water operatives 4s. to 6s. per week,
and a long list of warehouses in which girls were exploited were
compelled to give some slight modification of the inhuman conditions
under which their employees were labouring.

As Mr. Havelock Wilson, General Secretary, National Seamen's and
Firemen's Union, has mentioned the strike on the City of Dublin Steam
Packet Company as an instance of our erratic methods, it may be worth
while to note that as a result of that strike some of his sailors got an
increase of 5s. 6d. per week.

In addition to the cases enumerated I might also mention that the
labourers on the Dublin and South-Eastern Railway got increases of 6s.
per week, and those in the Kingstown Gas Works got increases varying
from 3s. to 10s. per week per man.

All of these increases were the result of the sympathetic strike policy,
first popularised by its success in winning the battle for the Seamen
and Firemen -- who are now asked to repudiate it.

These things well understood explain the next act in the unfolding of
the drama. Desiring to make secure what had been gained, Mr. Larkin
formulated a scheme for a Conciliation Board. This was adopted by the
Trades Council, at least in essence, and eventually came before the
Employers' Executive, or whatever the governing committee of that body
is named. After a hot discussion it was put to the vote. Eighteen
employers voted to accept a Conciliation Board, three voted against. Of
that three, William Martin Murphy was one. On finding himself in the
minority he rose and vowed that in spite of them he would "smash the
Conciliation Board." Within three days he kept his word by discharging
two hundred of his tramway traffic employees for being members of the
Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, and thus forced on the
strike of the tramway men. Immediately he appealed to all the Dublin
employers who had been forced into a semblance of decency by Larkin and
his colleagues, called to their memory the increases of wages they were
compelled to pay, and lured them on to a desperate effort to combine and
destroy the one labour force they feared.

The employers, mad with hatred of the power that had wrested from them
the improved conditions, a few of which I have named, rallied round
Murphy, and from being one in a minority of three he became the leader
and organising spirit of a band of four hundred.

I have always told our friends in Great Britain that our fight in
Ireland was neither inspired nor swayed by theories nor theorists. It
grew and was hammered out of the hard necessities of our situation.
Here, in this brief synopsis, you can trace its growth for yourselves.
First a fierce desire to save our brothers of the sea, a desire leading
to us risking our own existence in their cause. Developing from that an
extension of the principle of sympathetic action until we took the
fierce beast of capital by the throat all over Dublin, and loosened its
hold on the vitals of thousands of our class. Then a rally of the forces
of capital to recover their hold, and eventually a titanic struggle, in
which the forces of labour in Britain openly, and the forces of capital
secretly, became participants.

That is where we stand to-day. The struggle forming our theories and
shaping the policy, not only for us, but for our class. To those who
criticise us we can only reply: we fight as conditions dictate; we meet
new conditions with new policies. Those who choose may keep old policies
to meet new conditions. We cannot and will not try.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
