---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Mr Murphy's Great New Year Speech

#### (Exclusive to the *Irish Worker*)

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Irish Worker**, 3 January 1914.\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.5 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcription: Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We are informed that on Wednesday, December 31st (New Year's Eve), a
special meeting of the Employers' Association was held in the Antient
Concert Rooms to hear an address by Mr William Martin Murphy. The
meeting was called at the personal request of that gentleman, and was
the most remarkable gathering that has been held since the beginning of
the dispute. The great hall was taxed to its utmost, and the remarkable
address was listened to in absolute silence, in fact with a feeling
almost of awe-struck wonderment. We dare not speculate upon the possible
results of this unique pronouncement.

Mr Murphy said: "Gentlemen, I have called you together on the eve of the
New Year, 1914, because I have something to tell you that I feel can
better be told upon such an occasion than upon any other. It has long
been the custom amongst Christian nations to make the closing of the old
year and the opening of the book of the new an occasion for the
promulgation of new policies, and for the renunciation of old sins. Such
of us as feel wearied and worn out with old forms of iniquity and
desirous of aspiring after a newer life in which to qualify for a
greater righteousness naturally choose that period in which the thoughts
of men turn to change as the period best suited to mark their change of
heart. For that reason I have fixed upon this evening as the most
auspicious occasion, and the one most calculated to awaken in your
breasts a responsive throb for the review of the past and the
announcement of the change of policy I intend to follow upon my change
of heart (sensation). Yes, gentlemen, I intend to embark upon a new line
of policy -- a policy that I hope will reconcile me at last to the great
heart of the Dublin public, of the generous Irish public from whom I
have been so long estranged.

"For years I have followed in Ireland a policy which set my own
interests above and before everything else. I have schemed and contrived
by every means to obtain control of every kind of business, even if in
doing so I had to destroy the business and wreck the prospects of
helpless orphans. I have never followed any policy of Christian charity,
of humane pity, even of common decency, to restrain me when engaged
trying to obtain possession of the business interests of those whom I
considered as business rivals. I have made a fine art, or perhaps I
should say a scientific business of the accumulation in my own hands of
the fortunes and control of destinies of others. My path through the
business world has been marked by the ruin of others, and all over
Dublin and the other scenes of my activities can be traced the sufferers
-- suffering in silence for the most part, as I have successfully
manipulated into silence every avenue of publicity by means of which
they could make themselves heard.

"What I have done to the business people in this business world I have
done even more ruthlessly and unscrupulously to those members of the
working class who dared to cross my path. You all know the tale of the
West Clare Railway. How I terrorised the whole countryside into
acceptance of my terms, how I evicted poor Irish labourers for daring to
ask as a weekly wage a sum not sufficient to pay for a box at the Opera
for one of my guests at Dartry Hall, how I secured that this eviction
should pass and win the approval of a venal Home Rule Press which had
grown into popularity by the denunciation of evictions not one half as
cold-blooded and merciless, and how in spite of this eviction of my poor
countrymen and women I still managed to pose before the public as a
pure-souled patriot and lover of my kind. All this you know, gentlemen!
You also know -- for you have been participating in my crime -- how I
managed our latest attempt to reduce to soulless slavery the gallant
workers of Dublin. You know how I managed to secure a sufficient number
of slaves prepared to sell their manhood for a chance to earn a few
miserable shillings; how I used those slaves, and when I was sure of
their slavishness proceeded to goad the more manly workers into revolt,
and then supplanted them by the help of those Judases. How I had
prepared my plans so that the Judge who tried the strikers, arrested by
a police force drunken with rural hatred of the city, should feel that
his own right to dividends was on trial when confronted by a working
class prisoner, and should hit out vindictively with fiendish sentences
accordingly. You also know, none better, how we had our secret agents in
every club, society and gathering place in the city. How we encouraged
them to play upon the most sacred offices and the most hallowed
institutions and to divert them to our uses. How we made priests of the
Most High imagine they were obeying the call of God when in reality they
were only being galled by our carefully poisoned suggestions -- made
them mistake the insinuations of the devil for the inspirations of God.
How we secured that through the influence of some of our lady
shareholders the uniformed ruffians of the police should be let loose to
insult with foul-mouthed indecencies the brave girls who dared to strike
against the unbearable conditions you imposed upon them, and when in the
pride of their outraged purity they resented the insults the same police
bullies beat them, arrested them, and perjured themselves to swear their
liberties away. All this you know, gentlemen! You also know how we made
the streets of Dublin a place of terror for every worker not prepared to
sell his class; how our uniformed brutes (whom I despised even whilst
using them) batoned, kicked and maimed all and sundry; how we murdered
two men in Dublin and left another widow and six orphans in Kingstown
[\[1\]](#n1){#f1}; how we armed scabs to shoot at will, and how, in
short, we have made of the Capital City of our country a place of
slaughter, of misery, and a byword amongst the nations.

"Well, gentlemen, what has it all profited us? At the end of it all we
find that the workers of Dublin are still unsubdued, and I now believe
are unsubduable and unconquerable. You can extract what comfort you may
from that fact. For myself now at the opening of the New Year I am
determined to do what I can in the few years left me to try and make
amends for all the long array of crimes against my kind of which I have
been guilty. I, at least, will no longer make war upon the liberties of
my poorer brothers and sisters, or use my ill-gotten wealth to exploit
others. What I have done I cannot restore, but I can restore to the
working class the rights of which I used my wealth to deprive them. From
this night, gentlemen, I cease to hold the pistol of starvation at the
heads of the poor to make them surrender their souls and liberties. I
propose to go down to the Tramway Depots and hunt away the foul vermin
who now pollute the cars by their presence. I propose to open the
dispatch business of the **Independent** and **Herald** with Transport
Union members, and if they will permit me I will grasp the hand of each
and beg their pardon for my crimes against their manhood. These will be
but the beginning.

"From this day forward I am at the service of every honest cause, and I
trust that the closing years of a life spent in unscrupulous acquisition
of gold may be worthy of some honour when spent as they will be spent in
trying to win instead the esteem of my fellows.

"To-day I am sending to Jim Larkin, whom I have grown to esteem and
value as a worthy citizen, an invitation to do me the honour of
consenting to dine with me on New Year's Day at the Imperial Hotel.
There on the spot made historic by Larkin [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}, I propose
that he and I shall make a pact of friendship, and trust that united our
efforts will succeed in purging Dublin and Ireland of much of its
squalor and misery, and set its feet upon the upward path that leads
towards righteousness."

(**NOTE.** -- Up to the present the invitation has not arrived, and we
are wondering whether our reporter invented the speech of Mr Murphy, as
Murphy's supporters have hitherto invented so many speeches attributed
to Mr Larkin.)

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} James Nolan and James Byrne were killed by a police baton
charge, and another James Byrne died on hunger strike in prison.

[2.](#f2){#n2} It was from a balcony of the Imperial Hotel that Larkin
spoke on Bloody Sunday.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 20.8.2003
