---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Law and Order

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 26 August 1899.\
Republished in Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom (eds), **James
Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, New York 1974.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The statement is often made that Socialists are opposed to Law and
Order, and made by men and women who find in the belief implied in the
statement a sufficient reason for withholding their support from the
aggressive Socialist movement. We do not mean to propitiate that section
of our critics by denying our hostility to the governmental powers that
be, but we would suggest that a little calm reflection -- supplemented
by historical inquiry -- upon the origin and uses of the terms 'Law' and
'Order' may be of use in determining whether the sanction of legality
should be sufficient to protect any social or political institution from
attack.

It is worth remembering in this connection that every movement for the
improvement of the condition of the human race, every step forward in
civilisation, has of necessity had to face the opposition of Law, and
disturbed the stability of Order. The pioneer of progress has ever been
an enemy of Law, and directed all his efforts to the destruction of
Order. The reason is obvious. The human race in its progress upward from
savagery has had, at each upward move, to meet the opposition of the
class who, thriving upon the misery of their fellows, found their
security in the maintenance of the status quo and its attendant evils.
This class coming together for mutual support imposed upon their weaker,
or less cunning, fellows certain rules and observances calculated to
weaken the power of the multitude and augment the privileges of the few.
Those rules and observances were called the Law, and in the early stages
of human history, as to a lesser extent today, the majority of the race
grew into the habit of accepting and even reverencing such rules or Law
from the mere fact of their promulgation -- especially when such
promulgation dated from a period anterior to their own birth as
individuals. This blind unreasoning acceptance by the majority of rules
made for their own subjection, this passive and spiritless acquiescence
in the rightfulness of the social or political condition of the day, is
called Order. Every proposal made by the more far-seeing and intelligent
to abolish such iniquitous rules is an attack upon Law, and every effort
to arouse the multitude from their state of slavish subjection and
inspire them with a desire to win better conditions of life, is
necessarily aimed at the disturbance of Order. But the habit of thought
engendered by the fact of so many generations having lived under the
rule of Law -- although that Law may have been but the self-preserving
ordinances of a tyrannical class -- has given to the term 'Law' a
commanding influence over the minds of men which even the friends of
progress feel compelled to avail themselves of. The first impulse of the
average citizen is to yield to the uniforms and trappings with which
lawmakers and administrators clothe their offices a reverence and
obedience which they would by no means willingly yield to the
individuals in their capacity as private citizens; in like manner the
ordinances formulated by the Legislative Chamber come to the people
invested with a peculiar flavour of pseudo-sanctity which they could
never acquire as the mere opinions of the very mediocre gentlemen who
usually frame them. Thus the reformer or revolutionist finds the line of
least resistance for his party suggested to him by observing this
tradition of Law. Since the people almost involuntarily obey the Law let
us capture the law-making machinery, and the new ideas -- obnoxious,
treasonable, or heretical, and therefore looked upon with suspicion
today -- will appear to them in all the pomp and panoply of Law, and
they will then readily conform to the new conditions. So every
discontented party in the State strove to capture the law-making
machinery of the State. In this manner every class in Society, from the
king to the capitalist, has successively captured political power and
when enthroned in possession has legalised its own conception of
Society. Each class has had a different method of exploiting Labour, and
the fight for governmental power has been a contest in which each rising
class above the working class has sought to make its own peculiar manner
of appropriating the products of the labour of the workers the only
lawful manner. In this fight the mechanism of government has been
gradually improved and extended, and its franchises broadened down until
the means of acquiring power have at last come within reach of the only
remaining subject class -- the workers. The direction taken by the
revolt of this class -- the modern Socialist movement -- has thus been
determined for it by the previous history of the race; frankly
confessing its hostility to Law and Order, but supplementing the avowal
by the qualification that it is only against Capitalistic Law and
Capitalistic Order that its hostility is directed. Like every other
revolting class in the past it aims at the capture of the law-making
machinery, in order that in possession of that mechanism of government
it may proceed to impose its will upon the nations as an all-compelling
law. But it also knows that the conquest of political power by the
revolutionary working class must of necessity result in the complete
transformation of the very nature of government; that the present forms
of government are the reflex of a system of society based upon class
rule, and pre-suppose the existence of two separate classes -- dominant
and subject, coercing and coerced; that whereas every revolting class in
the past upon the successful issue of its struggle had still a subject
class below it, and therefore maintained all the coercive machinery of
government in order to keep that class in its subject position, the
emergence of the working class into the light of power and freedom will
leave no class in the darkness of subjection; that, therefore, the
coercive functions of government will be no longer necessary, and the
first duty of the revolutionary working class after the dethronement of
class government, and abolition of class robbery, must be to divest the
State of its power of political ruler, and place it upon its true basis
of industrial administrator.

Then when Law is the self-imposed ordinances of a free people --
ordinances self-imposed in the interest of industrial efficiency and
general well-being, when Order comes as a result of the harmonious
working of a just social system, then Progress will find its adherents
in the friends of Law, and the triumph of its ideas without disturbing
the stability of Order.

But while Law remains the conservation of all the worst tyrannies
imposed by man upon his fellow-man through all our long and bloody
history, while Order is but a synonym for the cringing submission of
spiritless slaves, the Socialist will remain an enemy of Law, and a
disturber of Order.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
