---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Isolation of Dublin

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Forward**, 9 February 1914.\
Transcribed by *The Workers' Web ASCII Pamphlet Project* in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not necessary, I presume, to remind our readers of the beginnings
of the Dublin struggle. Let us, just for convenience sake, take up the
fight at the moment it became a subject of national action on the part
of the British Labour movement.

A public meeting had been proclaimed in Dublin in a brazen illegal
manner. For declaring that this proclamation was illegal, and advising
their leaders to disregard it and stand to their rights, a number of
leaders of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union had been
arrested and imprisoned. A wholesale batoning of the people had
followed, and Dublin was the scene of the most unparalleled police
brutality.

An appeal was made to the British Trades Union Congress, then happily
sitting, and that body in the name of the British working class nobly
rose to the occasion, and pledged the credit of the whole British labour
movement to see their Dublin comrades through the fight. As a result,
the right of free speech was re-asserted in Dublin, a supply of food was
arranged for through the despatch of specially chartered steamers, and a
huge amount of money was raised to enable the men and women of Dublin to
keep the fight going. Never was seen such enthusiasm in a labour fight.
Trade unionists, socialists of all kinds, anarchists, industrialists,
syndicalists, all the varying and hitherto discordant elements of the
labour movement found a common platform, were joined together in pursuit
of a common object. Now, permit me to underscore that point, and
emphasise its great importance. For long years we have been preaching to
the labour movement the necessity of concerted industrial action,
telling it that the time was rotten ripe for industrial unity, and
declaring that as the interests of each were the concern of all, our
organisations should be rearranged with a view to the conserving of
their common interests.

We found that to a large extent these ideas were taking root in the
minds of the workers, but that to a still larger extent the tacit
acceptance of our ideas failed to evoke concerted action built upon
these lines. The forces of our enemies were united and wielded with all
the precision and relentlessness with which the general staff of an army
would wield the battalions and brigades which formed the component parts
of that army, but the battalions and brigades of the army of labour when
engaged in battle had no efficient general staff to guide and direct the
whole army to the salvation of its individual units; and, worse still,
had none of that esprit-de-corps which on the military battle-field
would make the desertion of any section to its fate an unthinkable
course to the officers of the divisions not engaged. We had seen at
London, at Leith and elsewhere that whereas the whole force of the
Shipping Federation has been actively engaged in fighting the dockers of
these ports, the dockers and seamen of the other ports had maintained
the peace, and left their Leith or London brothers to bear alone the
full force of the Federation attack, instead of meeting that attack by a
movement against the flanks and rear of the Federation in these other
ports. We know that although much of this blundering was due to the
sectional jealousy of various union leaders, much was also due to the
fact that the conception of common action on a national scale by the
whole working class had not yet entered the minds of the rank and file
as a whole. Something had been wanting -- something that would make the
minds of the workers more responsive, more ready to accept the broader
idea, and act upon its acceptance. That something Dublin supplied.

The dramatic suddenness with which the Dublin fight was thrust upon
public attention, the tragic occurrences of the first few days --
working class martyrdom, the happy coincidence of a Trade Union
Congress, the intervention of British trade unionists to assert the
right of public meeting for Irish workers -- filling the gap in the
ranks caused by the jailing of Irish Trade Union leaders, the brilliant
inspiration of a food ship, and last but not least the splendid heroism
of the Dublin men and women showing out against the background of the
squalor and misery of their houses.

There are times in history when we realise that it is easier to convert
a multitude than it ordinarily is to convert an individual; when indeed
ideas seem to seize upon the masses as contra-distinguished by ordinary
times when individuals slowly seize ideas. The propagandist toils on for
decades in seeming failure and ignominy, when suddenly some great event
takes place in accord with the principles he has been advocating, and
immediately he finds that the seed he has been sowing is springing up in
plants that are covering the earth. To the idea of working class unity,
to the seed of industrial solidarity, Dublin was the great event that
enabled it to seize the minds of the masses, the germinating force that
gave power to the seed to fructify and cover these islands.

I say in all solemnity and seriousness that in its attitude towards
Dublin the working class movement of Great Britain reached its highest
point of moral grandeur -- attained for a moment to a realisation of
that sublime unity towards which the best in us must continually aspire.
Could that feeling but have been crystallised into organic expression,
could we but have had real statesmen amongst us who, recognising the
wonderful leap forward of our class, would have hastened to burn behind
us the boats that might make easy a retreat to the old ground of
isolation and division, could we have found labour leaders capable
enough to declare that now that the working class had found its
collective soul it should hasten to express itself as befitted that soul
and not be fettered by the rules, regulations and codes of organisations
conceived in the olden outworn spirit of sectional jealousies; could
these things have but been vouchsafed to us, what a new world could now
be opening delightfully upon the vision of labour? Consider what Dublin
meant to you all! It meant that the whole force of organised labour
should stand behind each unit of organisation in each and all of its
battles, that no company, battalion or brigade should henceforth be
allowed to face the enemy alone, and that the capitalist would be taught
that when he fought a union anywhere he must be prepared to fight all
unions everywhere.

For the first days and weeks of the struggle, the working classes of
Great Britain attained to the height of moral grandeur expressed in that
idea, all labour stood behind Dublin, and Dublin rejoiced. Dublin
suffered and agonised, but rejoiced that even in its suffering it was
the medium for the apostolate of a rejuvenating idea. How often have I
heard the responsive cheers to the question whether they would be
prepared to stand by others as these others had stood by them!\
 

And now? Dublin is isolated. We asked our friends of the transport trade
unions to isolate the capitalist class of Dublin, and we asked the other
unions to back them up. But no, they said we would rather help you by
giving you funds. We argued that a strike is an attempt to stop the
capitalist from carrying on his business, that the success or failure of
the strike depends entirely upon the success or non-success of the
capitalist to do without the strikers. If the capitalist is able to
carry on his business without the strikers, then the strike is lost,
even if the strikers receive more in strike pay than they formerly did
in wages. We said that if scabs are working a ship and union men
discharge in another port the boat so loaded, then those union men are
strike breakers, since they help the capitalist in question to carry on
his business. That if union seamen man a boat discharged by scabs, these
union seamen or firemen are by the same reason strike-breakers, as also
are the railwaymen or carters who assist in transporting the goods
handled by the scabs for the capitalist who is fighting his men or
women. In other words, we appealed to the collective soul of the workers
against the collective hatred of the capitalist.

We asked for no more than the logical development of that idea of
working class unity, that the working class of Britain should help us to
prevent the Dublin capitalists carrying on their business without us. We
asked for the isolation of the capitalists of Dublin, and for answer the
leaders of the British labour movement proceeded calmly to isolate the
working class of Dublin. As an answer to those who supported our request
for the isolation of Dublin we were told that a much better plan would
be to increase the subsidies to enable us to increase strike pay. As
soon as this argument had served its purpose, the subsidies fell off,
and the 'Dublin Fund' grew smaller and smaller as if by a pre-arranged
plan. We had rejected the last terms offered by the employers on the
strength of this talk of increased supplies, and as soon as that last
attempt at settlement thus fell through, the supplies gradually froze up
instead of being increased as we had been promised.

In addition to this the National Union of Railwaymen, whilst in
attendance at the Special Conference in London on 9th December, had
actually in their pockets the arrangements for the re-starting of work
on the London and North-Western boat at the North Wall of Dublin, and in
the train returning to Dublin the day after the Conference, we read of
the line being re-opened. No vote was taken of the men on strike; they
were simply ordered back to work by their officials and told that if
they did not return, their strike pay would be stopped. The Seamen's and
Firemen's Union men in Dublin were next ordered to man the boats of the
Head Line of steamers, then being discharged by free labourers supplied
by the Shipping Federation. In both Dublin and Belfast the members
refused, and they were then informed that union men would be brought
from Great Britain to take their places. Union men to be brought from
Britain to take the place of members of the same union who refused to
desert their brothers of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union.
We were attempting to hold up Guinness' porter. A consignment was sent
to Sligo for shipment there. The local Irish Transport and General
Workers' Union official wired me for instructions. I wired to hold it
up; his men obeyed, and it was removed from Sligo, railed to Derry, and
there put on board by members of Mr. James Sexton's National Union of
Dockers on ships manned by members of Mr. Havelock Wilson's National
Union of Seamen and discharged in Liverpool by members of Mr. James
Sexton's Union. Whilst the City of Dublin Steam Packet Company was still
insisting upon carrying the goods of our worst enemy, Jacob's (who is
still enforcing the agreement denounced by Sir Geo. Askwith) the members
of the Seamen and Firemen's Union were ordered to sign on in their
boats, although our men were still on strike. We were informed by Mr.
Joe Houghton of the Scottish Dockers that his union would not hold up
any boat for us unless joint action was taken by the National Transport
Workers' Federation. As on a previous occasion, his members at Ayr had
worked coal boats belonging to a Belfast firm that was making war upon
the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, we do not blame Joe very
much. He had been disobeyed at Ayr -- perhaps he was coerced in Glasgow.

But why go on? Sufficient to say that the working class unity of the
first days of the Dublin fight was sacrificed in the interests of
sectional officialism. The officials failed to grasp the opportunity
offered to them to make a permanent reality of the union of working
class forces brought into being by the spectacle of rebellion, martyrdom
and misery exhibited by the workers of Dublin. All England and Scotland
rose to it; working class officialdom and working class rank and file
alike responded to the call of inspiration; it would have raised us all
upward and onward towards our common emancipation. But sectionalism,
intrigues and old-time jealousies damned us in the hour of victory, and
officialdom was the first to fall to the tempter.

And so we Irish workers must go down into Hell, bow our backs to the
lash of the slave driver, let our hearts be seared by the iron of his
hatred, and instead of the sacramental wafer of brotherhood and common
sacrifice, eat the dust of defeat and betrayal.

Dublin is isolated.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
