---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Lenten Pastorals: A Challenge

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Irish Worker**, February 28, 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A year ago at the meeting of the Maynooth Union a paper was read on
*Syndicalism* which attracted widespread attention at the time because
of the sympathetic attitude towards organised Labour taken up by the
reverend author of the paper in question, and because the same
sympathetic note was struck by most of the speakers who took part in the
discussion following the reading of the paper. We were amongst the
number of writers to the press who commented upon this phenomenon, and
in our press, the Irish Worker, we emphasised the fact that in the main
the speakers who gave this turn to the discussion seemed to represent
the younger clergy -- the younger clergy who had been students while the
modern labour movement was influencing the literature and thought of the
world. Now today we are confronted with another phenomena upon a
somewhat similar field. The united Irish Hierarchy have issued to the
faithful in Ireland a joint Pastoral upon the labour question in the
light of the Dublin dispute.

As representing the union most actively involved in that dispute, we
take it that it will be thought no impertinence or undue self-importance
on our part if we avail ourselves now of the opportunity to comment upon
the Pastoral from the standpoint of labour, and to place before our
readers the construction we place upon the events with which that
Pastoral deals. We are workers. And we speak for the class to which we
belong.

As workers then we feel that we have no apology to offer for our share
in the recent dispute. The Pastoral admits that it is the right, nay,
that it is the duty of the workers to combine for their own advancement;
it admits that there will always be the possibility of disagreement,
leading to conflict even when the best intentions exist upon both sides;
it contends that against such possibilities of strife the best remedy in
Ireland is a strong Irish Trades Union, and impresses upon all the
desirability of a Conciliation Board to obviate the dangers of
industrial war. Well, then, we submit that on all these points -- and
they are the cardinal points of the Pastoral -- our action in the past
has been entirely upon the lines suggested. We found the workers
disorganised, and we proceeded to organise them. We taught them to use
their organisation for their own moral and material advancement, and as
a result have endued them with a higher sense of the dignity of manhood
and womanhood, and weaned them from their former habits of dissipation
and recklessness. Against the possibility, the certainty of
disagreements between employers and employed when the latter sought for
relief from intolerable burdens of toil and low wagery we established an
Irish trade union, absolutely independent of British control or
influence, and appealing solely to the spirit of self-reliance we sought
to inculcate in the Irish working class.

And finally, in order to prepare a way of escape out of the strife that
might follow upon hotheadedness on the part of employers or upon our own
part, we proposed in the Dublin Trades Council and in our own press the
establishment of Conciliation Boards for the prevention, or if that
failed, for the settlement of labour disputes. In other words, our
activity has been entirely upon the lines indicated in the Pastoral as
being the proper lines to follow in our position. If, then, our activity
did not bring peace but a sword the fault lies with those who prefer to
take the sword rather than suffer the loss of any portion of the profits
and domination they lusted for, and had so long enjoyed at the cost of
the suffering and damnation of so many thousands of our class. From
beginning to end of the dispute -- if it can be said to have ended -- we
have offered to meet and to discuss with our opponents; from beginning
to end our opponents have refused to meet and discuss directly with us,
even in the two abortive Conferences, insisting upon keeping the two
directly interested bodies from getting into friendly discussion. We
would most respectfully challenge the Hierarchy to name any one point of
importance that we refused to concede, which they, had they been in our
place, would have conceded, to our opponents. They cannot name one and
be true to the position they take up in their Lenten Pastoral.

It is of little practical value in this rough work-a-day world of ours
to enunciate principles, however sublime, and to refuse to take into
account the very imperfect human material with which those principles
have to deal. We had and have to deal with a set of employers the most
heartless and the most ignorantly selfish in Christendom, employers too
lazy to adapt themselves to modern methods of business and seeking by
fiendish undercutting of wages to meet the legitimate competition of
employers elsewhere who do use modern methods and adopt modern business
ideas. In any large centre elsewhere the manager who persisted in using
the antiquated methods and the slipshod lack of system that
characterises the Dublin employers as a whole would be fired out of his
job quicker than he could draw his first week's salary. But up to the
present the constantly available supply of cheap labour has prevented
the development of up-to-date methods of business in Dublin, and when
the Irish Transport and General Workers' Trade Union began to push up
the rate of wages and to destroy the supply of cheap labour, instead of
the Dublin employers moving with the times and changing their wasteful
methods accordingly their only thought was to destroy the union, and to
remain in the unprogressive, slovenly, unenterprising state which now
and in the past has excited the laughter of every observant visitor.

In any other city an attempt to raise the wages of tramwaymen from the
low standard at which they were in Dublin would not have caused a
lock-out. The wages would have been raised, and the managing director
would have sought by cheaper fares and other attractions, to attract
greater receipts to compensate for greater outlays. It is now
well-established that cheaper fares by tram or rail or steamer mean
greater numbers travelling and hence greater receipts.

But in Dublin such a thing was impossible. An increase of wages was not
met by a development of enterprise, no, but the suggestion of an
increase was met with an outburst of eighteenth century barbarity and a
perfect carnival of ferocity towards labour. This attitude of Mr.
William Martin Murphy is typical of the whole class in Dublin to which
he belongs. Like the Bourbons "they learn nothing and they forget
nothing." The whole world is advancing around them, labour is everywhere
stirring out of the depths of subjection and advancing upward to the
heights of citizenship and towards the responsibilities of freedom. But
all this shaking up of old systems of thought, all this stirring into
life of the dormant germs of social consciousness amongst our long
oppressed people leaves them absolutely untouched. As the tiger reared
upon flesh can never lose his craving for that food, so the Dublin
employer reared as employer upon the flesh and blood of cheap labour can
never wholly relinquish, and in most cases cannot even partially
relinquish, his lust after cheapness in the labour he exploits. The
highest industrial authorities in the world declare that cheap labour
never pays in the end; the Dublin employers declare that unless they can
have a plentiful supply of cheap and helpless labour, civilisation's
hopes in Ireland are for ever doomed. The ineffective pigmies of
capitalist Dublin oppose their ridiculous theories to the world-wide
experience of the giants of international capitalism.

In face of this the beautiful theories of the Lenten Pastorals seem
rather weak and ineffective. The whole record of the Dublin master class
has been marked by a contemptuous and cynical disregard for every
principle of social conduct set forth by his Holiness Pope Pius X, or
his Holiness Pope Leo XIII. Not an independent professional man, not an
unselfish literary man or woman of genius, not a clergyman of any
denomination, not an important public servant who investigated the
merits of the dispute had during our long agony failed to acknowledge
finally the justice of our cause or to be won to admiration by the
patient suffering and steadfast adherence to an ideal exhibited by the
Dublin workers. Be it remembered that even his Grace the Archbishop of
Dublin publicly expressed his agreement with the proposals for a
settlement which we put forward. On the first occasion the employers met
his prayer for peace by importing British scabs; on the second, when he
blessed our peace proposals on the eve of Christmas, they contemptuously
refused even to look at them. Again we ask, we challenge the Hierarchy
to name the point of importance which we refused to concede which they,
were they in our place, would have conceded to our opponents.

Let it be at once understood that the strictures upon socialism and
syndicalism embodied in the Pastorals leave us unmoved. As complete
systems of thought these two principles do not exist, whatever some
extremists may say or imagine. As lines of action they do exist, and
their influence is wholly beneficial. It is only when taken as offering
a completely worked-out system of thought capable of dictating human
conduct in all possible phases, and hence governing human morals
accordingly, that either of them came under the strictures of
theologians with any degree of justification. But in their present stage
in the labour movement, viz., as indicating lines of activity in the
industrial and political world -- the only stage in which they are ever
likely to be popular or useful in Ireland -- the most consistent
socialist or syndicalist may be as Catholic as the Pope if he is so
minded.

And it may help the learned authors of the Lenten Pastoral to a becoming
frame of mind that the recent exposure of the soul-corrupting and
murderous tenements in which this capitalistic system condemned so many
thousands of their and our co-religionists to rot and suffer and die was
not due to any crusading against slums or the things that make for and
maintain slums on the part of either Hierarchy or of the parochial
clergy, but was solely due to the fierce revolt of the victims, and the
reckless campaigning of their leaders. If and when a purified Dublin
arises, with clean streets, healthy homes and happy citizens, it will
surely be remembered that whatever its foundations may be in lime,
mortar or brick, its real foundations were the hunger, suffering and
martyrdom even unto death of the working class men, women and girls of
Dublin; that their hunger, suffering and martyrdom by challenging the
conscience of the civilised world laid the foundation of that sweeter,
happier city of which we and Ireland shall yet be proud.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
