---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# A Lesson From Dublin

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Forward**, 2 February 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some time ago I reprinted in **Forward** an extract from an article I
had contributed to the **Irish Review** defending and expounding the
idea of the sympathetic strike. That was at the beginning of the Dublin
struggle. Now, the members of the Irish Transport and General Workers'
Union who have returned to work in Dublin have done so after signing an
agreement to handle all classes of goods, that is to say, to renounce
for the time the idea and practice of the sympathetic strike.

This, by the way, is the only agreement yet signed by members of that
union. In those firms which still insist upon the former Employers'
Agreement banning the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union the
strike or lock-out is still in active operation.

But the question arises: what reason is to be derived from our
experience of the sympathetic strike in Dublin? What lesson can be
learned from a cool and reasoned study of our struggle?

Let me repeat the essence of the article alluded to as an explanation of
the nature of the sympathetic strike. It pointed out that we in Dublin
had realised that the capitalist cannot be successfully fought upon the
industrial field unless we recognise that all classes of workers should
recognise their common interests, that such recognition implied that an
employer engaged in a struggle with his workpeople should be made taboo
or tainted, that no other workers should cooperate in helping to keep
his business growing, that no goods coming from his works should be
handled by organised workers, and no goods going to his works should be
conveyed by organised workers. That he should, in effect, be put outside
the pale of civilisation, and communication with him should be regarded
as being as deadly a crime as correspondence with an enemy in war time.
I tried to illustrate this by citing examples of social warfare
conducted on similar lines in the past by various societies and classes.

It may then be asked: how far has the Dublin experience justified or
failed to justify those who, like myself, contended for the
practicability of this policy? We have been forced in Dublin to abandon
the policy temporarily because other unions whose cooperation was
necessary had not adopted a similar policy. It was not practicable to
enforce the policy of tainted goods in Dublin whilst the goods so held
up could be transported from other ports and handled across channel by
other unions. The executives of other unions failing to sanction the
cooperation of their members, the enforcement of this policy became an
impossibility. Hence I submit that the main difficulty in the way of the
success of this policy is in the multiplicity of unions and executives.
Every union not immediately engaged in the conflict is a union whose
material interests -- looked at from a narrowly selfish point of view --
are opposed to being drawn into the struggle. Therefore, every executive
naturally aligns itself in opposition to the policy of a sympathetic
strike, except when it is its own union that is immediately concerned.
When it is one of the principals in the fight then each union becomes as
enthusiastically in favour of the sympathetic strike as it formerly was
against it. We have seen this exemplified recently in London in the
cases of the Coalmen's strike and the London Builders' lock-out. In fact
every union that nowadays becomes involved in a strike appeals to
sympathetic action immediately, even after condemning its theory when at
peace. It is no use pointing out the inconsistency of such action; it is
merely a case of following the immediate material interests of their
union, instead of the broader material and moral welfare of their class.
But when we recognise this ugly fact, what lesson ought we to derive
from it?

We ought, I think, to learn that the first duty of the militant worker
today is to work for industrial unionism in some form. To work for the
abolition or merging of all these unions that now divide our energies
instead of concentrating them -- and for the abolition of all those
executives whose measure of success is the balance sheet of their union,
instead of the power of their class. The doctrine of 'tainted goods' is
vitally necessary for the salvation of labour upon the industrial field,
but its enforcement is not possible as long as labour is split up by
unions whose executives look upon fellow workers in conflict with dread
as possible sources of depletion of their treasuries. Be it remembered
that it is scarcely humanly possible that these executives should act
otherwise if the consciousness of class solidarity has not entered into
the minds and hearts of their membership; but if and when it has so
entered, then a bigoted conservatism based upon old traditional methods
of action becomes a crime against the progress of the species.

This is to my mind the lesson of Dublin. Industrial unionism, the
amalgamation of all forces of labour into one union, capable of
concentrating all forces upon any one issue or in any one fight, can
alone fight industrially as the present development and organisation of
capital requires that labour should fight. This will not be accomplished
in a day, nor in a year, but should be definitely aimed at, no matter
how long may be the period of its accomplishment.

The organisation of all workers in any one industry into a union
covering that entire industry, and the linking up of all such unions
under one head is a different thing from the mere amalgamation of
certain unions. But whilst not necessarily antagonistic, it is certainly
more in the line of industrial development, and more effective in the
day of conflict.

The name also helps to retrieve the workers' movement from the unnatural
alliance with mere antipoliticalism so unfortunately and unnecessarily
introduced as a fresh dividing issue at this juncture when all our minds
ought to be set upon unity.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.8.2003
