---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1898

### The Initial Phases of the Theory of the Class Struggle

### An Introduction to the Second Russian Edition of the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 427-73. Scanned and
prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'In 1898 Plekhanov decided to write an
introduction to a new Russian edition of Marx and Engels' *Manifesto of
the Communist Party* on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of its
first publication. This proved a lengthy undertaking, which ultimately
produced an independent article written with due regard for all
instances of "criticism" of Marxism at the end of the nineteenth
century. The second Russian edition of the *Manifesto* with Plekhanov's
introduction appeared in Geneva in 1900.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

Marx wrote to Ruge in September 1843 when he was about to launch
publication of *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher*:

Hitherto, the philosophers have had lying in their desks the answers to
all riddles, and the dull exoteric world had only to open their mouths
wide for the roasted grouse of absolute knowledge to pop into. But
philosophy has now become secular\... If the construction of the future
and the final outcome for all time is no affair of ours, so much more is
it certain what we must accomplish in the present: I am referring to a
*ruthless criticism of everything that exists* --- ruthless in the sense
that criticism has no fear of its own results, and has as little fear of
coming into conflict with the powers that be. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Fully in keeping with this critical mood in one of the future authors of
the *Manifesto* was the mood of the second author --- Frederick Engels,
as is evidenced by the latter's interesting article 'Die Lage Englands',
which was published in *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher* and much of
which set forth the views of Carlyle. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^

Carlyle admitted that he had no Morison's pills, no panacea, to cure
ills of society. Referring to that admission Engels wrote:

In that, too, he is right. All social philosophy, as long as it still
propounds a few principles as its final conclusion, as long as it
continues to administer Morison's pills, remains very imperfect; it is
not the bare conclusions of which we are in such need, but rather
*study*, the conclusions are nothing without the reasoning that has led
up to them; this we have known since Hegel; and the conclusions are
worse than useless if they are final in themselves, if they are not
turned into premises for further deductions. But the conclusions must
also assume a distinct form for a time, they must in the course of
development evolve from vague imprecision into clear ideas\...
^[\[3\]](#n3)^

From the time these lines had been written, the social philosophy of
Marx and Engels had also arrived at definite results in its development,
these finding their first systematic expression in the *Communist
Manifesto* and then being supplemented in other writings by them. These
results were never marred by 'vague imprecision'. On the contrary, even
those who do not sympathise with them, and fear them, have been
compelled to admit that Marx and Engels' 'studies' led them to a series
of clear and original thoughts. But if Engels was right in saying that
what should be valued is not the *results* so much as the *development*
leading up to them, and that, in general, results are only of *temporary
significance*, it may well be asked whether the results set forth in the
*Manifesto* are already outdated, and whether they have not been
condemned by the further course of the development that once led up to
them. A witty Frenchman once remarked that he would not like to think as
Voltaire had done at a time the latter would be thinking otherwise. We
should follow that Frenchman's example. Were we to wish to think as Marx
and Engels did, at a time the latter thought otherwise, we would thereby
reveal a total incapacity to learn the living critical *spirit* of their
doctrine; by defending the dead *letter* of the latter, we would stand
removed from it much farther than the dogmatists Marx spoke of in the
above-quoted letter to Arnold Ruge.

Marx and Engels had ruthless criticism for everything that existed, and
had no fear of the results of that criticism. The followers of Marx and
Engels, too, should have no fear of the results achieved by their
teachers.

One would think that all this goes without saying, and that it is quite
superfluous to speak on the matter, especially today when there are so
many Marxists all over Europe --- from St Petersburg to Naples, and from
Samara to Dublin --- standing '*under the banner of criticism*'. The
trouble is that there are various '*banners of criticism*'. It was said
long ago that not everyone who keeps on repeating 'Lord, O Lord!' will
enter the kingdom of heaven. It now has to be said that not everyone who
keeps on reiterating 'Criticism, criticism!' is capable of rising above
*dogmatism*. People who 'criticise' Marx and Engels are now as numerous
as the sands on the seashore. Criticism of Marxism has now become the
vogue in certain circles of the intelligentsia in all countries.
However, vogue and criticism do not go together very well; the more
fashionable criticism of Marxism becomes, the more it loses *all
critical content*. When they call obsolete the results arrived at by
Marx and Engels, the critics cannot produce anything *new* in their
stead; some of them confine themselves to empty and tedious reiteration
of the word 'criticism', while others return to the standpoint of the
*bourgeois contemporaries* and even *predecessors* of Marx and Engels.
*Such* criticism, needless to say, is no salvation from dogmatism;
*that* kind of movement can in no way be called *progressive*.

The paucity of the 'critical' thinking of those gentlemen who would
criticise Marx reveals itself most tellingly in the sphere of
philosophy. Here they contrapose to what they term the materialists'
dogmatism the threadbare dogma of the Kantians regarding the
unknowability of the external world. It would not be in place here to
discuss that dogma, which is why we shall merely observe that, in
rejecting materialism, the critical gentry do not go to the trouble of
getting a better knowledge of that theory, restricting themselves to
that notion of it which is so assiduously cultivated, to the greater
glory of religion, by the learned, semi-learned and quite unlearned
philistines and priests of various countries, and which is based on the
Christian contraposition of matter to spirit. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

What we have in the *Manifesto of the Communist Party* is exclusively
the '*social philosophy*' of Marx and Engels, and it is that subject
that we shall deal with in our introduction. However, it is also a very
broad subject, to examine which from all sides is impossible within the
framework of an introduction. That is why we shall consider only the
*fundamental idea* of the *Manifesto*, and shall examine the individual
propositions contained therein in a booklet entitled *A Critique of Our
Critics*, which we are now preparing for publication: ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

The basic thought running through the *Manifesto* --- that economic
production and the structure of society of every historical epoch
necessarily arising therefrom constitute the foundation for the
political and intellectual history of that epoch; that consequently
(ever since the dissolution of the primeval communal ownership of land)
all history has been a history of class struggles\...; that this
struggle, however, has now reached a stage where the exploited and
oppressed class\... can no longer emancipate itself from the class which
exploits and oppresses it\..., without at the same time forever freeing
the whole of society from exploitation, oppression and class struggles
--- this basic thought belongs solely and exclusively to Marx.
^[\[6\]](#n6)^

That is what Engels says. Is he right? Not quite. In the first place, he
is wrong in reducing to nil his own participation in evolving the
fundamental idea in the *Manifesto*. In the second place, certain very
important *elements* of that idea are to be met in far earlier
socio-political literature.

In his excellent essay 'In Memory of the *Manifesto of the Communist
Party*', Professor Antonio Labriola has very correctly observed that
already the historians of antiquity, and in modern times Italian
historians of the Renaissance, were well aware of the significance of
the class struggle raging before their eyes within the close limits of
the urban republics. No less correct is Labriola's remark that the class
struggle, which has assumed a far greater sweep in the modern state, was
ever more evident during the first half of the nineteenth century. He is
mistaken, however, in thinking that the historical significance of that
struggle was most clearly realised at the end of that period, to wit,
between the years 1830 and 1850. In fact an understanding of the class
struggle as a most important mover of historical development had
achieved, by the 1820s, a degree of clarity that was surpassed only in
the writings of the *Manifesto*'s authors. Between the years 1830 and
1850, that understanding was partly dimmed by the impact of causes we
shall mention below.

Already in his *Lettres d*\'*un habitant de Genève*, which appeared in
1802, Saint-Simon spoke of the relations between the 'propertied' and
the 'non-propertied' classes, attributing the course and outcome of the
French Revolution to *the struggle between those classes*. The
*Lettres*, however, contain only the germ of Saint-Simon's views, which
were expressed far more completely in his later writings, for example,
in the *Organisateur* (the celebrated *Parabole*), in *Lettres à
Messieurs les Jurés*, *Du Système industriel*, *Catéchisme des
industriels* and *Opinions littéraires*, *philosophiques et
industrielles*. Production is the purpose of the social union, which is
why leaders of production have always headed social unions, and will
always do so. Until the fifteenth century, temporal power was
concentrated in the hands of the nobles\... it could not be otherwise
because the nobles of the time guided agriculture, farming then being
the only industrial occupation of great importance. ^[\[7\]](#n7)^
However, there gradually arose, between the first crusade and the reign
of Louis XI, a new social class that organised itself as a force
independent of the nobility, namely, the manufacturers in the strict
sense of the word --- a class which gained in strength and development
during the period between the reign of Louis XI and Louis XIV.
Throughout that period, the industrial class did not cease from
struggling against the nobles, from whom they won one economic position
after another. Their need of strong support led them to enter into an
alliance with the royal authority, an alliance that determined the
further political development of France until the time when the
monarchy, in the person of Louis XIV, betrayed its faithful ally and
became a protector of the aristocracy. This was a mistake that cost the
Bourbons dear but did not halt the development of the industrial class.
The French Revolution and the ensuing events were the outcome of the
struggle between the new industrial order and the old feudal system,
whose adherents made a new attempt, during the Restoration, to regain
their whilom influence and importance. However, their efforts were
doomed to failure; that influence was gone for all time:

During fifteen centuries \[says Saint-Simon\], the feudal system has
gradually become disorganised, and the industrial system gradually
organised. Tactful behaviour on the part of the leading representatives
of industry will be sufficient finally to establish the industrial
system, and clear society of the rubble of the feudal edifice our
ancestors once lived in. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

Saint-Simon's historical views were absorbed in almost their entirety by
his 'adopted son' Augustin Thierry, who was to make such an important
contribution to French historical science. Augustin Thierry held the
stand of the third estate, and was well aware of that. Here is what he
wrote in *Censeur Européen* in 1818:

Who of us has not heard of a class of people who, in times when the
barbarians were overrunning Europe, preserved the industrial arts and
skills for humanity? Insulted and plundered daily by their victors and
their masters, they lived in hardship, receiving for their labours only
the consciousness of doing good and preserving civilisation for their
children and the world. These savers of our arts were our fathers: we
are the sons of those serfs, those tributaries, those bourgeois that the
conquerors preyed upon without mercy; it is to them that we owe
everything that we are\... But we, the liberated slaves of yesterday,
have so long preserved in our memories only the families and the actions
of our masters; it was only thirty years ago that we bethought ourselves
of our fathers having been the nation. We admired and studied everything
except what they were and what they did. We are patriots and have
committed to oblivion all those who, for fourteen centuries, tilled the
soil of our Motherland, which was so often devastated by other hands.
^[\[9\]](#n9)^

Returning to the same theme two years later, Thierry set out to prove
that the French did not yet possess a genuine history of their *people*.
A history of the citizens, a history of the subjects, had not yet been
written, yet it was far more interesting, and evocative of far greater
sympathy than the history of the grand and the sovereigns --- 'The only
history told to us\...' The progress of the popular masses towards
freedom and prosperity seems to us far more impressive than the
campaigns of conquerors; the misfortunes of the people are more moving
than those of dispossessed kings. If a pen worthy to describe it could
be found, the French would learn that their cities could be proud of:

\... other things than the sojourn of some great seigneur or the passage
of some sovereign; and that it is not true that, for whole centuries,
all their political life consisted in providing bowmen for the army, and
paying tallage twice a year. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^

Such eloquent tirades clearly show how the mounting consciousness of
France's third estate brought about a radical change in the views of
French historians. To the scholarly plebeians of the times, the history
of the third estate was more interesting than that of the Court or the
aristocracy; that was why they felt the need to develop a history of
that third estate. Since, for many centuries, that history was the
history of the entire people, with the exception of the nobility and the
clergy, there is nothing surprising that the life of the people in past
centuries began to attract the main attention of historical science,
which had previously dealt only with kings and aristocrats. Historical
science of the Restoration period was affected by the self-same temper
in the third estate, which had begun to influence literature and
literary criticism already in the eighteenth century. We know the
psychological motivations that had led up to the emergence of what is
known as the *domestic drama*. 'What does it matter to me, a peaceable
subject of a monarchical state in the eighteenth century', Beaumarchais
wrote, 'how some Peloponnesian tyrant met his end, or how a young
princess was offered as a sacrifice in Aulis? There is nothing for me to
see in all this, no moral for me.' ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ What Beaumarchais
and his fellow-thinkers wanted to see depicted with sympathy on the
stage was the life and sufferings of contemporary third-estate society.
They were offended and incensed by the classical tragedy's predilection
for high-born heroes. 'To present people of the middle station as
crushed and in affliction!', Beaumarchais exclaimed with bitterness. 'Fi
donc! They should never be shown otherwise than as objects of derision!
Ridiculous citizens and unfortunate kings --- that is the entire
existing and possible theatre, and I shall content myself with saying:
c\'est fait\...' ^[\[12\]](#n12)^

Since the eighteenth-century bourgeoisie wanted to 'have its own
portrait', its literary representatives tried to depict its features of
the times through the characters in the *domestic drama*.
^[\[13\]](#n13)^ In just the same way, the bourgeoisie of the
Restoration period, in defending their social and political gains from
persistent encroachment by the adherents of the *ancien régime*, were
eager to hear the story of their childhood and youthful years; their
scholars set about presenting it with an instructive and interesting
narrative of the harassment they had been subjected to, their efforts to
win a better future for themselves, and their successes in the struggle
against their oppressors. Thus there arose a new current in historical
science, marking a major step forward in its development.

Previous historians, whose interest had been mainly focussed on kings
and aristocrats, had seen the exploits of their high-born heroes as the
principal driving force of historical development. This view was also
taken up by the eighteenth-century Enlighteners, who, in keeping with
their revolutionary sentiments, modified it into the doctrine that
opinions govern the world. Though theoretically untenable, this theory
had the advantage of attaching considerable significance to the impact
of the intelligentsia's revolutionary *heroes* on the *multitude* of the
middle class, who were oppressed by the state and the upper estates.
However, the bourgeoisie of the Restoration period, which had shortly
before dealt a mortal blow at the *ancien régime*, no longer resembled a
downtrodden multitude. Imbued with a consciousness of its strength and
importance, its ideologists saw in it the mainspring of the historical
advance. We are already aware of the enthusiasm with which Thierry spoke
of its services to mankind and civilisation.

Once they had taken an interest in the history of their 'fathers', the
bourgeoisie's learned representatives could not but evolve a completely
new view of the historical origins and development of social
institutions:

It is highly singular \[said Augustin Thierry\] that the historians
stubbornly refused to attribute any spontaneity or creativity to the
masses of people. If an entire people migrates and makes itself a new
home, that means, our annalists and poets assert, that some hero has
taken it into his head to found a new empire to add lustre to his name;
if a city is established, it is some prince that has given it life. The
people, the citizens are always material for the thinking of a single
individual. Do you really wish to learn who founded an institution and
who conceived a social enterprise? Search among those who really needed
it; it was to them that the first idea of it, the wish to act, and a
considerable part of the execution belonged. *Is fecit, cui prodest*:
this axiom is applicable in history just as in justice. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^

In view of the sympathy with the 'fathers', who had had to wage an
age-old struggle against the upper classes, this new point of view ---
that of *social or class interest* --- was bound to lead to an
appreciation of the major historical significance of the struggle of
various social classes for their interests, that is, in brief --- the
*class struggle*. And indeed already at the outset of his literary
career, Augustin Thierry spoke of the 'struggle of classes and
interests' in England --- '*la lutte des classes d\'hommes et des
intérêts*' --- as one of the main consequences of the Norman conquest.
^[\[15\]](#n15)^ He described the revolutionary movement in
seventeenth-century England as a struggle of the third estate against
the aristocracy:

Any man whose ancestors came over with the Conqueror \[he said of the
first English revolution\], left his castle to join the royalist camp to
take up a command in keeping with his rank. The inhabitants of
cities\... flocked to the opposite camp. One could say that the rallying
calls of the two armies were: on one side, *idleness and power*, on the
other, *work and liberty*. All idlers, whatever their origin, those
whose only aim in life was the pursuit of enjoyment without any effort,
enrolled in the royalist forces to defend interests that coincided with
their own; whilst the families of the caste of the ancient conquerors
who had now gone into industry united with the party of the Commons.
^[\[16\]](#n16)^

What is particularly noteworthy is that Thierry saw the religious
movement of the times merely as a reflection of 'positive' everyday
interests:

It was for positive interests that the war was waged by both sides \[he
wrote\]. All the rest was merely extraneous or a pretext. Most of those
who took up the cause of the *subjects* were Presbyterians, that is,
wanted no yoke, even in religion. Those who supported the opposite cause
were episcopalians or papists: even in the field of religion they were
out to exercise power and impose taxes. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^

When we go over to Thierry's contemporary *Mignet*, we see the self-same
view of the significance of property interests and the role of the class
struggle in the history of civilised countries. In Mignet's words, 'the
most numerous and the strongest interests dictate laws, and achieve
their aims' (\'*dictent la loi et arrivent à leur but*').
^[\[18\]](#n18)^

Hence one can readily understand the influence that, in his opinion,
interests exerted on the development of society:

The dominant interests \[he said\] determine the social movement. That
movement achieves its aim despite various obstacles; it halts on
achieving that aim, and yields place to another movement which is
imperceptible at the outset and makes itself known only when it becomes
predominant. Such was the development of feudalism, which existed in
human needs before becoming a fact --- the first epoch; in the second
epoch, it existed in fact, while ceasing from corresponding to needs,
and it was this latter circumstance that put an end to its actual
existence. No revolution as yet has been carried out in any other way.
^[\[19\]](#n19)^

The appearance of urban communes changed all the internal relations of
the societies of the time. In Italy, the communes achieved complete
supremacy, this giving rise to democracy. In France they were forced to
join forces with the royal authority, thereby laying the foundations of
absolutism. Last, in England, where they joined forces with the
feudalists against the king, there emerged a constitutional monarchy.
^[\[20\]](#n20)^

Thus, the interrelations between the leading social elements of European
society, that is, the aristocracy and the third estate, determined
Europe's historical development. The greater the growth of the third
estate, the closer the advent of the final downfall of the old social
order. In France, the period of that decline was also a time of
revolution, which Mignet always regarded with the warmest sympathy.
Better than all his other writings, his history of the French Revolution
showed his awareness of the historical significance of the class
struggle. He fully realised that the struggle of political parties
during the Revolution was merely an expression of the contradiction
between class interests:

The aristocratic classes \[he said\] had interests that were the
opposite of those of the national party. That was why the nobility and
the upper clergy, who sat on the Right, were in constant opposition to
that party, except for several days of universal enthusiasm.
^[\[21\]](#n21)^

The party of Du Port, Barnave and Lameth was 'a kind of opposition
within the middle class'. ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ The Constitution of 1791 was
the creation of the middle class, which was stronger at the time than
the rest. 'It is common knowledge', Mignet adds, 'that a force which has
won domination always gains control of institutions.' ^[\[23\]](#n23)^
He attributed the counter-revolutionary uprisings in Calvados, Gevaudan
and Vendée to those areas being ill-disposed towards the Revolution,
'since there was no numerous and educated middle class there'.
^[\[24\]](#n24)^ He saw the Girondists as a party of transition from the
middle class to the common people (*la multitude*), whilst in Danton,
Robespierre, Camille Desmoulins, d\'Églantine, Marat and others he saw
genuine leaders of the new movement which had been launched with the aid
of the lower social class and was directed against the middle class the
Girondists belonged to by status and habits. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ The tenth
of August was 'an uprising of the common people against the middle class
and the constitutional throne, just as 14 July was an uprising of the
middle class against the privileged classes and the absolute power of
the crown. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ In short, the entire history of the French
revolution serves Mignet as an illustration of a proposition which can
with good reason be called a *formula of the progress* made in civilised
societies: 'Changes infringe interests; interests create parties;
parties enter into struggle.' ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ Augustin Thierry had good
reason to say that Mignet was endowed with the great talent of
generalising facts and of historical induction.

Throughout his life, Mignet was a conscious, outspoken and consistent
representative of the 'middle class', whose social and political
supremacy was his ideal. He was utterly opposed to the 'common people'
inasmuch as they presented a threat to that supremacy. 'Les désordres de
la Commune lui furent odieux', said his biographer Edouard Petit.
^[\[28\]](#n28)^ But this friend of Thiers, the brutal pacifier of the
Paris Commune, ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ regarded the revolutionary mode of
action without that mixture of wretched fear and malignity that marks
the big and petty bourgeois of our time. 'It is only by force that one
can win recognition of one's rights', he remarked in the very beginning
of his history of the revolution, adding several pages later that 'there
exists no overlord but force.' ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ Present-day historians
do not find such aphorisms to their liking. This particular aspect of
their taste is explained by old Guizot.

His views on the fundamental cause of social development in no way
differ from those of Augustin Thierry and Mignet. He, too, sees social
relations as underlying the political:

It is through the study of political institutions \[he wrote in his
*Essais sur l*\'*Histoire de France*\] that most writers, scholars,
historians or publicists have sought to learn the state of society, and
the degree or kind of its civilisation. It would have been wiser to have
begun with society itself so as to know and understand its political
institutions. Before becoming a cause, institutions are an effect;
society produces them before becoming modified by them; instead of
inquiring of systems or forms of government as to what the condition of
the people has been, one should first and foremost examine the condition
of the people in order to know what its government should or could
be\... Society, its composition, the way of life of individuals
according to their social station, and the relations between various
classes of individuals, in short, *people*'s *conditions* \[*l\'état des
personnes*\] such, assuredly, is the first question that attracts the
attention of the historian who wishes to witness the life of peoples,
and the publicist who wishes to learn how they are governed.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^

According to Guizot, the '*état*' of all peoples that appeared on the
European historical scene following the downfall of the Western Roman
Empire was closely linked causally with property relations, whose study
should therefore precede that of people's conditions: 'To understand
political institutions, one should know the diverse social conditions
and the relations between them. To understand the diverse social
conditions, one should know the nature of property relations.'
^[\[32\]](#n32)^ It was from this point of view that Guizot regarded the
history of France during the first two dynasties, a history he saw as
one of the struggle between the various '*strata*' of the population of
the times.

The history of the English revolution was depicted by him as a struggle
between the bourgeoisie and the aristocracy. He called ingenious but
superficial the view that the English revolution was more political than
social, while the French revolution strove to change the entire sum of
society and government.^[\[33\]](#n33)^ In fact, both revolutions had a
common origin and a common purpose. In England, the revolutionary
movement began under the impact of changes in social relations and the
customs of the people. While the upper crust of the aristocracy had lost
all influence over the people and had become corrupt, the ordinary
gentry, the freeholders and the bourgeois, who were engaged exclusively
in increasing their lands and their capital, grew ever wealthier and
brought the people more and more under their influence. By degrees,
without any fuss, and almost unawares, they concentrated in their hands
almost all the social forces --- the 'true sources of power'.
^[\[34\]](#n34)^ In the measure that this fundamental change in social
relations was accomplished, the middle class (\'*les communes*') began
to chafe at the tyranny: 'With the growth of wealth, greater security
became a need. The rights so long exercised by the prince, without
meeting with protest and obstacles, now seemed to have become abuses.'
^[\[35\]](#n35)^ Such were the causes of the revolutionary struggle
which met with numerous ups and downs, but ended in the complete victory
of the middle class.

Guizot was able to trace the influence of the 'social composition', not
only on society's political structure but also on the *intellectual
trends* in it. His ideas on the history of French literature, which he
voiced as far back as the days of the First Empire, deserve detailed
consideration, but lack of space restricts us to making mention here
only of his ideas on the theatre, which, in his opinion, is a reflection
of the development of social relations. In ancient Greece, where social
affairs were run by the entire people, the theatre was a public
entertainment reflecting the habits and tastes of all free citizens. On
the contrary, in the modern societies, which are a complex blend of
various classes engaged in labour and always locked in a constant
struggle between themselves for supremacy, the theatre has become a form
of entertainment for the upper classes. This has affected many of its
virtues. After consolidating their position, the upper classes usually
try to separate themselves from the rest of society, thereby losing the
simple and natural habits inherent in the people, and become imbued with
artificiality. That is why the sphere of artistic creativity becomes
narrower and impoverished. As an example, Guizot speaks of the fate of
the English theatre following the Restoration of 1660. In their contempt
for the people, the English aristocracy began to ignore even
Shakespeare, whom they called a boor. French tragedy was also a product
of the upper classes, which is why its day passed together with the
downfall of the *ancien régime*. The Revolution cleared the way for a
'new system of drama'. ^[\[36\]](#n36)^

Of course, individual propositions here do not necessarily have to be
agreed with, but it must be admitted that his study of the causal links
between phenomena followed the correct lines. It was in that direction
that the most gifted critics and historians of French literature were to
proceed, thus paving the way so well for a materialist explanation of
the intellectual history of civilised mankind.

Guizot's political activities revealed his class viewpoint even more
tellingly. In his *Mémoires*, he himself said that the consolidation of
the supremacy of the middle classes (*des classes moyennes*) was his
invariable political aim. ^[\[37\]](#n37)^ He not only came out ardently
and fearlessly in defence of their interests, but, as he himself put it,
he wished to magnify their cause still more by taking them back to the
past and revealing their interests and their vicissitudes in the entire
course of French history. ^[\[38\]](#n38)^ This intention was superbly
carried out in his political pamphlets, the most noteworthy of which is
the one entitled *Du Gouvernement de la France depuis la Restauration et
du ministère actuel*, which appeared in September 1820. In it, Guizot
came out as a convinced defender of the French Revolution, which he
called a war, just like wars between nations:

For over thirteen centuries France contained two peoples: conquerors and
vanquished. For over thirteen centuries, the vanquished people fought to
throw off the yoke of their conquerors. Our history is one of that
struggle. In our times, a decisive battle has taken place. The battle is
called revolution. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^

The outcome of the revolution was never in doubt. An ancient and
vanquished people became a people of conquerors. In their turn, they
subdued France. According to Guizot, the well-known Charter merely
acknowledged that *fact* and declared it a right. Representative
government was a guarantee of that right. ^[\[40\]](#n40)^ The debates
in the Chamber of Deputies might have seemed strange and hard to
understand only to anybody who regarded them from the viewpoint of
theory, without being able to link them up with the circumstances that
had engendered them. In fact, the debates were conducted 'between
equality and privilege, between the middle class and the ancient
aristocracy'. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^ The *ancien régime* and the new France
are locked in a life and death struggle. To reconcile them is a
chimerical idea. ^[\[42\]](#n42)^

We already know that Guizot understood the causal link between social
relations, on the one hand, and intellectual trends, on the other.
Political polemics gave him an extra opportunity to voice his view on
this score. 'Ideas, doctrines and constitutions themselves', he
declared, are subordinate to circumstances and are adopted by peoples
only when they serve as an instrument and guarantee of their pressing
interests as generally realised. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ The history of the
English Constitution, in his opinion, shows particularly well 'in what
measure circumstances dominate over the pretended theories of the
representative system'. ^[\[44\]](#n44)^ Today we see the edifice of the
English Constitution and forget how it was built: 'We are prone to
attribute to human wisdom this progressive advance, which was the fruit
of nothing but necessity.' ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ The theorists of the
revolution were mistaken '*or were lying*' (italics are mine) in
proclaiming the sovereignty of the people. In fact, it was not a
question of the people's sovereignty, but of the victory of a part of
the people over another part. Since the numerical superiority was
immensely in favour of the third estate, the sovereignty of the people
arose as a doctrine. That doctrine was necessary at the time because
force stands in need of a doctrine: to believe, and to make others think
that they are right. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^

The adherents of counter-revolution always understood very well that, to
achieve their aim, they had first to seize power and use it in
accordance with their interests. For their part, the middle class should
know that they have to gain possession of power, not to demolish it.
^[\[47\]](#n47)^

Representative government is instituted to concentrate and express those
social needs and aspirations, and then place power into the hands of
those who will be able to understand and meet those aspirations and
needs. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^ It goes without saying that, in Guizot's
opinion, only representatives of the 'middle class' possess that
ability, so that power, according to his theory, should belong to that
class, and not to the *population extérieure* (as Guizot called the
working masses) whose rights should be recognised and defended but who
could bring about their own downfall and that of the state if allowed to
assume power. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^

When Marx and Engels wrote in the *Manifesto* that the executive of the
modern state is but a committee for managing the common affairs of the
whole bourgeoisie, ^[\[50\]](#n50)^ they were expressing the same view
in respect of the representative government set up by the bourgeoisie;
only they were now appraising that system of rule, not from the
viewpoint of the '*middle class*' but from that of the *population*
*extérieure*, whose supremacy Guizot could not even think of without a
feeling of apprehension.

However that may have been, Guizot was indubitably very well aware of
the class character of the socio-political trends he represented and
defended. When the supporters of the old order began to accuse him of
fanning evil passions by his propaganda of the class struggle, he
replied that he wanted only to summarise the history of France. It was
full of the struggle between the estates, or rather *created by it*:

This was known and said many centuries before the Revolution; it was
known and said in 1789; it was known and said three months ago.
^[\[51\]](#n51)^ Though I am now accused of having said so, I do not
think anybody has forgotten it. Facts do not vanish at the sweet will or
for the fleeting convenience of ministries and parties\... What would
the courageous bourgeois sent to the States-General to win or to defend
their order's rights say were they to rise from the dead only to learn
that the nobility never waged war against the third estate, was never
alarmed at the latter's emergence or indignant at its growth, and was
never constantly opposed to its progress in society and power? \...
Effete descendants of a race that dominated a great country and made
great kings tremble, you have disowned your ancestors and your history!
Aware of your downfall, you protest against your past splendour!

In making reference to the class struggle, Guizot did not want to say
anything new. The class struggle was not a theory or an hypothesis but a
fact in all its simplicity. 'I repeat', he exclaimed, 'that no credit
reflects on those who have seen that, but it is almost ridiculous to
contest it.' Guizot felt some shame that he, a bourgeois, was obliged to
give noblemen instruction in the history of France and to prove to them
that they had grown 'too humble in their recollections'. In reply to the
accusation that he was fanning passions and sowing discord among
citizens, he exclaimed: 'What? You are commanding us to forget our
history because its conclusions have not been in your favour!'

These excerpts ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ are sufficiently descriptive of Guizot's
militant temper at the time. To round off the picture, we shall also
make mention of the epigraph to his *Du gouvernement de la France*, from
which we have already quoted. It comes from Pascal's *Pensées* and says:
'*It is pleasant to be on board a storm-driven ship when you are sure
you will not perish!*'

So vividly is the bourgeoisie's class consciousness expressed in all
this that we stand in no need of any further excerpts. That is why we
shall not speak here either of Armand Carrel's *Histoire de la
contra-révolution en Angleterre* (Paris, 1827) or of Alexis
Tocqueville's writings, which date later. We consider as firmly
established the fact that, already during the Restoration, Saint-Simon
and many learned representatives of the French bourgeoisie saw the class
struggle as the mainspring of the historical development of modern
peoples.

We have thought it useful to establish this fact since it seems to have
remained beyond the ken of many critics of the *Manifesto of the
Communist Party*. For instance, Emile Vandervelde categorically asserts
that the concept of the class struggle is 'the touchstone of democratic
socialism, distinguishing it from all other past and present forms of
bourgeois and utopian socialism', and that this concept 'was first
developed, with all its consequences, in the *Manifesto of the Communist
Party*'. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^ We must say that a more attentive attitude to
his subject can be demanded from a man who has, so to say, written a
booklet for the jubilee of the *Manifesto*.

In just the same manner, Herr Werner Sombart, who has criticised the
*Manifesto*'s view on the great historic significance of the class
struggle, has not said a single word about that view being no novelty in
the political literature of the 1840s. ^[\[54\]](#n54)^ He attaches
great importance to the 'history of dogmas' (*Dogmengeschichte*) in
present-day socialism. A closer acquaintance with that history might
well have been expected of him too. In an article entitled 'Essai
d\'interprétation et de critique de quelques concepts du marxisme'
published in the February 1898 issue of *Devenir Social*, Benedetto
Croce has most zealous 'criticism' of Marx and Engels' theory of the
class struggle. But this zealous critic too is evidently very far
removed from the idea that the class struggle was taught already by
theoreticians of the bourgeoisie.

We will also mention Thomas Kirkup who, in 'criticising' Marx's theory
from the most varied angles, with fairly detailed reference to the
*Manifesto*, did not even ask himself whether the idea of the class
struggle belonged exclusively to Marx. ^[\[55\]](#n55)^

The critics of Marxism have almost invariably been on a wrong tack by
failing to notice actual errors made by Marx and Engels while ascribing
to them mistakes they never made.

But there are different kinds of errors. It is, of course, a good thing
for the founders of a given theory to know all their precursors, and not
to err in their judgements of them. However, no one would take exception
to the errors Darwin might have made in speaking of the place held by
his own theory in the history of evolutionary doctrines. However, if
somebody set about *criticising* Darwinism, and especially if he would
wish to write a *history of transformism*, he would be *in duty bound*
to know Darwin's forerunners, and it would be most strange were he, in
dealing with the latter, to limit himself to simply repeating what
Darwin himself said of them.

The same may be said of the critics of Marxism, and the historians of
socialism. One cannot forgive their errors in the 'history of dogma',
which were quite understandable and pardonable in Marx or Engels.

But let us leave the *critics* for a while, and return to the
*forerunners.*

The French bourgeoisie ran into many a storm during the Restoration.
However, heartened by their recent resounding victories over the
aristocracy, they believed that no force could put an end to their
domination, and looked into the future with confidence, finding that it
was very pleasant to be on board a storm-driven ship when you are sure
that it will not perish. They were not afraid at the time to speak of
the class struggle and derisively refused to forget the history of their
own class struggle to please the effete aristocracy. But alas! All is
flux, nothing is stationary. A mere two or three decades later, the
bourgeoisie were forced to see the class struggle from another angle.
The working class --- Guizot's *population extérieure* --- launched a
struggle against their class domination, this radically changing the
bourgeoisie's temper: from a *revolutionary* class, they turned into a
*conservative* one. The year 1848 provided them with a frightful lesson;
how well they learnt the meaning of that lesson can be seen from its
theoreticians beginning, from that time on, to preach '*social peace*'.
Always keenly aware of the condition and the needs of the 'middle
class', Guizot brought out, as far back as 1849, a booklet entitled *De
la Démocratie*, which lauded social peace as leading to 'liberty,
security, prosperity, dignity', and all other 'moral and material
benefits'. In 1849, Guizot still recalled that social war had '*made*'
the history of France, but he now saw that war, not as a prime mover of
progress but as a kind of Pandora's box, from which all kinds of
calamities were swarming upon his country:

The struggle between the various classes of our society has filled our
history \[he repeated\]. The revolution of 1789 was its most general and
powerful outburst. Nobles and third estate, aristocracy and democracy,
bourgeois and workingmen, property-owners and proletarians --- all these
have been so many forms, so many phases, of the social struggle that has
so long plagued us\... This is a curse, a shame that our times cannot
accept. Internal peace, peace between the various classes of citizens,
social peace! That is France's supreme need, her cry for salvation!
^[\[56\]](#n56)^

The predominance of the middle classes had been a marked feature of
France's history since 1789. Noting this, Guizot eulogised the
bourgeoisie, but he clearly saw the frightful danger that threatened its
rule:

And now a third combatant has entered the lists. The democratic element
has split up. Against the middle classes there have been set the working
classes; against the bourgeoisie --- the people. And this new war is
also to the death, because the new challenger is\... exclusive as the
others have never been able to be. ^[\[57\]](#n57)^

The proletariat threatens to do away with the domination of the 'middle
classes\'; the 'middle classes' are afraid of the proletariat, so their
theoreticians are preaching *peace*. Firm peace, however, can be
concluded only when the proletariat ceases from disputing the
bourgeoisie's right to existence. That was something that Guizot was
very well aware of, so he set about proving that all the classes
existing in France were 'natural and deep elements of French society',
^[\[58\]](#n58)^ and went on to assert that recognition of the justice
of that idea by all the combatant parties would be a big step forward
towards social peace. Indeed, by recognising the justice of the idea,
the proletariat would be recognising the '*naturalness*' of its
thraldom, which was precisely what the alarmed ideologist of the
bourgeoisie was after.

Guizot was not alone in preaching social peace or in changing his
attitude towards the class struggle after the new 'combatant' had
entered the lists. We have seen how Mignet looked upon the
'disturbances' of the Paris Commune. As for Augustin Thierry, his frame
of mind after 1848 was displayed in the Preface to his *Essai sur
l*\'*histoire du tiers-état*, which came out in 1853. The history of the
third estate was one of a social war waged by the middle class against
the aristocracy. As we know, Augustin Thierry was one of the first to
draw the attention of the reading public to the class character of that
war, to deny it would have meant stripping the history of the third
estate of all its significance. On the other hand, however, Thierry
could not in 1853 speak of the class struggle without serious
reservations, which he did make. He remarked that the class struggle
dealt with in his book had nothing in common with the proletariat's
class struggle against the bourgeoisie. The struggle he described had
been beneficial in its consequences, and conducted for whole centuries,
while the proletariat's struggle against the bourgeoisie had been born
'only yesterday and destructive to all public security'. He considered
the proletariat's class interest *narrow*, and that of the third estate
very *broad*, since the latter included the entire nation but the
nobility and the clergy.

This kind of reasoning is highly characteristic in the psychological
sense although, as we shall now see, the adherents of revolutionary
struggle against the bourgeoisie would have little difficulty in
refuting Augustin Thierry with his own arguments.

So profoundly were the French historians of the Restoration period
convinced of the historical significance of the class struggle that they
resumed their former language. As an instance, we shall again refer to
Guizot.

In 1858, he brought out his *Mémoires*, the first volume of which dealt
with the time when, with the ardour of youth, he came out for the class
struggle of the middle class against the aristocracy. Regarding his
booklet *Du gouvernement de la France*, which, as we already know, was
an impassioned call for that struggle, Guizot acknowledged that, on
re-reading it thirty-six years after its publication, he gained the
following impression:

On considering things thoroughly and in themselves, both as historian
and as philosopher, I find nothing in it to retract. I persist in
thinking that the general ideas in it are correct, the great social
facts well appraised, the politicians well understood and depicted with
truth\... But\... I have demanded too much of men.

His scientific integrity gaining the upper hand over his fear of the new
'combatant', the aged theoretician of the bourgeoisie no longer looked
upon the class struggle as France's shame and calamity: he asserted that
the social facts had been correctly appraised in *Du gouvernement*, that
meaning that social war --- the struggle of classes --- *had made the
history of France*. By making so frank a statement, Guizot revealed far
more respect for scientific truth than do all present-day 'scholars',
who eschew any mention of the class struggle with the same zeal as,
following the counsel of the Apostle Paul, Christians should avoid all
and any talk on the 'abominations' the Seventh Commandment forbids.

Thus there was a time when the bourgeoisie had an excellent
understanding of the historical role of the class struggle. If they do
not understand it today, or pretend not to, and if they now preach
'social peace', that is very well accounted for by the further history
of bourgeois society and its fear of the new 'combatant'. Since today's
theoreticians of the bourgeoisie willingly hold forth on the theme of
'social peace', and castigate the Social-Democrats for their preaching
the class struggle, the latter can well reply in the way Guizot once
retorted to the theoreticians of the aristocracy: 'Effete descendants of
a race that dominated a great country and made kings tremble, you have
disowned your ancestors and your history!' And, like Guizot, we have
every right to express scoffing surprise at our enemies having grown too
humble in their recollections, and to ask them ironically: 'What? You
are commanding us to forget our history because its conclusions have not
been in your favour!'

And how should one understand those socialists who, behind a cover of a
criticism of Marxism, would play down the significance of the class
struggle and, like His Excellency Monsieur le ministre Millerand,
declare that the workers should not be set against the bourgeoisie? Let
us leave that to the reader's judgement.

Socialism can stand on no other basis today than that of the class
struggle. But that was not always so. Whilst it was in its infancy, its
adherents were also prepared to deplore the class struggle as the shame
and calamity of mankind, an attitude that seemed to be in contradiction
with the above-mentioned views of Saint-Simon. It should not be
forgotten, however, that it was the *industrialists*' struggle against
the *feudal lords* that Saint-Simon invariably spoke of, and not the
*proletariat*'s struggle *against the bourgeoisie*. To Saint-Simon, the
proletariat did not exist as a class capable of playing an independent
role in history. In his *Geneva Letters*, he told the 'non-propertied'
that, by taking over power during the revolution, they had been able to
create nothing but *famine*. In his *Du Système industriel*, he tried to
induce the bourgeoisie to accept his views, by frightening them with the
working class, in whose midst the ideas of equality ('turkish equality',
as he put it) could, in his words, assume an extensive significance that
was injurious to civilisation. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^ He saw the bourgeois
*entrepreneurs* as the workers' natural leaders. It was with good reason
that the authors of the *Manifesto* said that the founders of utopian
systems already saw 'the class antagonisms, as well as the action of the
decomposing elements, in the prevailing form of society. But the
proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them the spectacle of a
class without any historical initiative or any independent political
movement. ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ True to that view, the utopian socialists
addressed themselves, not to the proletariat but to all contemporary
society. Thus, in his lectures on industry delivered in the Paris
Atheneum in 1831, Jacob-Emile Pereire categorically declared on behalf
of the Saint-Simonists that, as 'men of progress', they wished to save
all mankind, 'not any particular nation or class'. ^[\[61\]](#n61)^
Similarly, the Fourierites regarded as one of the main virtues of their
teacher's doctrine its not being an expression of a struggle of
'opposing interests\... in society'. ^[\[62\]](#n62)^ Finally, we shall
refer to Louis Blanc, who, in January 1845, wrote in the Introduction to
his celebrated *Organisation du travail*: *'*It is to you, the rich,
that this book is addressed, because it is a question of the poor. For
their cause is yours.' ^[\[63\]](#n63)^

Both theoretically and practically, these views of the utopian
socialists were a big step backwards as against the above-mentioned
views of the revolutionary bourgeoisie's ideologists, and resulted from
the undeveloped condition of capitalism at the time. Of course, they did
not fail to exert an injurious influence on the workers' class
consciousness, whose development, however, they did not and could not
halt. The growth of capitalism brought about both a numerical growth of
the proletariat and its intellectual awakening. Already in October 1836,
the Working Men's Association, which existed in London, spoke in no
uncertain terms, in its Charter, of the need for the working class to
break with the parties of the ruling classes. ^[\[64\]](#n64)^ On the
other hand, in France, most of the membership of the secret
revolutionary societies were recruited from the midst of the working
class. The kind of ideas that spread among the members of such societies
will be seen from the following extract from a dialogue during the
enrolment of new members in the Society of the Seasons, ^[\[65\]](#n65)^
a communist society:

**Question**: What are the aristocracy made up of today?

**Answer**: The hereditary aristocracy were destroyed in July 1830;
today the aristocracy are made up of the wealthy, who are just as
rapacious an aristocracy as the former.

**Question**: Is it enough to overthrow the monarchy?

**Answer**: Aristocrats of any kind should be destroyed, as well as
every kind of privilege, for otherwise nothing will come of this.

**Question**: Those who enjoy rights without performing obligations,
like the aristocrats of today --- do they form part of the people?

**Answer**: They should not form any part. To the social body, they are
like a cancer in the human body. The prime condition for the restoration
of the body's health is extirpation of the cancer. The prime condition
for the social body to return to a condition based on justice is the
annihilation of the aristocracy \[etc\]. ^[\[66\]](#n66)^

From our present-day point of view, the practical programmes of the
communist conspirators of the times were even less satisfactory than
their theoretical views. Nevertheless, their firm conviction that the
emancipation of the working class ('the people') was inconceivable
without a struggle against the upper classes ('the aristocracy')
distinguished them in the positive sense from the utopian socialists. Of
course, a struggle waged by a handful of conspirators in pursuit of the
people's interests can in no way be called a *class* struggle, but when
the main contingent of such conspirators are drawn from the industrial
workers, conspiracy becomes *an embryo* of the revolutionary struggle of
the working class. The view of the 'aristocracy' held by the Society of
the Seasons is indicative of the intimate genetic link between the ideas
of the French communist revolutionaries of the time, and those of the
eighteenth-century bourgeois revolutionaries and the liberal opposition
of the Restoration.

We have already seen that the class interest of the proletariat seemed
narrow to Augustin Thierry, and that of the third estate, broad, since
that estate included the entire nation with the exception of the
aristocracy. Like Augustin Thierry, the French communist revolutionaries
proceeded from a consciousness of the need to combat the *aristocracy*
in the interests of *the rest of society*. But they also pointed out,
very correctly, that the hereditary aristocracy had yielded place to the
moneyed, which was why the struggle for broad social interests should
now be conducted, not against the nobility but against the bourgeoisie.
Logic was evidently on their side and they were entitled to accuse their
bourgeois opponents of inconsistency.

As the contradiction between the interests of the exploited and the
exploiters revealed itself and developed, the consciousness of the need
for the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie grew ever
stronger. However, there were still very many utopian elements in that
consciousness. The concept of the class struggle was far from achieving,
in the communist and socialist literature of the 1840s, the degree of
clarity to be seen in Guizot, for example. In this respect, bourgeois
ideology was surpassed only in the *Manifesto*.

Marx and Engels' view on the class struggle, the significance of
politics in that struggle, and the dependence of the state power on the
ruling classes is identical with the views of Guizot and his
fellow-thinkers on the matter, the only difference being that they stood
for the interests of the proletariat, while the others defended the
interests of the bourgeoisie. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^ There are passages in the
*Manifesto* that speak in the language of Guizot's pamphlets, or, if you
wish, some of Guizot's pamphlets are couched, in part, in the language
of the *Manifesto*. ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ With the latter's authors, however,
the concept of the class struggle is a component of a coherent
historical theory, while the historical theory of Guizot, Thierry,
Mignet and other contemporary ideologists of the bourgeoisie were still
lacking in completeness. All this was, of course, indicative of the vast
superiority of the 'social philosophy' of Marx and Engels.

We shall presently deal with that superiority, but before doing so, we
must subject to criticism some 'critical' remarks of certain critics of
Marxism.

Here is what Herr Werner Sombart says:

In beginning the *Communist Manifesto* with the words, 'The history of
all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles', Karl
Marx expressed one of the greatest truths that have filled our century.
But he did not express the whole truth, for it is not true that the
entire history of society can be reduced solely to the struggle of
classes. If, in general, we would bring world history into a single
formula, we shall have to say, I think, that all the history of society
revolves about two *opposites*, which I shall call *social* and
*national*, using the word *nationality* in its broadest sense. In its
development, mankind at first gathers into societies which initially
wage a mutual struggle, but that is followed by an internal struggle
among their members for superior positions\... Thus we see, on the one
hand, a striving towards wealth, strength and importance on the part of
entire societies, and, on the other, a striving towards the same ends on
the part of individual members. Such, as I see them, are the two
opposites which have filled all history. ^[\[69\]](#n69)^

Marx discovered only part of the truth. For his own part, that critical
thinker, Herr Sombart, has complemented what Marx has said, and now we
have the good fortune and pleasure of possessing the entire truth, free
of all extremes and exaggerations. That is very pleasant, but, in the
first place, the mutual struggle between individual members of society
for superior positions is not yet a class struggle, as has been so well
proved by the example of our contemporary entrepreneurs, who engage in a
furious struggle among themselves to win customers, but harbour not the
least thought of a *class* struggle with their own ilk. In the second
place, what is meant by Herr Sombart's 'national struggle\'? It is
nothing but a struggle between individual states. The question arises:
could the authors of the *Manifesto* have lost sight of the historical
significance of that struggle? That would have been strange, the more so
for the authors saying, in the self-same *Manifesto*, that the
bourgeoisie of any particular country wages an incessant struggle
against the bourgeoisie of other states *(Manifesto*, p 13).
^[\[70\]](#n70)^ What, then, is the matter? It is simply that Herr
Werner Sombart has poorly understood the meaning of the *Manifesto.*

In what sense does Marx use the word *society*? It is in the very same
sense it is used by Guizot when he speaks of the dependence of the
*political* structure on the *social*. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^ With both of
them, the word *society* is short for what they themselves have called
civil society, *as distinct from the state*. When the authors of the
*Manifesto* say that the bourgeoisie of any particular country wages an
incessant struggle against the bourgeoisie of other countries, they are
referring to the struggle *between states*, *an international*, or ---
in the terminology of Herr Werner Sombart --- a *national* struggle.
When they say that the history of all hitherto existing society is the
history of class struggle, they mean the history of *civil society*, or,
in other words, *the internal history of states*. ^[\[72\]](#n72)^ That
history has, in their opinion, been one of a struggle of classes, and it
is in *that* respect that their 'critic' agrees with them in essence.
What follows, therefore, is that the amendment made by Herr Sombart is
nothing more than the result of a misunderstanding.

Most frequently, Marx and Engels are 'criticised' as follows: first they
are somewhat misunderstood or distorted, and then somewhat amended. That
is how the merciful critics act; the merciless ones act more rudely:
first they ascribe absurdities to them, and then proceed profoundly to
remark that the time has come to put an end to the Marxist 'dogma'.

Benedetto Croce also finds the very concept of the class struggle vague:

I shall be almost tempted to say that history is a struggle of
classes: 1) when classes exist; 2) when they have antagonistic
interests; 3) when they are aware of that antagonism. But that would
lead us to the amusing parity that history is a class struggle only when
it is\... a struggle of classes! In reality, it has happened that
classes have not had antagonistic interests, and very frequently they
are not even aware of them, something that is very well known to
socialists who strain themselves, through efforts sometimes fruitless
(with the peasants, for example, they have not even reached that stage),
to arouse this awareness among the present-day proletarians.
^[\[73\]](#n73)^

These remarks may seem very apt at first glance, and are therefore
worthy of attention.

The class struggle takes place only where and only when classes exist.
That is, of course, quite true: it would be strange to speak of the
class struggle in a society in which no classes exist. But in what kind
of society are they absent? Only in the very primitive kind, in which
there exists a kind of balance of interests. However, that balance is
unstable: already at the very early stage of development, long before
the full decomposition of the clan organisation, property inequality
appears among the 'savages', to be followed, not only by an antagonism
of interests but also by a *consciousness of that antagonism*. One of
the most remarkable works of Eskimo poetry is the tale whose hero, the
son of a *poor* widow, wreaks vengeance on his *rich* kinsmen for the
humiliation they have caused him, this despite the keen sense of
solidarity so highly developed among Eskimos as the result of their
traditions of primitive communism.

It should also be remembered that primitive society saw the early
inception of the division of labour between men and women, this in its
turn giving rise to *sexual antagonism*, which found expression in food,
customs, amusements, art and even language. Losing sight of the material
and spiritual consequences of this antagonism between the sexes leads to
a failure to understand many important aspects of primitive life. A
consideration of more advanced societies will show very clearly both the
existence of various classes in them and an incessant struggle that is
reflected in the state structure, law, religion, poetry and all artistic
creativity in general.

It is also true that the interests of various social classes are not
always *opposed* to each other; however, a simple *difference* of
interests is sufficient for class antagonism to arise. Where relations
of hirers and hired have not yet been established between rich and poor,
it is only that difference which is often to be seen, however, it
engenders a fierce struggle between classes. There are times when
property inequality is not even necessary for the inception of the class
struggle, a difference between local interests being enough, as is shown
by the early history of Athens, with its struggle between Diacrii,
Paralii and Pedii. ^[\[74\]](#n74)^

In stating that social classes are not invariably aware of the
antagonism of interests, Signor Croce has expressed an idea that is only
partly true. Let us cite from Russian history as some illustration: have
there been a large number of open and large-scale peasant uprisings? In
fact, there have been very few: the Razin and the Pugachev uprisings in
Great Russia and the Cossack wars in Little Russia ^[\[75\]](#n75)^
filled some relatively brief periods separated from each other by more
or less lengthy intervals. But what were those intervals marked by?
'Social peace\'? Not at all; even then, nothing was heard of social
peace or of a truce at least. The 'social war' did not cease even during
such intervals; it merely changed in character, *from turning overt into
covert*. Society continued divided into two hostile camps: on one hand,
the 'masters', and, on the other, the 'muzhiks'. Each of these two camps
very clearly saw the wall of inimical sentiments, views and actions
dividing it from the other. The 'masters' vilified the 'muzhiks', and
tried to keep a tight rein on them; for their part, the 'muzhiks' made
mock of the 'masters' and resisted their rule with all the means at
their disposal. Every year, even every month, the covert war in various
parts of the country would flare up into open warfare, true, limited to
some small area; the muzhiks would 'rebel', and the masters would
'pacify' them with the military force available. Our Narodniks were
right in saying that the peasants' struggle for land and liberty had
pervaded all Russian history. But what else was that struggle for land
and liberty but a class struggle against the landowners and the state
controlled by the latter? The 'muzhiks' were well aware of the
oppositeness of their interests to those of the landowners; if,
nevertheless, the struggle they waged cannot be called a *conscious
class struggle*, that is only because an awareness of antagonistic
interests is insufficient for a conscious class struggle; what is also
needed is an understanding of the ways of defeating those who are
defending those opposite interests. It is common knowledge that the
Russian peasantry were not distinguished by that knowledge, which was
why the struggle they conducted was in considerable degree a
'spontaneous' struggle. Yet it did not cease from being a class
struggle.

Signor Croce has confused a conscious struggle with a consciousness of
an existing antagonism, which is why he thinks that no class struggle
exists at all where there is no *conscious* class struggle. He fails to
understand that a more or less bitter, overt or covert, conscious or
unconscious class struggle is an invariable consequence of the division
of society into classes.

Finally, it is also true that today's socialists are doing everything in
their power to develop the class consciousness of the workers. We
cannot, however, understand how Signor Croce can cite this indisputable
fact as an argument against the doctrine of the class struggle. Of the
present-day socialists, one can say in the words of the *Manifesto* that
they:

\... are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this
only\... In the various stages of development which the struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always
and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
^[\[76\]](#n76)^

From this it only follows that not all workers are marked by the same
degree of class consciousness and not all of them understand the overall
interests of the labour movement equally well.

The division of society into classes is caused by its economic
development. However, the course of *ideas* lags behind the course of
*things*; that is why *people*'s *awareness* of the relations existing
between them in the social process of production lags behind the
*development* of those relations. Besides, even within one and the same
class, consciousness does not develop at one and the same rate: some of
its members grasp the essence of a given order of things sooner than
others do, this making it possible for the advanced elements
ideologically to influence those that are backward, and for socialists
to influence those proletarians that have not yet achieved a socialist
world-outlook. ^[\[77\]](#n77)^ Signor Croce evidently wishes to say
that class consciousness is non-existent wherever it has to be
developed. In the first place, however, the development of that
consciousness is not yet proof of its absence. In the second place, even
were it now possible to meet workers who still believe in the harmony of
their interests with those of the employers, it would be necessary to
say of such workers that they have not yet cast off a world-outlook
characteristic of the class struggle of another kind --- the struggle
between the third estate and the aristocracy. The third estate had not
yet become aware of the economic antagonism lurking within its own
midst. There is nothing surprising in views evolved in times of a class
struggle of one kind surviving in part till our day, a period marked by
a class struggle of another kind: after all, the development of
consciousness lags behind the development of the economy.

Hence, wherever one's glance falls in present-day society, one sees the
influence of the class struggle. It also follows that it is no one else
but Signor Croce himself who has advanced 'amusing' parity.

Though Signor Croce is an intelligent and capable man, his thinking is
lacking in the dialectical element, a shortcoming that accounts for
almost all the reverses that have attended his 'critical' efforts.
^[\[78\]](#n78)^

But let us go further: we have already pointed out that the authors of
the *Manifesto* possessed a most harmonious theory of history, while the
historical views of the bourgeoisie's ideologists have lacked the
necessary coherence. We must now explain and prove that statement.

Augustin Thierry, Mignet, Guizot and other historians who held the
viewpoint of the interests of the 'middle class' saw property relations
as the main and deepest foundation of a country's political structure
and even of the views predominant in it. ^[\[79\]](#n79)^

In this respect, their views differ but little from those of Marx and
Engels, and when Marx later wrote that neither legal relations nor
political forms could be comprehended whether by themselves or on the
basis of a so-called general development of the human mind, but that on
the contrary they originate in the material conditions of life, the
totality of which Hegel called civil society, ^[\[80\]](#n80)^ he was
merely repeating the conclusions that historical science had arrived at
before him, under the influence of social development and the class
struggle connected with it. The entire difference boiled down to Marx's
predecessors having failed to ascertain the origin of property relations
and interests, while Marx gained a complete understanding of them.

With Guizot, Mignet and Thierry, as well as with all historians and
publicists who shared their point of view, property relations in society
were often attributed to *conquests*. They themselves, however, pointed
out that conquests are effected for the sake of definite '*positive
interests*'. But where do such interests come from? Their existence is
clearly conditioned by the property relations both in the country of the
conquerors and in the country that comes under their yoke. What we have
is a vicious circle: property relations and interests are the outcome of
conquests, while conquest is explained by property relations and
interests. While historical theory was confined to this vicious circle,
it could not but be marked by eclecticism and contradictions. In
general, these contradictions are numerous in all historians belonging
to the trend under examination.

The historians sometimes appealed to human nature. However, one of two
things is possible: human nature must remain immutable throughout the
historical process, or else undergo change. If it remains immutable, it
is obvious that it cannot account for the changes taking place in
history. If, on the other hand, it undergoes change, then references to
it can explain nothing, since we must first of all establish the causes
of the changes within it. That leads us into another vicious circle and
another source of contradictions and eclecticism in historical science.

An excellent example of such eclecticism and contradictions is provided
by Tocqueville's celebrated book *De la démocratie en Amérique*, which
Royer-Collard called a continuation of Montesquieu's book *On the Spirit
of Laws*. Tocqueville says that if we have a definite social structure,
it may be regarded as the prime cause of most of the laws, customs and
ideas 'determining the behaviour of nations'. To understand the
legislations and manners of a given people, one should begin with a
study of the social system; ^[\[81\]](#n81)^ but where does a social
system come from? In reply, Tocqueville refers to human nature. We
already know that such references can explain nothing. This was
something that was known to or at least suspected by Tocqueville
himself, who wrote in his letter from America: 'I see prospering here
institutions that would inevitably turn France upside down\... people
are neither different nor better than in our country.' ^[\[82\]](#n82)^

The inevitable and inescapable conclusion to be drawn from these words
is that human nature provides no key to an understanding of American
institutions.

Elsewhere Tocqueville tried to ascribe the origins of social systems to
the operation of *laws*. However, since, in his own words, a country's
legislation stems from its social system, we again come up against a
contradiction. Tocqueville himself was more or less vaguely aware of
that contradiction and tried to eliminate it, but all his efforts were
in vain: his analysis proved powerless in this respect.

Marx's historical theory solved this contradiction, thereby bringing
clarity and consistency into an area that contained many important
particulars, profound thoughts and true remarks, but lacked a
fundamental principle capable of bringing all these important
particulars, profound thoughts and true remarks together into a coherent
whole.

In Marx's theory a social system --- men's social relations --- is
explained by their *economic relations*: *'*the anatomy of this civil
society, however, has to be sought in political economy'.
^[\[83\]](#n83)^ But how are such relations created? If Marx had
attempted to ascribe their origin to human views, sentiments or 'nature'
in general, he would have fallen into the same contradictions that his
precursors were involved in. However, Marx gave a quite different
explanation.

*To live*, people must *produce*. To produce, they must pool their
efforts in a certain way and establish with one another certain
relations which Marx called *production relations*. The totality of
these relations constitutes society's *economic structure*, on whose
basis all other (social) relations develop, as, incidentally, do all
'*people*'s *conditions*' \[*l\'état des personnes*\] which played so
important a part in the theories of French historians of the
Restoration.

In any given period, the nature of production relations is determined
not by 'chance' or by human 'nature' but by the natural conditions in
which men have to struggle for their existence. It is on these
conditions, and first and foremost on the geographical environment, that
the state of the *productive forces* at men's disposal depends. Definite
production relations correspond to a definite state of the productive
forces, and any particular social system corresponds to definite
relations of production; the nature of that social system, which
influences people's mentality, conditions the intellectual, moral and
all the so-called *spiritual* development of men and women.

However, the very process of production and the pooling of human efforts
in that process, by increasing the sum of experience, lead to a further
development of the productive forces, as a result of which there arises
and gradually increases a *discrepancy* between those forces on the one
hand, and the production relations on the other. Those relations
previously fostered the further growth of the productive forces, but now
they begin to hold it back. There then sets in a *revolutionary epoch*
in social development, which sooner or later ends in the destruction of
obsolete production and consequently property relations, and all
'*l\'état des personnes*'.

The struggle against outmoded production relations makes people develop
a critical attitude, not only towards the old social order but also to
those ideas, sentiments and, in general, the '*mentality*' evolved on
the basis of the old order. To the revolutionary movement in the area of
social relations there corresponds a revolutionary movement in the
sphere of spiritual life:

Does it require deep intuition \[ask Marx and Engels in Chapter Two of
the *Manifesto*\] to comprehend that man's ideas, views and conceptions,
in one word, man's consciousness, changes with every change in the
conditions of his material existence, in his social relations and in his
social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual
production changes its character in proportion as material production is
changed? ^[\[84\]](#n84)^

Such is the historical theory of Marx and Engels. It is a theory that
pervades the entire *Manifesto* and comprises what can well be called
its fundamental idea.

It is from the viewpoint of this fundamental idea that the authors of
the *Manifesto* appraised their own times as well. If they considered it
*revolutionary*, it was for the sole reason that they saw the
discrepancy between the productive forces created by capitalism and the
production relations inherent in capitalism:

Modern bourgeois society with its relations of production, of exchange
and of property \[they wrote\], a society that has conjured up such
gigantic means of production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who
is no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he has
called up by his spells. For many a decade past the history of industry
and commerce is but the history of the revolt of modern productive
forces against modern conditions of production, against the property
relations that are the conditions for the existence of the bourgeoisie
and of its rule. It is enough to mention the commercial crises that by
their periodical return put on its trial, each time more threateningly,
the existence of the entire bourgeois society. (*Manifesto*, p 8)
^[\[85\]](#n85)^

Since bourgeois production relations make the workers intolerably
dependent on capital, there is nothing surprising in the emergence,
among the workers, of a sense of dissatisfaction, which grows together
with the growth of the contradiction we have spoken of, and develops
into a revolutionary movement that is directed against the entire
present social order. The bourgeoisie has 'not only forged the weapons
that bring death to itself; it has also called into existence the men
who are to wield those weapons --- the modern working class --- the
*proletarians*' (ibid, p 9). ^[\[86\]](#n86)^

All this shows how incorrectly the historical theory of Marx and Engels
is characterised by the generally accepted term *economic materialism*.
If that denoted a theory that recognises property interest as the main
driving force in historical progress, then the French historians of the
Restoration period may well be called economic materialists. But these
'economic materialists' were, in fact, wholly devoid of materialism, for
they remained *idealists*, inasmuch as they did not turn into eclectics.
With them, the origin of property relations and interests did not get
any kind of materialist explanation. If, on the other hand, Marx's
theory was imbued with materialism, it was not at all because it
attributed an extraordinarily important historical role to property
interests; it was because, by tying the development of those interests
to the development of the productive relations caused by the growth of
the productive forces, it provided for the first time a materialist
explanation of the evolution of social thought, and completely
eliminated the idealist explanation of that evolution as deriving from
the properties of the human 'spirit' or human 'nature' in general. There
is nothing surprising, therefore, in the *semi-Marxists*, who have
rebelled against *materialism*, clutching at the expression '*economic*
materialism'.

They realise that absolutely idealistic views may lie concealed behind
that expression. ^[\[87\]](#n87)^

Herr Eduard Bernstein, that former Marxist and Social-Democrat, finds
that the historical theory of Marx and Engels is most clearly defined by
a title proposed by Barth: *the economic understanding of history*.
After all that has been said, it is superfluous to say that this opinion
of the esteemed 'critic' is based exclusively on a complete failure to
understand the true nature of the theory he makes so bold as to
criticise. ^[\[88\]](#n88)^

Since we have begun to deal with this 'critic', we shall remind the
reader that, in his opinion, the historical theory of Marx and Engels
has itself gone through a process of development, as a result of which
there has emerged a certain limiting of the role of the economic
'factor' in history, in favour of other, *non-economic '*factors'. Herr
Bernstein cites the following arguments to bolster this opinion of his.
In 1859, Marx, writing in the Preface to his *Zur Kritik der politischen
Oekonomie*, 'recognised as the determining factor the given material
productive forces ^[\[89\]](#n89)^ and production relations of man',
while later, in his polemic with Dühring, Engels, 'even in Marx's
lifetime and in agreement with him', gave another 'explanation' to
historical materialism, namely:

It is indicated there that the *ultimate* ^[\[90\]](#n90)^ *causes* of
all social changes and revolutions should be sought, not in people's
minds but in changes in the mode of production and exchange. Ultimate
causes, however, do not preclude simultaneously operating causes of
another kind --- causes of the second, third and other degrees --- and
it is clear that the more considerable is the series of such changes,
the greater the restrictive force of ultimate causes is limited both
qualitatively and quantitatively. The fact of their influence remains,
but the final shape of things does not depend on it alone.
^[\[91\]](#n91)^

Herr Bernstein thinks that 'in his later works Engels still more limited
the determining force of production relations'. As proof, he cites two
letters from Engels, published in *Sozialistischer Akademiker* of
October 1895, one of them written in 1890, and the other in 1894. The
contents of these letters are very well characterised by the two
excerpts from them provided by Herr Bernstein.

The first of them reads as follows:

Thus there are innumerable intersecting forces, an infinite series of
parallelograms of forces which give rise to one *resultant* --- the
historical event. This may again itself be viewed as the product of a
power which works as a whole, unconsciously and without volition. For
what each individual wills is obstructed by everyone else, and what
emerges is something that no one willed. (Letter of 1890)
^[\[92\]](#n92)^

In the second excerpt, we read the following:

Political, juridical, philosophical, religious, literary, artistic, etc,
development is based on economic development. But all these react upon
one another and also upon the economic basis. (Letter of 1895)
^[\[93\]](#n93)^

Regarding these excerpts, Herr Bernstein makes the following remark:
'The reader will agree that this sounds somewhat different from the
passage from Marx quoted at the beginning.' ^[\[94\]](#n94)^

'At the beginning', he has cited a passage from the celebrated Preface
to *Zur Kritik*, which says that the mode of production of material life
conditions the process of social, political and intellectual life. Let
us assume for a moment that this passage does indeed 'sound' different
from the above-mentioned excerpt from Engels' letter, and ascertain how
the *Manifesto*, which was written eleven years prior to the appearance
of *Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*, does actually 'sound'.

We have already drawn the reader's attention to the fact of the
development of the productive forces being recognised there as the most
profound cause of social development. In this respect, the viewpoint of
the *Manifesto* is *identical* with that in the Preface to *Zur Kritik*.
But how does the matter stand with the 'parallelograms of forces' and
with the interplay of various 'factors' of social development?

The *Manifesto* shows how the successes scored by the bourgeoisie in the
economic area brought it into the political struggle and led to
political gains which, in their turn, laid the foundations of its
further achievements in the economic field. It declares that *any class
struggle is a political struggle* ^[\[95\]](#n95)^ and tells the
proletariat that its seizure of *political* power is an essential
condition of its *economic* emancipation. In brief, what we read here
about the political 'factor' is actually the same as was pointed out in
Engels' letter of 1895. Political development rests on the economic
development but at the same time reacts to the economic basis.

What follows is that the view which to Herr Bernstein seems a fairly
late result of the evolution of Marx and Engels' historical theory was
in fact expressed as far back as 1848, that is, at a time when,
according to Herr Bernstein's hypothesis, Marx and Engels should have
been --- if we may put it so here --- 'pure economists'.

This, however, follows as yet only in respect of the political
'factor\'; perhaps it is wrong in respect of other 'factors\'?

Let us see. The *Manifesto* says that intellectual activities change
together with the material ones:

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions
were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the
eighteenth century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death
battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. ^[\[96\]](#n96)^

These words in themselves contain a recognition of the interaction
between society's economic development, on the one hand, and its
intellectual development, on the other. However, it is still a tacit
recognition, which is why it may be questioned. But the concluding
chapter of the *Manifesto* leaves absolutely no room for doubt on this
score. In this chapter, which shows the Communists' attitude to other
working-class parties, the authors say that the Communists never cease,
for a single instant, to instil in the workers the clearest possible
consciousness of the hostile oppositeness of the bourgeoisie's interests
and those of the proletariat. Why do the Communists do so? Obviously,
because they recognise the significance of *ideas*. Incidentally, the
authors themselves hasten to explain their purpose. What the Communist
Party wants, they write, is that:

\... the German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against
the bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the
bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, and in
order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany, the
fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.
^[\[97\]](#n97)^

This passage reveals absolutely the same view regarding the significance
of the *intellectual '*factor' that we have noted in respect of the
*political '*factor\'; intellectual development is based on the
economic, but then, in its turn, influences the latter (through the
medium of men's socio-political activities). It follows, then, that the
ideological 'factor' was recognised by Marx and Engels, not only during
the polemic with Dühring but as far back as 1848 and even earlier,
during the period of the publication of the *Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher*. This, at least in respect of Marx, precludes any doubt
regarding the following outstanding lines from his article on the
Hegelian philosophy of law:

No class\... can play this role without arousing a moment of enthusiasm
in itself and in the masses, a moment in which it fraternises\... with
society in general\... is perceived and acknowledged as its *general
representative*; a moment in which its demands and rights are truly the
rights and demands of society itself; a moment in which it is truly the
social head and the social heart. ^[\[98\]](#n98)^

As you see, the part played by consciousness in transforming society, in
general, and even by enthusiasm in particular is recognised in the most
categorical terms. The 'factor' of mentality reacts to social (and
consequently to economic) relations. Marx then goes on to explain how
the attitude of all society to the 'emancipator class' develops on the
basis of the class struggle:

For one estate to be *par excellence* the estate of liberation, another
estate must conversely be the obvious estate of oppression. The negative
general significance of the French nobility and the French clergy
determined the positive general significance of the immediately adjacent
and opposed class of the *bourgeoisie*. ^[\[99\]](#n99)^

The conclusion to be drawn is that from the very outset of their
activities the founders of scientific socialism voiced absolutely the
same view of the mutual relationship between various 'factors' of
historical development as we meet in the excerpts made by Herr Bernstein
from Engels' letters of the 1890s. It could not have been otherwise: had
Marx and Engels, from the very start of their political careers, not
attached importance to the political and the 'intellectual' factors and
precluded their impact on the economic development of society, their
practical programme would have been quite different: they would not have
said that the working class cannot cast off the economic yoke of the
bourgeoisie without taking over the political power. In exactly the same
way, they would not have spoken of the need to foster class
consciousness in workers: why should that consciousness be developed if
it plays no part in the social movement and if everything takes place in
history irrespective of the consciousness, and exclusively through the
force of economic necessity? And who does not know that the development
of the workers' class-consciousness was the immediate practical task of
Marx and Engels from the very outset of their social activities? As a
former 'Marxist', Herr Bernstein ought also to know that the intense
intellectual work carried on in the early 1840s among the French and
British workers served Marx as one of the main arguments against those
writers who, like Bruno Bauer, ignored the 'masses' and pinned all their
hopes on 'critically minded personalities'. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^

Let us try to construct another hypothesis: in the beginning of their
activities, Marx and Engels regarded 'factors' in the same light as they
were seen in by Engels in the 1890s. Midway through those activities, at
about the time of the publication of *Zur Kritik*, Marx --- alone, or
together with Engels --- changed this viewpoint for some reason, and
fell into the extreme discovered by Herr Bernstein in the Preface to
this book.

But even this hypothesis will not stand up to any criticism, because the
Preface just mentioned contains that very view of 'factors' which, in
Herr Bernstein's opinion, arose only in consequence of the *evolution*
of Marx's historical theory. The reader will have no difficulty in
agreeing with us if he goes to the trouble of scrutinising the quotation
that our profoundly thinking 'critic' makes reference to: 'The mode of
production of material life conditions the general process of social,
political and intellectual life', which means that social, political and
intellectual 'factors' grow on economic soil.

Further:

At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of
society come into conflict with the existing relations of production
or\... with the property relations within the framework of which they
have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive
forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of
social revolution. ^[\[101\]](#n101)^

Property relations pertain to the realm of *law*. At a definite time,
certain property relations promote the development of the productive
forces. That means that the legal forms that have evolved on a definite
economic basis in their turn react to the development of the economy.
Then --- and, incidentally, as a result of that reaction --- there comes
a time when the given legal forms begin to hamper the development of the
productive forces. That again means that these forms are reacting ---
though this time in the opposite sense --- to the development of the
socio-economic relations. As a consequence of the contradiction between
the productive forces and property relations, an epoch of social
revolution sets in. *What* is achieved by that revolution? *What kind*
of purpose does it pursue? The elimination of the old production
relations and the establishment of new relations, and new legal
institutions. What is the aim of that elimination and that
establishment? It is the further development of the productive forces.
That means again and again that, in their turn, the legal forms that
have arisen on a given economic foundation affect the latter. Is this
not exactly what was said in the *Manifesto*, was repeated in almost all
of Marx's other writings, and was referred to in Engels' letters quoted
by Herr Bernstein?

And the 'factor' of mentality? Perhaps, the Preface does not say about
it what is set forth in Marx and Engels' other writings. Very little is
said about it in the Preface, but what is said there in no way
contradicts what Engels' letters have to say on that score. The
development of the productive forces places people in certain relations
of production and leads to the appearance of certain legal forms. To
those legal forms there correspond certain legal notions in people. With
the further development of the productive forces and in the measure in
which their condition ceases from being in keeping with the old legal
forms, those whose interests are infringed by that discrepancy begin to
feel doubt as to the fitness and justice of the old legal institutions.
New notions of law and justice appear in keeping with the newly-achieved
social stage of the development of the productive forces. Towards these
new notions of law and justice are directed the practical activities of
the fighters against the old order, this leading to the creation of new
legal institutions which give a fresh impetus to the development of the
productive forces, and so on and so forth. That is what is said in the
Preface, and we would ask the unprejudiced reader whether this
contradicts by one jot what Engels said in his letters.

Of course, there is no contradiction there, but the Preface is couched
in more abstract language and deals with quite another matter. In it,
Marx wished to emphasise that social relations could not be comprehended
whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general development
of the human mind. ^[\[102\]](#n102)^ To that end, he brought to the
fore the *economic foundation* of the development of those relations.
For his part, Engels, in his letters, addressed himself to one who, like
many of our compatriots, thought that the theory of 'economic
materialism' has no room for the operation of political, legal and
spiritual 'factors' and therefore, while making passing mention of the
economic foundations of all these 'factors', he laid special stress on
the circumstance that the latter, which had developed on the economic
foundation, affected that foundation. That is all. Were Herr Bernstein
capable of seeing just a little beyond the *wording* of the theory he is
analysing, and of penetrating into its *contents*, he would find it much
easier to understand that the historical views set forth in the Preface
to *Zur Kritik* leave exactly the same amount of room for the operation
of 'causes of the second, third, etc, degrees' as the doctrine contained
in *Anti-Dühring*, while Engels' argument, contained in his letter of
1890, to the effect that historical events can be regarded as a product
of an unconsciously operating force, is the very same that Marx says in
the Preface regarding the operation of the fundamental cause of social
development, irrespective of human consciousness and will. Here we have
complete identity, yet Herr Bernstein has far-fetchedly understood
Engels' words as something that changes the meaning of the Preface and
complements it. Some 'criticism\'!

Elsewhere in his booklet, our 'critic' speaks of Marx having allegedly
made an excessive appraisal of the 'creative ability of revolutionary
force to effect socialist transformation in present-day society'. But a
revolutionary force is also a political one. What follows is that Marx
was guilty of an exaggerated appraisal of the creative capacity of the
political force. But the self-same Marx, at the same time and according
to that self-same 'critic', was guilty of attaching no significance at
all to any other 'factors' except the economic. What is one to make of
that?

Herr Bernstein criticises, not only the historical theory of Marx and
Engels, but also their doctrine of the class struggle. In his words, the
class struggle no longer confronts the proletariat with the practical
tasks indicated by the authors of the *Manifesto*. The proletariat's
struggle against the bourgeoisie of the most developed countries in the
civilised world cannot at present lead to the dictatorship of the
proletariat, which is why talk about the latter becomes simple
phrase-mongering. But let Herr Bernstein speak for himself:

Is there, for instance, any sense in repeating the phrase of the
proletarian dictatorship at a time when, in all kinds of institutions,
representatives of Social-Democracy are in practice taking up the stand
of parliamentary struggle, proportional representation and popular
legislation, which are contradictory to dictatorship? It is at present
so much outlived that it cannot be brought into accord with reality
otherwise than deleting its true meaning from the word 'dictatorship'
and giving it some milder meaning. ^[\[103\]](#n103)^

In the second half of the 1880s, there appeared in our country a special
brand of 'socialist' whose main and, it may be said, agonising concern
consisted in refraining from frightening the liberals. The spectre of
the frightened liberals so greatly intimidated that brand of socialists
that it brought confusion into all their theoretical and practical
arguments. Herr Bernstein reminds one very much of such 'socialists'.
His main concern consists in not frightening the democratic bourgeoisie.
If he rejects materialism and recommends a return to Kant, it is solely
because Kantianism leaves room for religious superstition, and Herr
Bernstein is unwilling to shock the religious superstitions of today's
bourgeois. If Herr Bernstein has rebelled against the materialist
doctrine of necessity, it is solely because, as applied to social
phenomena, that doctrine leaves no room for the proletariat's hopes of
good will from the bourgeoisie, and consequently of the convergence of
these two classes. Finally, if Herr Bernstein dislikes the 'phrase' of
the proletarian dictatorship, that again is solely because it is
offensive to the hearing of even the most 'democratic' bourgeoisie.
However, to those who have no fear of the spectre of the frightened
bourgeoisie, the question of the proletarian dictatorship is seen in a
light quite different from that our critic sees it in.

As even Mignet was aware in his time, the dictatorship of a class means
the *supremacy* of that class, which permits it to dispose of society's
organised force to defend its own interests and directly or indirectly
to suppress all those social movements which infringe those interests.
^[\[104\]](#n104)^ In that sense, it may be said, for instance, that the
French bourgeoisie achieved its dictatorship as far back as the times of
the first Constituent Assembly, and, with certain intervals, has
continued enjoying that dictatorship down to our days when even Monsieur
Millerand, styled a socialist minister by Monsieur Jaurès, is unable to
prevent the shooting down of workers who have dared to disobey the
capitalists. In this situation, it is the primary task of the French
proletariat to eliminate the 'conditions for the possibility' of that
bourgeois dictatorship. Among the most important of these conditions is
the insufficient class consciousness of producers, most of whom are
still under the influence of the exploiters. Therefore, one of the most
important practical tasks of the party consists in educating the
uneducated, prodding the backward, and helping to develop the
underdeveloped. Parliamentary or any other legal political activities by
representatives of Social-Democracy promote the accomplishment of this
important task and therefore *deserve every respect and approval*. Their
good feature is that they eliminate the spiritual 'conditions for the
possibility' of bourgeois dictatorship, and create the spiritual
'conditions for the possibility' of the future proletarian dictatorship.
They do not contradict the proletarian dictatorship, but prepare for it.
To describe as a *phrase* any call upon the workers to prepare for the
dictatorship of their class is something to be expected only of one who
has lost all idea of the '*ultimate aim*' (*Endziel*) and thinks only of
the 'movement' (*Bewegung*)\... towards bourgeois socialism.

But, in Herr Bernstein's words, class dictatorship pertains to a lower
culture, and:

\... one should recognise as a backward step, as political atavism, any
thought that claims that the transition from capitalist to socialist
society should inevitably take place in the form of the development of
an epoch unfamiliar or imperfectly familiar with present-day methods of
propaganda and the passage of laws, and, besides, has lacked the
appropriate bodies. ^[\[105\]](#n105)^

As we have pointed out, the dictatorship of any class means its
supremacy, which permits it to dispose of the organised force of society
to defend its interests and suppress all social movements that directly
or indirectly threaten those interests. It may be asked whether a
striving to such supremacy on the part of any class in present-day
society can be called political atavism? No, it cannot. *Classes* exist
in that society, and where classes exist, a *class struggle* is
inevitable. Wherever a class struggle takes place, *it is necessary and
natural for each of the struggling classes to strive* for complete
victory over its enemy and its complete subjugation. The bourgeoisie and
its ideologists may --- in the name of 'morality' and 'justice' ---
condemn that striving whenever the proletariat reveals it with
perceptible force. We know that, already in January 1849, Guizot
described the class struggle as France's shame and calamity. But we also
know that such condemnation of the class struggle and the striving of
the working class towards conquest was impressed on the bourgeoisie only
by its instinct of self-preservation, and that it saw the class
dictatorship in quite a different light while it was waging its
century-old struggle against the aristocracy, and was firmly convinced
that no storm could sink its vessel. The working class cannot and should
not be impressed by the alleged morality and justice the bourgeois call
for in times of decline. ^[\[106\]](#n106)^ Mignet said that recognition
of one's rights can be won only by force and that till now there exists
no overlord but force. This was most true during the times of the third
estate's struggle against the aristocracy, and it remains most true in
our times of the struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie.
Were we to assure the workers that, in bourgeois society, force no
longer has the importance it enjoyed under the '*ancien régime*', we
would be telling a patent and flagrant untruth, which, like any untruth,
would only increase and lengthen the 'birth pangs'.

True, *force* and *violence* are not one and the same thing. In
international political relations, the importance of any state is
determined by its strength, but it does not follow therefrom that
recognition of the right of the strongest in each particular instance
presupposes violence. It is the same in the relations *between classes*.
The importance of any given class is always determined by its
*strength*, but it is far from always that *violence* is necessary for
its significance to be recognised. The role of violence is sometimes
greater and sometimes less, according to the political structure of a
particular country. Herr Bernstein thinks that, in the democratic
countries of today, the working class has no need of violence for the
achievement of its aims. This is an excessively optimistic view
implanted in our 'critic' by his constant concern to avoid frightening
the bourgeois democrats. Present-day France has a democratic
constitution, yet no one familiar with that country's internal life can
guarantee that its proletariat will not be compelled to use naked force
to resist violence on the part of the bourgeoisie. Moreover, anyone
familiar with the French constitution will say that the very logic of
that country's electoral law can easily lead to an insurrection by the
proletariat. ^[\[107\]](#n107)^ Or else let us take the United States of
America, which is also a democratic country. But in that democratic
country, the emancipation of the Negroes could be achieved only at the
cost of an internecine struggle, and no one can guarantee that the
American proletariat will not have to clear the way for its economic
emancipation *by violence*. In Herr Bernstein's opinion, 'any practical
Social-Democratic activities consist in establishing circumstances and
conditions that will make possible and necessary the transition from
today's social system to a higher one, without any convulsions'.
^[\[108\]](#n108)^ There is some truth in these words. Social-Democracy
is indeed interested in the transition to a higher social order taking
place without any convulsions. But does that mean that it should give up
the idea of the proletarian dictatorship? Not at all! When they took
over Peking, the allied European-US-Japanese troops were most interested
in the occupation of the Chinese capital being carried out without any
bloodshed, yet they did not for a moment give up the idea of capturing
it. No goal changes because of people trying to achieve it with the
least effort, but when people are firmly resolved to achieve a given
end, the choice of the means depends not on themselves but on
circumstances. And it is precisely because the Social-Democrats cannot
foresee all the circumstances in which the working class will have to
win its *supremacy*, ^[\[109\]](#n109)^ they cannot, in principle,
reject the *violent mode* of action. They should remember the old and
tested maxim: if you want peace, prepare for war.

We may perhaps be told that, towards the end of his life, Engels himself
strongly advised the socialist parties of all countries to avoid violent
action and to remain on the platform of peaceful struggle through lawful
means. ^[\[110\]](#n110)^ To that we shall reply as follows: Engels gave
that advice on the basis of three considerations: 1) that the socialist
revolution presupposes a high level of development of the workers'
class-consciousness, for which time is required; ^[\[111\]](#n111)^ 2)
that the German conservatives are bending every effort to impel the
German Social-Democrats to organise an insurrection, hoping to rout them
and thereby cut short their continual successes; ^[\[112\]](#n112)^ and
3) that the present-day equipment of the army makes any attempts at
street uprisings hopeless. ^[\[113\]](#n113)^

The first two of these considerations stand in need of no 'amendments'
or commentary. They are set forth with such clarity and justice that
they can evoke objections neither from those who are really able to
criticise the doctrine of Marx and Engels, nor even from those who can
lay only spurious claims to criticism. But these two considerations
condemn, not violent action in general, but only such that is premature,
which is why they have nothing in common with the arguments advanced by
adherents of 'peaceful development' *quand même*.

As for the third consideration, careful analysis of its meaning shows it
to be different from what it may appear at first sight.

In developing this consideration Engels said that, until 1848, street
fighting often led to the insurgents' victory, but that stemmed from the
operation of quite different causes. In Paris in July 1830 and February
1848, and in most instances of street fighting in Spain, the outcome was
decided by the National Guard, who discouraged the regular forces by
their indecision or even went over to the side of the insurgents.
Wherever it came out decisively and immediately against the
insurrectionists, the uprisings proved abortive. That, for instance, was
the case in Paris in June 1848. At any rate, the insurgents proved
victorious only where and only when they were able to shake the morale
of the troops. Even during the classical period of street fighting, the
significance of barricades was more moral than material. By hampering
the advance of the troops, they gave the insurgents time to affect the
latter's morale. However, when the troops' morale did not succumb to
insurgent influence, the military proved victorious.

If that is so, and even if, during the classical period of street
fighting, the outcome of an uprising was entirely determined by the
morale of the troops, then the question under consideration boils down
to the following: could insurgents today exert on troops an influence
favourable to them? To that question Engels replies with an emphatic
'No'. He says that today, insurgents could not count, as they did in
1848, on the sympathy of all strata of the population, and though more
people with military training could go over to their side today, they
would find it far more difficult to get suitable weapons. Adding to all
this the consideration that, since 1848, new blocks have been built in
the big cities that are not suited for the construction of barricades,
Engels goes on to ask:

Does the reader now understand why the powers that be positively want to
get us to go where the guns shoot and the sabres slash? Why do they
accuse us today of cowardice, because we do not betake ourselves without
more ado into the street, where we are certain of defeat in advance? Why
do they so earnestly implore us to play for once the part of
cannon-fodder? The gentlemen pour their prayers and their challenges for
nothing, for absolutely nothing. We are not so stupid.
^[\[114\]](#n114)^

All this is couched in firm language and seems to leave no doubt about
Engels' view. But note that all these arguments refer to the *current
position* in German Social-Democracy, which would indeed be acting most
hastily by yielding to the treacherous provocations of the ruling
classes. An argument which might seem to be of a general nature here
receives a particular meaning; the reader begins to think that Engels
was referring only to the current position in German Social-Democracy.
That impression is supported considerably by Engels' following words:
'But whatever may happen in other countries, the German Social-Democracy
occupies a special position and therewith, at least in the immediate
future, has a special task.' ^[\[115\]](#n115)^ Further it is explained
why the German party should at present find it disadvantageous to resort
to violent action. That naturally leads to the assumption that the idea
of the specific features of the current position in the German party
gave a specific colouring to all of Engels' argument on the open
struggle of the working class against its exploiters. This assumption
yields place to confidence when we read the passage at the end of the
Introduction, where Engels says that, in view of the constant successes
scored by the Social-Democrats, the German government may abolish the
constitution and return to absolute rule. He is hinting here that such
an attempt will lead to a popular uprising, against which the
reactionary forces will be smashed. It follows therefore that, in
Engels' opinion, not every popular insurrection is hopeless today. This
inescapable conclusion is still more fortified by the concluding lines
of the Introduction, which carry the readers' thought 1600 years back to
the time when Christianity was engaged in a struggle against paganism.
The pagan world cruelly persecuted the Christians as subversive
elements. For a long time, they could conduct their activities only
secretly, but little by little their doctrine spread to such an extent
that they had supporters even among the troops: '*Entire legions adopted
Christianity*.' (Italics ours) When their duties required their
attendance at pagan ceremonies, such soldiers, imbued with the spirit of
the new religion, decorated their helmets with crosses. The usual
disciplinary measures proved powerless against their audacity. Emperor
Diocletian launched a resolute struggle against them by issuing
'anti-socialist' --- sorry, 'anti-Christian laws'. Assemblages of
subversive element were declared contrary to law; the premises they were
held in were locked up, the wearing of crosses was banned, and so on and
so forth. The year 303 was marked by savage persecution of Christians,
but such measures proved the last of their kind. 'And it was so
effective that, seventeen years later, the army consisted overwhelmingly
of Christians\...', and Constantine declared Christianity the
established religion. ^[\[116\]](#n116)^

If these lines are in the least meaningful --- and of course, they do
not lack meaning --- it is in the sense that the socialists will be
triumphant when revolutionary ideas penetrate into the army and when the
'legions' of today are imbued with the socialist spirit; until that time
comes, the socialist party should avoid open clashes with the troops.
The reader will see that this is in no way the conclusion usually drawn
from this argument of Engels'.

But can socialist ideas penetrate into an army? That is not only
*possible* but even *inevitable*. The present-day organisation of the
military establishment calls for universal conscription, which brings
into the armed forces ideas that are widespread among the people. The
wider the spread of socialist ideas in the masses, the greater the
insurgents' chances of success: we already know from Engels that the
outcome of street fighting is always determined by the morale of the
troops. ^[\[117\]](#n117)^

There can be no doubt that the 'legions' will not come under our
influence so soon. But what has been put off is not yet lost, as the
French have it. Sooner or later, socialist ideas will penetrate into the
armed forces and then we shall see what will remain of reactionaries'
bellicosity and whether they will cease from challenging us to come into
the streets\...

If we compare this argument of Engels', which we have just discussed,
with the celebrated concluding lines of the *Manifesto of the Communist
Party*, ^[\[118\]](#n118)^ we shall see that, towards the end of his
life, Engels greatly changed his opinion regarding the role of open
insurrections in the proletariat's struggle for emancipation. While, at
the time of the publication of the *Manifesto*, Marx and he considered
an open insurrection an essential condition of the triumph of the
working class, Engels admitted, towards the end of his life, that in
definite circumstances, the legal road may also lead to victory; he
began to regard insurrection as a mode of action which, in the
present-day state of the armed forces, promises the socialists not
victory but a resounding defeat, and will continue to do so until the
army itself is not imbued with the socialist spirit.

This new view of Engels' is, of course, deserving of every attention and
respect; it in no way contradicts what we have said above of the
possible significance of violent action in the revolutionary struggle of
the working class. It merely explains the conditions required for the
success of such action. ^[\[119\]](#n119)^

To this it should be added that the dictatorship of a particular class
is one thing, while violent action taken by that class in its striving
for dictatorship is something else. During the Restoration, Guizot and
his fellow-thinkers were highly energetic and purposeful in their
striving to establish the dictatorship of the 'middle class', but none
of them gave thought to violent action in general and to street fighting
in particular. Guizot would probably have sharply condemned any plan of
such an insurrection, which did not, however, prevent him from being a
*revolutionary* because he did not for a minute cease from inculcating
upon the minds of the 'middle class' a sense of the hostile oppositeness
of their interests to those of the aristocracy, and to drive home the
idea that any thought of reconciliation with that class was a *harmful
chimera*. Marx and Engels, in the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*,
were exactly the same kind of revolutionaries (only adhering to the
viewpoint of another class); they remained the same kind of
revolutionaries to the last breath. In this respect, their views did not
change a jot, this despite the assertions of those 'critics' who consist
entirely, as Marx put it, of 'on the one hand' and 'on the other hand',
and who would very much like to emancipate the proletariat without
giving offence to the bourgeoisie, and of whom one might say, in the
words of Nietzsche: 'Selig sind diese Schläfrigen, denn sie sollen bald
einnicken.' ^[\[120\]](#n120)^

That is all we have wanted to say about the fundamental idea in the
*Manifesto* and the conclusions to be drawn from it. Its individual
propositions will, as we have said, be examined by us in our booklet *A
Critique of Our Critics*. There we shall see whether Marx and Engels
*were right*, and, if so, *in what measure*, when they said that
bourgeois society's productive forces have outgrown its inherent
production relations, and that such a contradiction between the
productive forces on the one hand, and production relations on the other
is the underlying social foundation of the revolutionary movement of
today's working class.

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. See Marx's correspondence with Arnold Ruge in Book 4
of *Sozial-Demokrat*, pp 26-27. \[Plekhanov 1910, *Werke*, Volume 1, pp
343-46 --- Editor.\]

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Engels' work is an analysis of Carlyle's *Past and
Present* (see Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume
3 (Moscow, 1975), pp 444-68) --- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher*, pp 167-68. \[Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p
457 --- Editor. James Morison's Vegetable Universal Pills were a quack
cure-all medicine that was popular in Victorian times, especially with
the poor, who could not afford to pay doctors' fees. The pills led to
several deaths, as documented in the *Lancet*, and made their inventor
very wealthy --- MIA.\]

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. The main scientific source from which these gentlemen
draw the information about materialism is Lange's well-known history of
materialism. Lange, however, was never able to regard materialism
through the eyes of a sober and impartial researcher. His book did very
much, not for a criticism of materialism, but for the spread and
fortifying among the public of an erroneous view of its historical
development and its significance to social science today. \[The
reference is to a book by a German neo-Kantian philosopher Friedrich
Albert Lange, *Geschichte des Materialismus und Kritik seiner Bedeutung
in der Gegenwart* --- Editor.\]

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 474-595 --- MIA.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 101 --- Editor.

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. *Opinions littéraires, philosophiques et
industrielles* (Paris, 1825), pp 144-45. Cf *Catéchisme des industriels*
in *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon* (published by Olinde Rodrigues, Paris,
1832), p 18.

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. *Oeuvres*, p 59.

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. Quoted by Thierry himself in his *Dix ans d\'études
historiques* (Paris, 1837), preface, p viii.

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. See the first letter on the history of France,
reprinted in *Dix ans d\'études historiques*, p 325.

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. 'Essai sur le genre dramatique sérieux', *Oeuvres
complètes* (Paris, 1828), Volume 1, p 11.

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. 'Lettre sur la critique du *Barbier de Séville*',
*Oeuvres complètes*, Volume 1, p 258.

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. Cf Brunetière, *Les Epoques du théâtre français*
(Paris, 1896), p 287.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. *Dix ans d'études historiques*, p 348. \[\'Done by
the one who profits from it.' --- MIA\]

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. In the article 'Vue des révolutions d\'Angleterre',
*Dix ans d\'études historiques*, p 16.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. Ibid, p 52.

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 52-53.

[[18]{#n18}]{.info}. *De la féodalité, des institutions de Saint Louis
et de l\'influence de la législation de ce prince* (Paris, 1822), p 47.

[[19]{#n19}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 77-78.

[[20]{#n20}]{.info}. Ibid, p 83.

[[21]{#n21}]{.info}. *Histoire de la Révolution française*, Volume 1
(Paris, 1827), p 105.

[[22]{#n22}]{.info}. Ibid, p 111.

[[23]{#n23}]{.info}. Ibid, p 210.

[[24]{#n24}]{.info}. Ibid, p 227.

[[25]{#n25}]{.info}. Ibid, p 276.

[[26]{#n26}]{.info}. Ibid, p 290. \[The storming of the Bastille on 14
July 1789 marked the beginning of the French Revolution; 10 August 1792
was the day of the popular insurrection in Paris which resulted in the
abolition of monarchy --- Editor.\]

[[27]{#n27}]{.info}. Ibid, p 213.

[[28]{#n28}]{.info}. Edouard Petit, *François Mignet* (Paris, 1889), p
286. \['the disorder of the Commune was odious to him.' --- MIA\]

[[29]{#n29}]{.info}. The reference is to the Paris Commune of 1871 ---
the first dictatorship of the proletariat in history; it lasted 72 days,
from 18 March to 28 May 1871 --- Editor.

[[30]{#n30}]{.info}. *Histoire de la Révolution française*, Volume 1, pp
3, 13. These expressions remind one of Marx's well-known utterance:
'Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one.'
\[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 703 --- Editor.\]

[[31]{#n31}]{.info}. *Essais sur l'Histoire de France* (tenth edition,
the first edition was published in 1821), pp 73-74.

[[32]{#n32}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 75-76.

[[33]{#n33}]{.info}. Preface, *Histoire de la révolution d\'Angleterre*,
Volume 1 (Paris, 1841), p xxi (the preface is dated April 1826).

[[34]{#n34}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 9-10.

[[35]{#n35}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 11-12. Cf also *Discours sur l\'histoire
de la révolution d\'Angleterre*.

[[36]{#n36}]{.info}. See also his highly interesting 'Étude sur
Shakespeare', in Volume 1 of the French translation of Shakespeare's
*Works* (Paris, 1821).

[[37]{#n37}]{.info}. *Mémoires*, Volume 1 (Paris, 1858), p 8.

[[38]{#n38}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 296-97.

[[39]{#n39}]{.info}. *Du Gouvernement de la France depuis la
Restauration et du ministère actuel*, pp 1-2.

[[40]{#n40}]{.info}. Ibid, p 5

[[41]{#n41}]{.info}. Ibid, p 22.

[[42]{#n42}]{.info}. Ibid, p 108.

[[43]{#n43}]{.info}. Ibid, p 91.

[[44]{#n44}]{.info}. Ibid, p 127.

[[45]{#n45}]{.info}. Ibid, p 290.

[[46]{#n46}]{.info}. Ibid, p 138.

[[47]{#n47}]{.info}. Ibid, p 237.

[[48]{#n48}]{.info}. Ibid, p 283.

[[49]{#n49}]{.info}. Ibid, p 326, note.

[[50]{#n50}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), pp 110-11 --- Editor.

[[51]{#n51}]{.info}. Written in 1820.

[[52]{#n52}]{.info}. Cited from the 'Avant-propos' to the third edition
of the booklet *Du gouvernement de la France*.

[[53]{#n53}]{.info}. *The Golden Wedding of International Socialism*
(translated from the French, London, 1899), p 5. The Russian translation
of the booklet was brought out by the Free Russian Press Fund and
provided with a short introduction by the publishers, in which 'the
evolution of healthy socialist thinking' in Europe was contrasted with
'the dogmas of German socialism'. The esteemed adherents of 'healthy
socialist thinking' have failed to discern either the above or any other
errors of Vandervelde, and have even made additions to them from their
own stock. Thus they have called Vandervelde 'a Marxist as well as one
of the most scholarly and talented representatives of parliamentary
socialism'. The latter is true! Vandervelde is indeed one of the most
scholarly and talented representatives of socialism (parliamentary or
any other brand) in Belgium, but he has never been a Marxist, as his
Russian publishers could easily see for themselves from an acquaintance
with his other writings.

[[54]{#n54}]{.info}. See *Sozialismus und soziale Bewegung im 19
Jahrhundert*, pp 1-2.

[[55]{#n55}]{.info}. See Thomas Kirkup, *A History of Socialism*
(London, 1900), Chapters 7, 8 and 9.

[[56]{#n56}]{.info}. *De la Démocratie en France* (Paris, 1849), p 35.

[[57]{#n57}]{.info}. Ibid, p 107.

[[58]{#n58}]{.info}. Ibid, p 105.

[[59]{#n59}]{.info}. *Du Système industriel* (Paris, 1821), pp 205-07.

[[60]{#n60}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 134 --- Editor.

[[61]{#n61}]{.info}. *Leçons sur l\'industrie* (Paris, 1832), p 39.

[[62]{#n62}]{.info}. Victor Considérant, *Destinée sociale*, Volume 2
(third edition), p 8 et seq.

[[63]{#n63}]{.info}. After this, judge of the scholarship and profundity
of Professor Kareyev, who has remarked in an article on *The Development
of the Monist View of History*: 'The author is guilty of an unpardonable
error in disregarding the socialist historian Louis Blanc, who came out
much earlier than Marx and in whose views we see, on the one hand, a
further development of the views of Augustin Thierry and Guizot on the
class struggle in history and, on the other, a further development of
the ideas of Saint-Simon.' (*Studies Old and New on Economic
Materialism* (St Petersburg, 1896), p 211) In their time, Augustin
Thierry and Guizot preached the bourgeoisie's class struggle against the
nobles. In their opinion, the entire history of France showed that the
third estate could win no voluntary concessions from the aristocracy.
Louis Blanc insisted that the cause of the wealthy was also that of the
poor, addressing his project for the organisation of labour to the
bourgeoisie, not to the proletariat. Mr Kareyev calls this a further
development of the views of Thierry and Guizot regarding the class
struggle in history. This testifies only to the immaturity of his own
views on the class struggle and the history of socialism.

[[64]{#n64}]{.info}. Dr John L Tildsley, *Die Entstehung und die
oekonomischen Grundsätze des Chartismus* (Jena, 1898), pp 2-4.

[[65]{#n65}]{.info}. The Society of the Seasons (*Société des Saisons*)
--- a secret socialist republican organisation, led by Blanqui and
Barbès, which was active in Paris in 1837-39 --- Editor.

[[66]{#n66}]{.info}. De la Hodde, *Histoire des sociétés secrètes et du
parti républicain* (Paris, 1850), p 224.

[[67]{#n67}]{.info}. In his estimation of the views of Guizot and his
followers on the question of the class struggle Plekhanov is uncritical
in bringing together their views and those of Marx and Engels. He does
not show the qualitative distinctions between them or the new principles
brought by Marxism into the theory of the class struggle --- Editor.

[[68]{#n68}]{.info}. As an illustration, I shall remind the reader of a
passage quoted above from Guizot's *De la Démocratie*, which was written
in 1849: 'The struggle between the various classes of our society has
filled our history\... Nobles and third estate, aristocracy and
democracy, bourgeois and workingmen\... --- all these have been so many
forms, so many phases of the social struggle\...' This is almost
literally what is said in the beginning of the *Manifesto*'s opening
chapter.

[[69]{#n69}]{.info}. *Sozialismus und soziale Bewegung im 19
Jahrhundert*, pp 1-2.

[[70]{#n70}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 117 --- Editor.

[[71]{#n71}]{.info}. See above. \[Guizot, *Du Gouvernement de la France
depuis la Restauration et du ministère actuel*, pp 91, 127 --- MIA.\]

[[72]{#n72}]{.info}. Cf the introduction to *Zur Kritik*, which shows so
well the significance that Marx attached to the word society. Cf also
*Die heilige Familie*, p 189. \[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 20 --- Editor.\]

[[73]{#n73}]{.info}. 'Critique de quelques concepts du marxisme',
*Devenir Social*, February 1898, pp 121-22.

[[74]{#n74}]{.info}. See E Curtius, *Griechische Geschichte* (Berlin,
1857), pp 254-55. Hegel's *Philosophie der Geschichte* (herausgegeben
von E Gans), p 261: 'Der Unterschied der Stände beruht auf der
Verschiedenheit der Localität.' \[Diacrii --- land-poor peasants of
Northern and North-East Attica; Paralii --- maritime dwellers, traders,
artisans, sailors; Pedii --- dwellers of the plains, big landowners in
Ancient Greece (sixth century BC) --- Editor.\]

[[75]{#n75}]{.info}. Little Russia --- the name of the Ukraine used in
official documents in tsarist Russia --- Editor.

[[76]{#n76}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 120 --- Editor.

[[77]{#n77}]{.info}. That this impact is on the whole being achieved
with a considerable degree of success is shown by the universal growth
of socialist parties.

[[78]{#n78}]{.info}. We shall note, incidentally, that to identify the
'peasants' with the 'proletarians of recent times' is most strange in a
man with quite a good acquaintance with the literature on the subject.

[[79]{#n79}]{.info}. If this Introduction falls into the hands of the
learned Professor Kareyev, he will certainly exclaim with reference to
us as he has done in respect of another author \[that is, Beltov
(Plekhanov's pseudonym), which was the subject of Kareyev's article ---
Editor\]: 'And this is being said of Guizot, who recognised so important
a role for individual development! It is being said of Augustin Thierry
with his theory of races, which has played so important a role in
explaining events.' (*Studies Old and New*, p 209) The learned
professor's exclamations, however, stem from his ignorance of the
matter. Guizot did, indeed, ascribe considerable importance to
individual development, but with him that development figures as a
desirable consequence of social development, not as one of its main
causes. As for Thierry, his historical theory attaches considerable
importance, not to 'races' but to the conquest of one race by another.
What is the aim pursued by conquests? To this question Thierry would
have unhesitatingly replied: for the sake of positive (property)
interests. That, at least, is the reply given in his celebrated book
*Histoire de la conquête de l*\'*Angleterre par les Normands*. Let us
recall the following passage. Just before the Battle of Hastings, one of
the Angles said: 'We must fight because this is not a matter of a new
ruler to be accepted and taken\... this is a matter of quite a different
kind\... The Norman has given our lands to his captains, his knights and
all his men\... If the Duke becomes our king, he himself will be obliged
to let them have our property, our wives and our daughters.' For his
part, William the Conqueror said to his soldiers: 'Think of fighting
well and put them all to death, for if we vanquish, we shall all be
rich. What I shall gain, you will gain too; if I conquer, you will
conquer too; if I take the land, you will have it.' (See page 300 in
Volume 1 of the Paris edition of 1825.) Mr Kareyev's objections to
'economic materialism' are so full of misunderstandings and so empty of
content that they remind one of Proudhon's words: 'Il faut qu\'un
professeur parle, parle, parle non pas pour dire quelque chose, mais
pour ne pas rester muet.' \[\'A professor should speak, speak and yet
again speak, not in order to say something but just to avoid being
silent.' --- MIA.\]

[[80]{#n80}]{.info}. 'Preface', *Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*.
\[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*
(Moscow, 1970), p 20 --- Editor.\]

[[81]{#n81}]{.info}. See *De la démocratie en Amérique*, Volume 1
(Paris, 1836), p 74.

[[82]{#n82}]{.info}. *Nouvelle correspondance de Alexis Tocqueville*
(Paris, 1866); a letter to his father, dated 3 June 1830.

[[83]{#n83}]{.info}. Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 20 --- Editor.

[[84]{#n84}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 113 --- Editor.

[[85]{#n85}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 125 --- Editor.

[[86]{#n86}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 114 --- Editor.

[[87]{#n87}]{.info}. Here is an excellent example: Saint-Simon's
historical view had an idealistic foundation, yet he, as we have already
seen, was an economic materialist no less than Mignet, Guizot or
Augustin Thierry.

[[88]{#n88}]{.info}. Herr Bernstein asserts that 'the doctrine of the
class struggle rests on the foundation of the materialist understanding
of history' (*Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma* \[*Die Voraussetzungen
des Sozialismus*\] (London, 1900), p 17). The reader now knows that the
doctrine of the class struggle is possible not only on the foundation of
the materialist understanding of history. But what does that matter to
Herr Bernstein? He does not do any studying; he merely 'criticises'.

[[89]{#n89}]{.info}. The Russian translator of Herr Eduard Bernstein has
used the term 'production forces' instead of 'productive forces'
(*Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 6). That is utterly meaningless.

[[90]{#n90}]{.info}. Instead of 'final' causes the Russian translator
has said 'ultimate causes', which is completely out of place in Marx's
theory.

[[91]{#n91}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 9.

[[92]{#n92}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 488 --- Editor.

[[93]{#n93}]{.info}. F Engels to W Borgius, 25 January 1894, Karl Marx
and Frederick Engels, *Selected Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), pp
441-42 --- Editor.

[[94]{#n94}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 9.

[[95]{#n95}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 116 --- Editor.

[[96]{#n96}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 125 --- Editor.

[[97]{#n97}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 137 --- Editor.

[[98]{#n98}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 184 --- Editor.

[[99]{#n99}]{.info}. *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher*, p 82. \[Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p
185 --- Editor.\]

[[100]{#n100}]{.info}. *Die heilige Familie*, p 125.

[[101]{#n101}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 9. We have
cited this passage with the necessary corrections in the horrible
Russian translation. \[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 21 --- Editor.\]

[[102]{#n102}]{.info}. Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 20 --- Editor.

[[103]{#n103}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 158.

[[104]{#n104}]{.info}. We would ask the reader to recall the Mignet
proposition cited above: 'It is common knowledge that a force which has
won domination always gains control of institutions.' When a class
'gains control of the institutions', its dictatorship sets in.

[[105]{#n105}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 159.

[[106]{#n106}]{.info}. That is the more so because the proletarian
dictatorship will put an end to the existence of classes and
consequently to their struggle, with all the inevitable sufferings it
brings about. But that is something the bourgeoisie will not and cannot
understand because of its social position. It worked for dictatorship
and found it a necessary and quite permissible means of achieving its
aims during its struggle against the aristocracy. However, it began to
condemn that means and find it superfluous as soon as the question arose
of the dictatorship of the working class. This reminds us of the savage
who distinguishes between good and evil as follows: 'When I take
something away from others, that is good, but when something is taken
away from me, that is bad.' Much good will is needed to find convincing,
as Herr Bernstein does, the arguments of the bourgeoisie, with its fear
of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[[107]{#n107}]{.info}. Cf Jean Jaurès, 'Le Socialisme français',
*Cosmopolis*, January 1889, pp 119-21.

[[108]{#n108}]{.info}. *Usloviya Vozmozhnosti Sotsializma*, p 158.

[[109]{#n109}]{.info}. We have already said why the proletariat needs
that supremacy.

[[110]{#n110}]{.info}. See his Introduction (dated March 1895) to Marx's
*The Class Struggles in France 1848 to 1850*.

[[111]{#n111}]{.info}. 'Die Zeit der Ueberrumpelungen, der von kleinen
bewussten Minoritäten an der Spitze bewusstloser Massen durchgeführten
Revolutionen, ist vorbei. Wo es sich um eine vollständige Umgestaltung
der gesellschaftlichen Organisation handelt, da müssen die Massen selbst
dabei sein, selbst schon begriffen haben, worum es sich handelt, für was
sie eintreten sollen\... Damit aber die Massen verstehen, was zu thun
ist, dazu bedarf es langer, ausdauernder Arbeit \[etc\].' (Foreword,
*Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich*, p 16) \['the time of surprise
attacks, of revolutions carried through by small conscious minorities at
the head of unconscious masses, is past. Where it is a question of a
complete transformation of the social organisation, the masses
themselves must also be in it, must themselves already have grasped what
is at stake, what they are going in for, body and soul\... But in order
that the masses may understand what is to be done, long, persistent work
is required \[etc\].' (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), pp 199-200) --- Editor.\]

[[112]{#n112}]{.info}. Ibid, p 17. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 199 --- Editor.\]

[[113]{#n113}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 14-15. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), pp 196-99 --- Editor.\]

[[114]{#n114}]{.info}. Ibid, p 15. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 199 --- Editor.\]

[[115]{#n115}]{.info}. Ibid, p 17. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 201 --- Editor.\]

[[116]{#n116}]{.info}. Ibid, p 19. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 204 --- Editor.\]

[[117]{#n117}]{.info}. We consider it necessary to note that barricades
are a particular instance of the open struggle.

[[118]{#n118}]{.info}. 'the Communists disdain to conceal their views
and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by
the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling
classes tremble at a communistic revolution. The proletarians have
nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.' (*Communist
Manifesto*, p 19) \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 137 --- Editor.\]

[[119]{#n119}]{.info}. In the article 'Der Sozialismus in Deutschland'
(*Neue Zeit*, Year 10, Book 1, p 583), written in the year 1892, Engels,
speaking of the rapid penetration of socialist ideas into the army,
exclaimed: 'How many times have the bourgeois called upon us to renounce
for all time the use of revolutionary means and to remain within the
limits of legality\... *Unfortunately we are not in a position in this
case to please the bourgeois*\... \[Italics ours --- GP\] This does not
prevent us from understanding that it is not us that legality is killing
at present but somebody else. It is working so well for us that it would
be very foolish of us to infringe it.' \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 201 --- Editor.\] This is
the same thought that we found in the Introduction; only in the latter,
it was purposely given a vague wording, this on the insistence of
friends who, for practical considerations, considered any clarity in it
inconvenient (on this see Kautsky's article 'Bernstein and Dialektik',
*Neue Zeit*, Year 17, Book 2, p 47). By following his practical friends'
advice in this matter, Engels provided grounds for an erroneous
theoretical interpretation of his view, an interpretation which has led
to a mass of practical awkwardness far greater than all the
inconveniences that might follow a clear and unambiguous exposition of
his idea. This is a lesson to theorists too prone to make concessions;
they should remember that where it is a question of the wording of
theoretical views, men of practice are always highly unpractical.

[[120]{#n120}]{.info}. 'Happy are the drowsy for they will soon be fast
asleep.' --- Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
