---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# [The Irish Socialist Republican Party and the Dewsbury Election]{.small}

### (29 March 1902)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Irish Socialist Republican Party and the Dewsbury Election*,
**Justice**, 29 March 1902, p.6.\
Transcribed by Ted Crawford.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DEAR COMRADE.

I have so often received commendatory notices from **Justice** that I
can scarcely complain if now I receive a stricture, even although that
stricture may be, in my opinion, as wide of the truth as was the
commendation perhaps is the minds of other people. But whilst not
resenting I may yet point out the errors of your note in **Justice** of
the 15th inst.

After quoting the **Workers' Republic** in its notice of the treacherous
action of the United Irish League at Dewsbury -- a notice in which we
say that, "If it were not for the fact that Quelch's defeat meant a
distinct loss to the Socialist cause, I would have rejoiced over this
action of the U.I.L.," you say that "to rejoice over the defeat of our
candidate would be rather petty," and go on to labour that point. But,
comrade, the words you have quoted do not justify the interpretation
that we would have rejoiced at your defeat *under any circumstances*.
You are somewhat hasty; the rejoicing was to be over the action of the
U.I.L., not over the defeat of Quelch, and unless you are prepared to
take up the ridiculous position that success or defeat at Dewsbury lay
with the Irish Home Rulers to decide, your complaint is utterly beside
the mark. The words in our paper were written under circumstances of
great excitement and confusion, but now, considering them more calmly,
it may interest you to know that I withdraw that reservation entirely. I
am heartily and unfeignedly glad of the action of the Home Rulers at
Dewsbury as I would be at any action of theirs which would tend to
convince my English comrades that the Home Rule gang is a capitalist
concern, mouthing revolutionary phraseology in order to cloak utterly
reactionary practices and designs. The splendid vote polled by Quelch at
Dewsbury against such splenetic and treacherous opposition may be taken
now as registering the high-water mark of Socialist feeling in the
district; as such it gives heart to the comrades, but if we had to allow
for a large percentage of Home Rule votes the poll at Dewsbury would
have been utterly valueless to our cause. Therefore, I rejoice.

Now, *in re*, the manifesto. I, of course, accept your statement that
you never saw it. But, seeing that a marked copy of it was posted to you
in a regularly sealed and addressed envelope, you will admit that our
assumption that you had received it was by no means a rash one. Of
course, strange things do happen in the post. The issue of **Justice**
for January 11 only reached this office on March 4, but then the wrapper
bore the strange and wonderful address, "*Irish Republic*, 138, Upper
Abbey Street, *Durban*," so no wonder that went astray. Our manifesto
was noticed favourably in the Socialist press of Germany, France, and
America; that it should be ignored by the English Socialists to whom it
was addressed was not calculated to the promotion of fraternal feelings
between us.

On your attitude to the Irish Parliamentary Party and my election
address: The reference to being "anxious to shield" was, of course,
inspired by the manifesto business noted above, the manifesto being an
attack upon Home Rulers. The statement that you attempted to rebut our
assertion that the action of the U.I.L. was inconsistent and treacherous
does seem to me at least to be borne out by the passages in **Justice**
in which you first noticed the address spoken of. I may have
misunderstood you. My citation of Lanarkshire and Dewsbury was addressed
to the electors of Dublin upon whose religious feelings our enemies were
playing by declaring that no Catholic could vote for a Socialist -- a
cry afterwards endorsed by the priests. Obviously it was, therefore,
good policy to point out that those same gentry had advised Irish
Catholics in Lanarkshire to vote for a man who claimed to be a
Socialist, and whom they had formerly denounced as a Socialist; and at
the time the election address was published the **Dublin Evening
Telegraph**, the evening edition of the **Freeman's Journal**, had
recommended Quelch to the Irish electors at Dewsbury. This was at the
time the only thing like an official pronouncement upon your election
contest.

Thanking you in anticipation for the insertion of this somewhat lengthy
epistle, and inclosing a copy of the manifesto all the bother is about,

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | I am, yours fraternally,\         |
|                                   | JAMES CONNOLY.\                   |
|                                   | 6, Lower Liffey Street, Dublin.   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### Editorial Note

We readily give space to this letter, and are pleased to have to
acknowledge that we misunderstood the reference to the Dewsbury result.
It was a mistake for which we apologise. We note now that it was at the
action of the U.I.L. and not at the defeat of our candidate, that our
Irish comrades would have rejoiced. For ourselves we never attached so
much importance to the action of the U.I.L. in that connection as did
some of our friends; the chief point was that in the peculiar
circumstances of the case, in which it was stated that our candidate had
been "foisted on the constituency," great capital was made by our
enemies out of any pronouncement made against us by any representative
body. We are under no delusion as to the composition of the Irish
Parliamentary Party, and if the Liberal candidate had been an honest
Home Ruler it would have been quite consistent for them to have
supported him rather than a Socialist; seeing, however, that he was an
Imperialist, their action was somewhat inconsistent. In another part of
this paper we publish the manifesto referred to above. In the main we
are in entire agreement with it. We have said practically the same thing
ourselves about the Irish Parliamentary Party, and the manifesto leaves
our withers unwrung. At the same time, because we do hold these opinions
about the I.P.P. we can scarcely regard their hostility to Socialists,
except under very exceptional circumstances -- as "inconsistent." We do
not regard Liberal opposition to us as inconsistent, except when their
only choice is between a Socialist and a reactionary Tory, or when,
while professing to be anti-jingoes, they vote for an Imperialist in
preference to a Socialist. Otherwise their opposition is quite logical
and consistent. For the rest, we can only say that we never had any
reason -- as Connolly seems to have supposed -- for not giving publicity
to the manifesto but, whatever the cause may have been, it never came
into our hands until we received it with the above letter.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
