---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Taken Root!

### (1902)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, March 1902.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Irish Socialist Republican Party was founded in Dublin in May, 1896.
Six working men assisted at its birth. The founders were poor, like the
remainder of their class, and had arrayed against them all those things
that are supposed to be essential to success. They were without a press
of any kind, their propaganda was generally supposed to be hostile to
the religious views of the majority of the people, no great or
well-known name allied itself to them, they had to count on the bitter
opposition of all the organised parties which defend the interests of
the propertied class, their opponents had more sovereigns to spare for
political work than they had coppers, they were in a country undeveloped
industrially, and a country in which political freedom was not fully
realised, and where, therefore, the political mission of Liberalism or
middle-class reformers was not yet exhausted -- in short they were
handicapped as no other party in this country ever yet were handicapped;
hated by the government, held in distrust by the people, and in short
generally regarded as Ishmaels in the political life of Ireland.

But that little band of pioneers stuck to their work manfully, and
despite all discouragements and rebuffs continued sowing the seeds of
Socialist working-class revolt in the furrows of discontent ploughed by
the capitalist system of society. To-day they can look back on their
work with pride. Nowhere, it is true, have they yet succeeded in getting
on their side that majority necessary to place the nominee of their
party, the SRP, on the seats of the elected ones -- that triumph is
indeed not yet vouchsafed to them -- but he would indeed be a very
ignorant or a very presumptuous person who would essay to review the
possibilities of the political situation in Dublin, and would leave this
little fighting party out of his calculations. In the elections just
ended *eight hundred votes were cast for Socialism* in the only two
wards of this city our finances allowed us to contest. These votes were
cast for no milk-and-water, ratepaying, ambiguous 'Labour' candidates,
but for the candidates of a party which in the very stress and storm of
the fight instructed its standard bearers to refuse to sign the pledge
of the compromising Labour Electoral body, and to stand or fall by the
full spirit and meaning of its revolutionary policy.

These 800 votes were cast for Socialism in spite of a campaign of
calumny unequalled in its infamy, in spite of the fact that the solemn
terrors of religion were invoked on behalf of the capitalist candidates,
in spite of the most shameless violation by our opponents of the spirit
of the Corrupt Practices' Act, and despite the boycott of the press. No
other party ever had such a dead weight to lift ere they could appear as
a recognised force in political life; no other party could have lifted
such a weight so gallantly and so well. What is the secret of the
wonderful progress of this party? The secret lies not in the personality
of leaders, nor in the ability of propagandists; it lies in the fact
that all the propaganda and teaching of this party was, from the outset,
based upon the Class Struggle -- upon a recognition of the fact that the
struggle between the Haves and the Have Nots was the controlling factor
in politics, and that this fight could only be ended by the working
class seizing hold of political power and using this power to transfer
the ownership of the means of life, viz, land and machinery of
production, from the hands of private individuals to the community, from
individual to social or public ownership.

This party had against it all the organised forces of society -- of a
society founded upon robbery, but it had on its side a latent force
stronger than them all, the material interests of the Working Class. The
awakened recognition of that material interest has carried us far; it
will carry us in triumph to the end.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
