---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Ireland and Ulster: [An Appeal to the Working Class]{.small}        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From [Irish Worker]{.underline}, 4 April 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this great crisis of the history of Ireland, I desire to appeal to
the working class -- the only class whose true interests are always on
the side of progress -- to take action to prevent the betrayal of their
interests contemplated by those who have planned the exclusion of part
of Ulster from the Home Rule Bill. Every effort is now being made to
prevent the voice of the democracy being heard in those counties and
boroughs which it is callously proposed to cut off from the rest of
Ireland. Meetings are being rushed through in other parts of Ireland,
and at those meetings wirepullers of the United Irish League and the
Ancient Order of Hibernians (Board of Erin) are passing resolutions
approving of the exclusion, whilst you who will suffer by this dastardly
proposal are never even consulted, but, on the contrary, these same
organisations are working hard to prevent your voice being heard, and
have done what they could to prevent the calling of meetings, of holding
of demonstrations at which you could register your hatred of their
attempt to betray you into the hand of the sworn enemies of democracy,
of labour, and of nationality.

An instance of this attempt to misrepresent you may be quoted from the
Irish press of March 26. In a letter from the Irish Press Agency it
says:

> "The proposal, representing the limit of concession and made 'as the
> price of peace' would only mean, if accepted, that the Counties of
> Down, Derry, Antrim and Armagh would remain as they are for six years
> at the end of which time they would come in automatically under Home
> Rule. They know, too, that the Nationalists in these four counties are
> perfectly willing to assent to this arrangement and that they are the
> Nationalists most concerned."

Remember that this is a quotation from a letter sent out by the Irish
Press Agency and that copies of it are supplied by the agents of the
Irish Parliamentary Party to every newspaper in Ireland and to Liberal
papers in England, and you will see how true is my statement that you
are being betrayed, that the men whom you trusted are busily engaged in
rigging up a fake sentiment in favour of this betrayal of your
interests. For the statements contained in the letter just quoted are,
in the first part, deliberately misleading and, and in the second part,
an outrageous falsehood.

The statement that the counties excluded would come in automatically at
the end of six years is deliberately misleading because, as was
explained in the House of Commons, two General Elections would take
place before the end of that time. If at either of these General
Elections the Tories got a majority -- and it is impossible to believe
that the Liberals can win the other two elections successively -- it
would only require the passage of a small Act of not more than three or
four lines to make the exclusion perpetual. And the Tories would pass
it. What could prevent them? You can prevent them getting the chance by
insisting upon the whole Home Rule Bill and no exclusion, being passed
now. If you do not act now, your chance is gone.

The second part of the statement I have quoted is an outrageous
falsehood, as every one knows. The Nationalists of the four counties
have not been asked their opinion, and if any politician would dare to
take a plebiscite upon this question of exclusion or no exclusion, the
democracy of Ulster would undoubtedly register a most emphatic refusal
to accept this proposal. And yet so-called Home Rule journals are
telling the world that you are quite willing to be cut off from Ireland
and placed under the heel of the intolerant gang of bigots and enemies
of progress who for so long have terrorised Ulster.

Men and women, consider! If your lot is a difficult one now, subject as
you are to the rule of a gang who keep up the fires of religious bigotry
in order to divide the workers, and make united progress impossible; if
your lot is a difficult one, even when supported by the progressive and
tolerant forces of all Ireland, how difficult and intolerable it will be
when you are cut off from Ireland, and yet are regarded as alien to
Great Britain, and left at the tender mercies of a class who knows no
mercy, of a mob poisoned by ignorant hatred of everything national and
democratic.

Do not be misled by the promises of politicians. Remember that Mr.
Birrell, Chief Secretary, solemnly promised that a representative of
Dublin Labour would sit upon the Police Inquiry Commission in Dublin,
and that he broke his solemn promise. Remember that Mr. Redmond pledged
his word at Waterford that the Home Rule Bill would go through without
the loss of a word or a comma, and almost immediately afterwards he
agreed to the loss of four counties and two boroughs. Remember that the
whole history of Ireland is a record of betrayals by politicians and
statesmen, and remembering this, spurn their lying promises and stand up
for a United Ireland -- an Ireland broad based upon the union of Labour
and Nationality.

You are not frightened by the mock heroics of a pantomime army. Nobody
in Ulster is. If the politicians in Parliament pretend to be frightened,
it is only in order to find an excuse to sell you. Do not be sold.
Remember that when soldiers were ordered out to shoot you down in the
Belfast Dock Strike of 1907 no officer resigned then rather than shed
blood in Ulster, and when some innocent members of our class were shot
down in the Falls Road, Belfast, no Cabinet Ministers apologised to the
relatives of the poor workers they had murdered. Remember that more than
a thousand Dublin men, women and children were brutally beaten and
wounded by the police a few months ago, and three men and one girl
killed, but no officer resigned, and neither Tory nor Home Rule press
protested against the coercion of Dublin. Why, then, the hypocritical
howl against compelling the pious sweaters of Ulster and their dupes to
obey the will of the majority? Remember the A.O.H., the U.I.L. and the
Irish Parliamentary Party cheered on the Government when it sent its
police to bludgeon the Nationalist workers of Dublin. Now the same
organisation and the same party cheers on the same treacherous
Government when it proposes to surrender you into the hands of the
Carsonite gang. As the officers of the Curragh have stood by their
class, so let the working-class democracy of Ulster stand by its class
and all Irish workers from Malin Head to Cape Clear and from Dublin to
Galway will stand by you.

Let your motto be that of James Fintan Lalor, the motto which the
working class Irish Citizen Army has adopted as its aim and object,
viz.:

> That the entire ownership of Ireland \[all Ireland\] -- moral and
> material -- is vested of right in the entire people of Ireland.

And, adopting this as your motto, let it be heard and understood that
Labour in Ireland stands for the unity of Ireland -- an Ireland united
in the name of progress, and who shall separate us?

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.8.2003
