---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Exclusion of Ulster

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Forward**, 11 April 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/){target="new"} in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Socialists and Labour people generally in Great Britain have had good
reason to deplore the existence of the Irish question and to realise how
disastrous upon the chances of their candidates has been the fact of the
existence in the constituences of a large mass of organised voters whose
political activities were not influenced solely or even largely by the
domestic issues before the electors. Our British comrades have had long
and sore experience of contests in which all the arguments and all the
local feeling were on the side of the Socialist or Labour candidate, and
yet that local candidate was ignominiously defeated because there
existed in the constituency a large Irish vote -- a large mass of voters
who supported the Liberal, not because they were opposed to Labour, but
because they wanted Ireland to have Home Rule.

Our British comrades have learned that the existence of that Irish vote
and the knowledge that it would be cast for the Home Rule official
candidate, irrespective of his record on or his stand upon Labour
matters, caused hundreds of thousands who otherwise would have voted
Labour to vote Liberal in dread that the Irish defection would "let the
Tory in." For a generation now the Labour movement in Great Britain has
been paralysed politically by this fear; and all hands have looked
forward eagerly to the time when the granting of Home Rule would remove
their fear and allow free expression to all the forces that make for a
political Labour movement in that country. Even many of the actions and
votes of the Labour party in the House of Commons which have been
strenuously complained of have been justified by that Party on the plea
that it was necessary to keep in power the government that would get
Home Rule out of the way. Now, in view of this experience of the
Socialist movement in Great Britain, we can surely not view with any
complacency a proposal chat will keep that question to the front as a
live issue at British elections for six years longer or rather for a
totally indefinite period. We know that this "six years period" so
glibly spoken of by politicians has no background of reality to justify
the belief that that term can be considered as more than a mere figure
of speech.

In the **Daily News and Leader** of 6th April, Mr. H.W. Massingham,
writing of the Ulster Limit, says, and the saying is valuable as
indicative of the trend of Liberal thought:

> "Should we, therefore, make an absolutely dead halt at the six years--
> milestone? Both parties implicity admit that that is impossible, for
> one Parliament cannot bind another."

And in the previous week the Liberal Solicitor General declared in
Parliament that if within the six years-- period

> "the other side brought in a Bill to exclude Ulster, it would have a
> royal and triumphant procession to the foot of the throne."

Thus we have it clearly foreshadowed that there is no such thing as a
six years' limit which can be binding upon future Parliaments and that
therefore the question of Home Rule for the Ulster Counties will be a
test question at future elections in Great Britain, and will then play
there the same disastrous role for the Labour movement as the question
of Home Rule does now. The political organisation of the Home Rule party
will be kept alive in every industrial constituency on the pretext of
working for a 'United Ireland,' and in the same manner the Unionist
Party will also keep up its special organisations, Orange Lodges, etc.,
in order to keep alive the sectarian appeal to the voters from Ireland
who will be asked to "vote against driving Ulster under the heels of the
Papish Dublin Parliament." Labour men in and out of Ireland have often
declared that if Home Rule was wanted for no other purpose, it was
necessary in order to allow of the solidifying of the Labour vote in
Great Britain, and the rescue of the Irish voters in that country from
their thraldom to the Liberal caucus. It might not be far from the truth
to surmise that the Liberal Party managers have seen the same point as
clearly as we did ourselves, and have quietly resolved that such a good
weapon as the Nationalist Party sentiment should not be entirely
withdrawn from their armoury. The reader will also see that with a
perfectly Mephistophelian subtlety the question of exclusion is not
suggested to be voted upon by any large area where the chances for or
against might be fairly equal, where exclusion might be defeated as it
might be if all Ulster were the venue of the poll, and all Ulster had to
stay out or come in as a result of the verdict of the ballot box. No,
the counties to be voted on the question are the counties where the
Unionists are in an overwhelming majority, and where therefore the vote
is a mere farce -- a subterfuge to hide the grossness of the betrayal of
the Home Rule electors. Then again each county or borough enters or
remains outside according to its own vote, and quite independent of the
vote of its neighbours in Ulster. Thus the Home Rule question as far as
Ulster is concerned, may be indefinitely prolonged and kept alive as an
issue to divide and disrupt the Labour vote in Great Britain.

The effect of such exclusion upon Labour in Ireland will be at least
equally, and probably more, disastrous. All hopes of uniting the
workers, irrespective of religion or old political battle cries will be
shattered, and through North and South the issue of Home Rule will be
still used to cover the iniquities of the capitalist and landlord class.
I am not speaking without due knowledge of the sentiments of the
organised Labour movement in Ireland when I say that we would much
rather see the Home Rule Bill defeated than see it carried with Ulster
or any part of Ulster left out.

Meanwhile, as a study in political disparity, watch the manoeuvres of
the Home Rule Party on this question. The deal is already, I believe,
framed up, but when the actual vote is to be taken in the Counties of
Down, Antrim, Derry and Armagh and the Boroughs of Belfast and Derry,
Messrs. Redmond, Devlin and Co. will tour these counties and boroughs
letting loose floods of oratory asking for votes against exclusion and
thus will delude the workers into forgetting the real crime, *viz.*,
consenting to make the unity of the Irish Nation a subject to be decided
by the votes of the most bigoted and passion-blinded reactionaries in
these four counties where such reactionaries are in the majority. The
betrayal is agreed upon, I repeat, the vote is only a subterfuge to hide
the grossness of the betrayal.

It still remains to be seen whether the working class agitation cannot
succeed in frightening these vampires from the feast they are promising
themselves upon the corpse of a dismembered Ireland.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
