---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # The Solidarity of Labour                                            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Forward**, 18 April 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This being Easter week, the news from Ireland for the readers of
**Forward** will necessarily be of a short and scrappy character. We are
all busy enjoying ourselves, and as this is the last Easter before the
red flames of war will light up our hilltops and the red rivers of blood
flow along our valleys (ahem!), our amusements must perforce be
absorbing and exciting. For it is an awful and serious thing to think
that in a month or two the wooden guns of Ulster may go off, and the
trained ambulance corps may be wrestling with the problems of how to tie
up broken heads or staunch the flow of blood from bleeding noses.

We may not see "red ruin and the breaking up of laws," but we may see
the breaking of window panes and hear the rattle of cobble stones upon
our doors.

The wooden guns of Ulster! Aye, but let us be frank with ourselves and
confess that the wooden guns of Ulster have, at least, succeeded in
frightening the Liberals, or if they have not frightened them, then the
Liberals are engaged in the greatest game of sham these countries have
ever seen. They are pretending to be frightened in order to cover their
action in going back on all the promises with which they have held the
Home Rulers of Great Britain and Ireland in leash for a generation.
Charles Stewart Parnell could have got Home Rule with Ulster excluded
thirty years ago. We have been told *ad nauseam* about the statesmanlike
qualities of John E. Redmond as the leader of the Irish race, and yet it
appears that his statesmanship has brought his followers to the point of
accepting with joyful eagerness and gratitude that which Parnell
rejected with scorn thirty years ago. A more miserable fiasco than this
ignominious collapse of a great national movement is not recorded in
history.

To this poor end have come all the glorious promises, and this poor
reward is all the Irish Party can show for its persistent fight against
Labour in every three-cornered election in Great Britain, in every
municipal election without exception in Ireland.

It is to us a grim comment upon the boasted solidarity of Labour when we
see a Labour M.P., in Great Britain, calmly announcing that he prefers
to follow the official representatives of Irish capitalism rather than
the spokesman of 86,000 organised Irish workers, and that he does so
because the latter are yet too weak to protect themselves politically --
have no votes to deliver in Parliament, whereas their enemies have.

Personally I make no complaint about the position taken up by Mr. George
N. Barnes, M.P., and his colleagues. I do not complain because I
expected it. I have always preached in Ireland that politically we were
far behind the English and Scots workers, that many of the measures we
required as an imperative necessity were already in working order in
Great Britain, and that it was absurd to expect the British working men
to turn aside to fight our political battles when his own required so
much effort and sacrifice.

On these lines of argument I have fought for the establishment of a
Labour Party in Ireland, for the separate political organisation of the
Irish workers and for the separate economic and industrial organisation
of the Irish workers on a more revolutionary basis than was usual in
England and Scotland. This I felt to be wise, because, as much of
Ireland is practically unorganised, I do not see the necessity of us
committing all the mistakes in organisation already made in Britain,
when we have so much practically virgin soil to till in industrial
organisation here.

In doing this, in carrying on such a propaganda, I have been continually
subject to misrepresentation and even abuse. I have been told that I was
no Internationalist, that I was preaching hatred of England, that I was
a disruptor. In vain for me to insist that the usual mistake of the
Englishman, viz., that he understood Irish problems better than the
Irish did themselves applied quite as strongly to British Socialists as
to the British ruling class, and that therefore the Irish Socialists
should work out their own policy and create their own literature, and
that we must expect to be misunderstood until we could compel
recognition by our own strength. For preaching this doctrine I have
generally suffered the boycott from the official Socialists in Great
Britain, and dislike from those in Ireland who followed their lead. But
now comes along Comrade George N. Barnes, M.P., and he blandly
acknowledges that Socialism in England in the votes of its Parliamentary
representatives will take its cue from the representatives of an Irish
party that openly avows in Ireland its hatred of Socialism and its
opposition to Independent Labour representation in this country. This, I
take it, is a confirmation of my position that the Irish workers must
work out their own salvation, and that in the process of working it out
they need not be astonished if the working-class leaders in Great
Britain utterly fail to understand them.

This question of presenting Socialism so that it will appeal to the
peculiar hereditary instincts and character of the people amongst whom
you are operating is one of the first importance to the Socialist and
Labour movement. A position, theoretically sound, may fail if expressed
in terms unsuited to the apprehension of those to whom you are
appealing. For years I fretted at what I considered the utterly foolish
attitude of certain Socialist propagandists in Great Britain. Their
arguments did not appeal to me, and I did not believe that they could
appeal to anyone else. Since then I have come to believe that these
people, perhaps, understood the psychology of their own countrymen
better than I did, and that this question of psychology or mental
make-up was of fundamental importance. Since that dawned upon me, I have
painstakingly stuck to the endeavour to translate Socialist doctrines
into terms understood by the Irish, in or out of Ireland. I fancy that I
have at least in that respect set a headline for abler persons than
myself to copy in future. But we cannot deal with Ireland without
getting entangled in the question of religion. Hence I have got
frequently involved in disputes centring around that point. Now observe
this confession! I have, I believe, fairly well presented my case on
that subject, but my case was the case for workers to whom the
traditions and aspirations of Irish Nationality had been of prime
importance. That achievement was reserved for, and I think has been most
excellently performed by our Comrade John Wheatley and his colleagues of
the Catholic Socialist Society. Nowhere have I come across literature so
well suited for the purpose of making Socialists of Catholics; my own
poor attempts have been, as I have said, directed to the enrolment in my
ranks of Irish workers.

All this is a digression in a sense, but an understanding of it may
explain to the reader 'that tired feeling' that comes across us in
Ireland when we witness the love embraces which take place between the
Parliamentary Labour Party deadliest enemies -- the Home Rule Party. I
say our deadliest enemies, because the Unionist Party is only a
negligible quantity except in a small corner of Ireland, and in that
corner it is not destined to be permanent. We do not get angry when we
see these things or read such letters; we simply say -- "What the devil
is up with those fellows?"

There will be no bad feeling over such letters as Mr. Barnes', or the
implied refusal of the Labour Party to pay any attention to the request
of organised Labour in Ireland, but it will not help on a better
understanding between the militant proletariat of the two islands.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.8.2003
