---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# British and Russian Imperialism I

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 3 September, 1898.\
Transcribed & marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

His Imperial Highness, the Czar of All the Russias, has issued a
manifesto in favour of universal disarmament. This is the silly season
\... His rule is founded on the sword, and can only be maintained by the
sword, and whatever seriousness there is in his latest pronouncement may
be translated into an appeal to his brother despots throughout Europe to
cease warring with each other in order that their hands may be free to
throttle the infant liberty in their own dominions. Humanitarians
indeed! Will Russia withdraw her troops from Warsaw and depend only on
the loyalty and affection of the Poles \...? The Czar, we repeat is
having his little joke. He speaks to-day of universal peace, in order
that when, in the near future, he hurls his armies across the frontier
into China, India or Constantinople, or whelms in blood the aspirations
for freedom on the part of his own subjects, he may be able to point to
this action of his as proof that the battle was not of his seeking. From
the Cabinets of every European Government all the other conspirators
against the freedom of the human race echo his cry, and even while they
are ordering new armaments and equipping new fleets, protest the
intensity of their desire for peace. 'Twas ever thus \... But universal
disarmament is not a dream. The day will come, and perhaps like a bolt
from the blue when the frontiers \... will not be sufficient to prevent
the handclasp of friendship between the peoples. But that day will come
only when the kings and kaisers, queens and czars, financiers and
capitalists who now oppress humanity will be hurled from their place and
power, and the emancipated workers of the earth, no longer the blind
instruments of rich men's greed will found a new society, a new
civilisation, whose corner stone will be labour, whose inspiring
principle will be justice, whose limits humanity alone can bound.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
