---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 3 September 1898.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The compositor fiend had his innings last week. Whether it was
revolutionary enthusiasm or loyalist spleen which disturbed his brain we
know not, but we do know that pages 3 and 7 and part of page 6 of our
last issue presented to the readers a new species of grammar and
orthography decidedly unknown to the writers of this paper.

The spelling was as vile as the principles of a hireling scribe on an
Unionist or Home Rule newspaper, and the grammar was as doubtful as the
patriotism of a politician.

We are assured by the printer that precautions have been taken to
prevent the recurrence of such mistakes. We hope so. The fiend capable
of such an atrocity as we complain of ought to be bound hand and foot
and thrown among the wild beasts -- in the City Hall.

**United Ireland**, which still drags on its painful career, presumably
by means of the donations begged from the country priests, takes us to
task for our exposure of the double-dealing practised by certain leading
lights in the '98 Executive, in the matter of speech-making and
toast-drinking.

It asks can we not "recognise the distinction between the men who
ostentatiously drink a toast which a Nationalist cannot with regard to
himself honour, and the person who, though present when the toast is
given, does not drink it, but treats it with calm indifference".

How beautifully that sentence is worded. The *suggestio falsi* was never
more cleverly introduced. Mr Harrington does not attempt to *prove* that
the persons referred to did not drink the loyal toast, but he gently
hints to them a way by which they can escape the censure they so richly
deserve.

We can imagine these gentlemen as soon as they read the paragraph in
**United Ireland** immediately chorussing, "Yes, that's it, we were
there of course but we did not drink the toast, we treated the toast
with indifference."

But swallowed the liquor with joy.

Now in order to prove the absurdity of this excuse let us put a parallel
case. Suppose that at each of the functions referred to, viz, the Press
Banquet at Malahide and Health Congress Banquet in Dublin, the convenors
had put upon the list of toasts, *An Irish Republic*; would the
loyalists present have sat in silence or allowed their names to go to
the newspapers as participating in the function?

And if they had would *their* newspapers have remained silent over the
matter as our Home Rule rags have done?

Is it too much to expect that our Nationalist politicians (so-called)
shall at least be as consistent in their public actions as the Unionists
whom they pretend to oppose?

Does not the howl set up by all those middle-class journalists when any
of their number is exposed, and their little treacheries held up to the
light of day, betray an uneasy conscience?

But **United Ireland** wants the **Workers' Republic** to be more
impartial, forsooth. It asks what about Alderman Pile who, "at a dinner
recently not only drank the health of the Queen but proposed the toast
himself and bubbled all over with delight when he saw his guests
honouring it"?

Well, never in our wildest dreams did we imagine Alderman Pile to be a
Nationalist. He owes his position in the Corporation of Dublin to the
fact that that body is elected on a restricted franchise. He is a
fitting representative of the middle-class who elected him.

Like yourself, Tim, my dear boy, he is not, nor, perhaps, ever would be
elected to that body by the workers' votes.

But, **United Ireland** continues, "Alderman Pile was, a few days before
this loyal performance, co-opted on the Wolfe Tone Committee."

Sorry to hear it, but not surprised. The Wolfe Tone Committee is the
child of the '98 Executive, which at its inception was thoroughly honest
and patriotic, but which is now dominated and controlled by the quondam
members of Mr Harrington's United Irishmen Centennial Association.

It is a pity the Wolfe Tone Committee should so co-opt some men who
propose and other men who drink loyal toasts, but after swallowing Mr
Harrington's nest of wire-pullers, it should easily assimilate a common
or garden Alderman.

Why do we insist so much upon outspokeness in such matters? Because
there is just now a perfect land-slide in a loyalist direction in
Ireland. Home Rule Lord Mayors shaking hands with Tory Lord Lieutenants,
Home Rule Editors drinking loyal toasts to-day and writing "patriotic
articles" tomorrow, Home Rule Corporations electing Tory Lord Mayors,
the conquest of Ireland at last accepted and ratified by her sons.

Said Darby the Blast in Lever's novel, **Tom Burke of Ours**, "Bad luck
to the gintry, 'tis the gintry ever and always betrayed us."

Since our Home Rule politicians were graciously permitted to associate
with Lords and Earls on the Financial Relations agitation, all the
virility and aggressiveness has gone out of our public life, and our
politicians are now afraid to utter a single sentence which might not
suit their new allies.

If this loyalist reaction is to be stopped and the tide of public
feeling set flowing in a more healthy direction, we require strong,
vigorous speech and action, both in public and private.

Therefore we say: away with middle-class leadership, which means
middle-class compromise, middle-class trickery, middle-class
time-serving, middle-class treachery. Room for the strong hand and clear
brain of Labour.

We can assure our friends there is no trace of personal feeling in our
attitude towards the middle-class politicians and their hireling
scribes.

If we cherish any other feeling towards them than that of amused
contempt it must be that feeling which animates the naturalist when he
gazes upon some strange freak of nature -- just newly caught and not yet
classified.

The "freaks" which abound in Irish politics to-day are in our opinion
the outcome of the foolishness of so many of our countrymen in insisting
upon a "broad platform".

They will have no exclusiveness, they tell us, and open out their ranks
to all who like to enter, and no questions asked. Their organizations
are run on the same principles as Barnum's menagerie. Pay the entrance
money and you have the run of the show.

As a result they get what they want, a "broad platform", so broad in
fact is it you can neither discover where it begins or ends.

For our part we are for a narrow platform, a platform so narrow that
there will not be a place on it where anyone not an uncompromising enemy
of tyranny can rest the soles of his feet.

And yet broad enough for every honest man. Eh, Tim.

Next for shaving.

"Roll on, thou deep and dark blue Ocean, roll." So sang the poet in his
most condescending mood. But I have never heard that the ocean rolled
either faster or slower because of the permission thus graciously
accorded to it.

And I am just inclined to think that the onward rolling ocean of Labour
will pay as little heed to the bland advice which the Dublin dailies are
so freely distributing on the question of labour representation.

Now that the scribes perceive the working men are determined on having
their class represented they are all purring forth their approval of the
step. As they are not strong enough to oppose they seem resolved to try
what flattery can do to prevent the working men entering the Council
animated with strong class feelings.

If they are so convinced of the value of labour representation, how many
parliamentary seats are they prepared to hand over to labour candidates?
Eh, my soft-spoken friends.

Now don't all speak at once. We know you all are in Parliament at an
immense sacrifice to yourselves, and that you only remain there for your
country's sake, so the opportunity of leaving it will be a perfect
godsend to you. Who will hand up his seat to a *bona fide*
representative of labour, chosen, say, by the Trades Councils of Dublin,
Waterford, Cork and Limerick respectively?

What, no answer. You are still resolved to sacrifice yourselves for your
country's good -- on the cushioned seats and in the well-upholstered
smoke-rooms of the British Parliament.

Heroic self-sacrifice, unselfish devotion!

The **Freeman's Journal**, commenting on the Bristol Trades Union
Congress, declares that a period has opened in which the war between
labour and capital will be waged in a more bitter and uncompromising
spirit than ever.

It declares that the recent engineers' lockout has proven the crushing
strength masters can bring to bear when organized, and regrets the
defeat of the unions, not, mark, because the **Freeman's Journal**
sympathises with labour, but because, in its own words, "they (the
unions) have acted as the *most effective of all defences against the
revolutionary ideas* that find such fertile soil in France, Germany or
Italy. Their disappearance would not mean the cessation of the activity
of the workers for their advantage, but the diversion of it into new and
far more dangerous channels."

I am glad to hear a capitalistic organ like the **Freeman** so openly
admitting that Socialism is a more "dangerous" foe to the exploitation
or robbery of labour than trade unions are. But what shall we say then
of the danger (to oppression) of trades unionism and Socialism
*combined*, as they are on the Continent, and as they will be here when
the Irish worker divests himself of the fear of politics in trade unions
-- a fear imported into this country from the conservative, slow-moving
trade organizations of Great Britain.

The London correspondent of the **Freeman** also informs us that "the
Trades Union Congress is presided over, for the first time, by a
Socialist, and moreover by an Irishman, Mr James O'Grady of Bristol."

He then goes on to say -- "Mr O'Grady is possessed of sound common
sense." Of course, Mr Correspondent, that is why he is a Socialist.

Go thou and do likewise.

And be assured that the democracy of Ireland are not in the least afraid
of "revolutionary ideas" even if the old woman of Prince's Street is.

If you shriek in our ears about "Continental Socialism", we will shout
back "'tis better than British capitalism", which will be a comforting
reflection to cheer the heart of a

SPAILPÍN.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
