---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Irish Land Question

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 24 September, 1898.\
Transcribed & marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For very many years we have seen the London Parliament sending forth
Land Act after Land Act, each and every one of them heralded by a
declaration that it embodied a complete cure for the land question in
Ireland. To-day the land question is as far from being settled as ever
it was; at least in appearance. The reason may escape the eye of the
Home Rule or Unionist editor, who dare not notice any point of
industrial development other than it suits the interests of his
employers to bring before the public, but it is very palpable indeed to
all who seek, with unbiassed minds, to ascertain the truth.

The successive Land Purchase Bills, Land Courts for adjustment of rents,
etc., are perhaps powerful enough in softening the rigour of the
relations between landlord and tenant; and were this island surrounded
by a wall of brass shutting out the world from intercourse, might serve
to settle for a long time the agrarian disputes in Ireland. But as long
as the produce of Irish farmers must sell upon the market side by side
with the produce of countries better situated, better equipped and
better organised for agricultural operations, so long will the Irish
produce be undersold: so long will Irish farming fail to pay. Were the
landlords to disappear to-morrow, and their titles to land to become
extinct, the peasant proprietors remaining would still be involved in a
hopeless struggle for subsistence, whilst this island remains dominated
by capitalistic conditions.

Every perfection of agricultural methods or machinery lowers prices;
every fall in prices renders more unstable the position of the farmer,
whether tenant or proprietor; and every year -- nay every month -- which
passes sees this perfection and development of machinery going more and
more rapidly on. We are left no choice but socialism or universal
bankruptcy.

Meanwhile it is instructive to notice that the United Irish League
agitators -- from Mr. William O'Brien down -- have no remedy to offer
which does not smack of socialistic principles. The compulsory
expropriation of the graziers; the break up of grazing lands; the state
help for agriculture; in fact, every proposal advocated proceeds upon
the assumption that 'property' has no rights as against the welfare of
the community, and that the life and prosperity of the people is, or
ought to be, the first care of *statesmanship*. So far our United Irish
League agitators are borrowing the arguments of the socialists to suit
their own purposes; but they, with characteristic class selfishness,
stop short at the application thereof. They will not carry them beyond
the rural districts; yet we challenge Mr. William O'Brien to tell us a
single sufficient reason for refusing to apply to property in towns the
same stern principles he would advocate in the country. Property *of all
kinds* ought to be subject to the community, and if the welfare of the
community requires that 'legal' rights of property shall be
subordinated, or even totally set aside, it must be done.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
