---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Regicide and Revolution

### (17 September 1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 17 September 1898.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.14.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As most of our readers are probably aware the Empress of Austria was
assassinated in the streets of Geneva, Switzerland, on Saturday last.

We deeply regret the untimely death of this lady as we would regret the
untimely death of any other unoffending woman, but we cannot see any
reason for the hysterics into which our daily papers are attempting to
work their readers on the subject. A woman has been foully murdered.
Stated thus simply the fact would arouse in all thinking men a righteous
horror of the deed. But when column is piled upon column, when we are
told "humanity stands aghast," that the crime is "unparalleled," that
the "world is plunged in mourning," etc., we begin to suspect the
presence of more cant than sincerity in all this newspaper grief. When
sailors are lost in rotten ships at sea, miners choked in the mine,
labourers killed by falling machinery, women and girls poisoned in match
works, etc., our friends on the capitalist press do not shed many tears
over or devote many columns to the matter. Wherefore we conclude that
these newspaper tears are shed for the *Empress* and not for the
*woman*.

For our part we regard *all human life* as equally sacred, whether it be
the life of an Empress or the life of a charwoman, and we have no desire
to emulate our contemporaries in their attempt to magnify the horror of
a crime because the victim belonged to the former rank of life rather
than the latter. The deed was the deed of a madman, its perpetrator will
be punished, in all probability with the utmost severity the law of
Switzerland allows. Had we the power we certainly would not lift a
finger to save him from or to modify that punishment, whatever it may
be, but we can see nothing in the case to justify the outbreak of
savagery to which our Dublin daily and evening papers are at present
treating their readers. When we find 'respectable' newspapers actually
regretting that the barbarous tortures of the Middle Ages are no longer
possible, indulging in fearful and disgusting recitals of the fiendish
cruelties perpetrated in the name of Law upon regicides in the past, and
openly wishing they could be revived, we feel that even the fear of
being misrepresented would not justify us in keeping silent longer, in
longer refraining from uttering a protest against this outburst of
ferocity in those who are so fond of posing as guardians of public
morals. The old Mosaic law demanded a life for a life, but our newspaper
oracles, who at ordinary times are so fond of mouthing their devotion to
the new dispensation which replaced the stern justice of the Mosaic code
by the more merciful ethics of Christianity, would now surpass that code
in the ferocity of their vengeance. A life for a life, it appears, may
serve as a basis of justice among ordinary mortals, but the life of a
crowned head must be hedged round with greater terrors, or else the
masses of desperate and starving people whom society creates in our
midst cannot be kept in subjection. Here, then, we find the real reason
of the outcry. The governing classes seek through Press, platform, and
all other means to impress the public mind with the divinity of their
persons, the 'divinity' which doth hedge their positions. A hundred
working-class women are murdered in the streets of Milan -- bayonetted
and shot with their starving babes at their breasts [\[1\]](#n1){#f1};
society grudges a paragraph in its newspapers to chronicle the fact; one
Empress is stabbed in the streets of Geneva, and lo! Humanity is
Shocked. Yet, perhaps the remorseless hand of history will reverse the
procedure: give to that holocaust of the workers a dedicatory chapter as
to the martyrs of humanity -- and dismiss this murder of an Empress with
the curtness of a footnote. As we progress toward a proper recognition
of the dignity of humanity we lose the inculcated respect for the tinsel
glory of a crown. Democracy is ever merciful and humane. The crime of a
Luccessi is in no sense attributable to the revolutionary party in
Europe, no more than the Phoenix Park murders were justly attributable
to the Nationalist party in Ireland. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} The criminal
passions which blazed out in Geneva last Saturday are nurtured and
blossom only in the dark shadows cast by capitalist society and its
financial and hereditary rulers. The present social and political order
in Europe breeds such criminals. They are its children. Let them deal
with each other.

We, who detest equally the criminal and the social order which creates
him, work unceasingly for the coming of the day when an enlightened
people by abolishing the latter will render impossible the former.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} Earlier in the year, workers demonstrating in Milan
against food shortages and inflation were brutally attacked by troops.

[2.](#f2){#n2} Luigi Luccheni was the actual name of the empress's
killer. In 1882 the colonial Chief Secretary and his deputy were killed
in the Phoenix Park by a Fenian splinter group, the Invincibles.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
