---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1884

### A Few Words with Mr Herbert Spencer

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *To-Day*, Jan-June 1884, pp. 416-427;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Ted Crawford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mr. Herbert Spencer, the English philosopher, of world-wide celebrity,
has contributed to the April number of the *Contemporary Review* an
article entitled "The Coming Slavery," which commends itself to the
attention of English Socialists, because he predicates therein that the
Social "changes made, the changes in progress, and the changes urged,
are carrying us \.... to the desired ideal of the Socialists" that even
the Liberals, the worst enemies of Socialists, "are diligently preparing
the way for them," and that nationalisation of land, banks, railways,
mines, factories, and other private instruments of production will be
realised in the near future: and because this hopeful idea, entertained
by so profound a philosopher, will put fresh courage into the hearts of
militant Socialists, and will encourage them to pursue with renewed
ardour their propaganda of Communistic theories. But the article has
other claims to our attention. It professes to be a powerful and
conclusive criticism of Socialism, while it is, in effect, a mere
summary of all the commonplace arguments habitually brought against
Socialism.. That so illustrious a man as Mr. Spencer should fail to find
more serious arguments against it, is a very conclusive demonstration,
if that were wanted, of the soundness of Socialism. That a thinker, like
Mr.Spencer, one of the lights of the *bourgeoisie*, --- should think it
worth his while to bring forward such arguments, makes it incumbent on
his opponents to refute thorn, how trivial and unworthy soever they may
be.

### I

Mr. Spencer concludes his article by this wise axiom, intended to deal
us a very ugly blow indeed: "No political alchemy will get golden
conduct out of leaden instincts; \... no well-working institution will
be framed by an ill-working humanity" --- hence mankind must abandon all
hope of bettering our present system of society and of doing away with
the wrongs and miseries of it.

It was generally presumed that Mr. Spencer had understood the Darwinian
theory, of which he had volunteered to be the propounder. The
anti-Socialist axiom cited above inclines us to think that the
presumption was erroneous. For, according to the evolution theory, the
organs of animals, their habits and their instincts are not spontaneous
growths, but the necessary results of "the struggle for life under the
conditions to which the animals have been exposed." The sharp teeth and
ferocity of the tiger, the swiftness and timidity of the antelope have,
no more than the wisdom of Mr. H. Spencer, sprung up spontaneously, but
have been evolved more or less gradually by the actions and reactions of
their *milieu.* Different conditions of life must consequently produce
different instincts and habits in animals and men. For instance, one of
the most powerful instincts met with in the whole animal kingdom, and
without which the rearing of the young had been impossible, the maternal
instinct, is utterly obliterated in certain insects living in
communities: "the queen bees kill their daughter queens; the desire to
destroy instead of loving their nearest relations having been of service
to the community." ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Another instinct, perhaps still more important for the preservation of
life, the instinct of self preservation, is deadened in animals living
in troops; the males are always ready to face danger and to give their
lives in defence of the females, the young and the weak of the
collectivity. These unmotherly and unselfish instincts, so unnatural,
are like Mr. H. Spencer's pessimism, produced by the conditions of life
to which their bearers have been exposed.

A man, who in order to account for the creation of the world requires a
God, maker of all things, may well believe that the cheating instincts
of the shopkeepers, the lying habits of the diplomatist, the humbugging
practices of the bubble company starters, the flunkeyism of the literary
and philosophical defenders of the capitalist class are of divine
origin; but for the Communist of the materialistic school of Karl Marx,
these bourgeois qualities are the necessary products of the bourgeois
social milieu. These precious instincts will, as mildew forms on organic
matter in decomposition, continue to make part and parcel of the
bourgeois nature, so long as the economical milieu which gave them birth
is not transformed.

The history of mankind shows us that these bourgeois virtues have not
always adorned human nature. In the early village communities of India
where private property in land does not exist, we never meet with the
parasitism which disgraces civilised England; good-for-nothing
aristocrats and capitalists ministered to by a host of flunkeys and.
prostitutes do not live on the good-for-somethings; there, every man is
not the foe of his fellow-man; he does not lay financial traps, nor lie
and cheat to come into another man's property. The private interests of
every member of these village communities are merged in the general
interest of the community; so much so that "a person aggrieved," writes
H. S. Maine, "complains not of an individual wrong, but of the
disturbance of the order of the entire little society." ^[\[2\]](#n2)^
This merging of private in public interest, evolved out of the communal
form of property, leads the Indian villager to sacrifice his private
welfare to the general good.

But under the system of private property the welfare of the community
and of the individual are at war; and the instincts generated by the
antagonism of interests leads every bourgeois to sacrifice the common
good to his private ends.

Mr. Holloway, the distinguished philanthropist and pill manufacturer,
would have inflicted bowel complaints on the whole human race, not even
excepting his own great philosopher, Herbert Spencer, with an eye to
business. There is never a cotton spinner but would hail the fire that
should burn to ashes all the factories of. Lancashire and make him lord
of the cotton market. There is never an English merchant who, in order
to turn an honest penny, would not sell guns and powder to the Soudanese
and Basutos fighting against his countrymen. There is not a financial
man of the city who would not lend money to Russia --- of course on good
security and given large profits --- for the organizing and arming of
the soldiers that should invade India.

The ground out of which spring the leaden instincts of the *man
bourgeois,* in England, as well as on the Continent and in America, is
private property. Selfishness, deceit, hypocrisy, and quackery are the
indispensable qualities of the bourgeois; it is they that make him flush
of money, and it is money that gives him all the joys of the earth, fat
meats, fruity wines, finery, and respectability, the smiles of the fair,
the blessings of priests and the flattery of philosophers; hence he
develops these qualities.

In savage tribes, courage, strength and stoicism under pain are
developed because these qualities are required in the long and
continuous fight which is their life. The habits and instincts of man
are shaped by the social milieu in which he lives --- private property
perverts human nature. One of the most infamous of all crimes, branded
by all mankind since it has come out of savagery, parricide, flourishes
in countries wherein the system of peasant proprietary prevails. It is
his fiendish love for land, his mad desire to inherit the small plot of
ground of his parents, which arms the parricide's hands. Private
property is the mother of the lowest and most sordid instincts, which no
amount of virtuous and tedious preaching and no amount of brutal
penalties will avail to eradicate.

The leaden instincts deplored by --- the too-evolutionist-by half ---
Mr. Spencer, are not the cause of the ill-working institutions which
Socialists seek to change; but so long as the social institutions shall
continue to work ill, the instincts of man will be leaden; so long as
private property shall stand, the capitalist will go on being the narrow
minded, selfish, and heartless brute he is.

Cellulary confinement, the tread-wheel and the lash patronised by the
"great philosopher," and applied so largely under our system will never
get golden conduct out of man's leaden instincts, so long as misery and
insecurity remain the lot of the hard working masses, so long as they
are surrounded and allured by the temptations of life and the luxuries
of the good-for-nothing capitalists. Quetelet, one of the fathers of the
science of statistics, has shown in his *Physique Sociale* that from
1826 to 1844 the number of criminals has varied in France with the price
of wheat.

Because the great philosopher has overlooked the causes of the leaden
instincts which he observes in the hearts of his fellow bourgeois and
friends, because he misunderstands the evolution theory, he predicates
that these instincts, the products of the private-property system will
continue the same in the common-property system. The great philosopher
is as logical as a man who should maintain, on seeing a field covered
with weeds and thistles, that no corn would grow on it, once the ground
was overturned and sown with wheat.

### II.

Mr. Herbert Spencer has been mistaken for an evolutionist because he is
in the habit of classifying natural and social phenomena according to
their external appearances and coarsest features, without analysing
their internal properties and their external causes, without studying
the action of the milieu on the phenomena and the reaction of the
phenomena on the milieu. The great philosopher piles up his facts in
evolutive series, much like a shopkeeper piles up his goods upon the
shelves of his shop, according to their most obvious qualities; he puts
pants with pants, socks with socks, shirts with shirts, etc., never
caring one straw to know what materials his goods are made of, and how
and where they were manufactured.

In his "Coming Slavery" Mr. Spencer gives an excellent example of his
shopkeeper-like evolutionism, which, let it be said in passing, is the
only kind of evolutionism known and practised by a large number of
Darwinian evolutionists.

Mr. Spencer says, Slavery, which is characterised by "how much the slave
is compelled to labour for other benefit than his own and how much he
can labour for his own benefit," has been on the decrease since the time
when the prisoner of war was made a slave, was converted into a serf
attached to the soil, paying a fixed amount of labour and produce and
then allowed to detach himself from the soil, as in Russia, but
nevertheless bound to give the *obrock* or a certain amount of money.
Because the *obrock* does not exist in England, and because the labourer
is not fastened to the soil, Mr. Spencer concludes triumphantly that
slavery is abolished, and that no Englishman is compelled to labour for
other benefit than his own.^[\[3\]](#n3)^

I cannot here stop to show how childish is this account of the evolution
of compulsory labour, but I may say that the amount of labour extracted
from the producing masses (slaves or serfs) does not depend upon the
mode in which it is extracted, but upon the mode of production of the
age and of the country under consideration. For instance, while the
slave-holders and the feudal lords remained their life long on their
lands, they claimed from their slaves and serfs a small amount of
compulsory labour; but when instead of requiring agricultural and
industrial produce for the maintenance of their families and retinue,
they wanted marketable goods for bartering, the amount of compulsory
labour increased considerably. This increase of compulsory labour
marked, not the initial but the last stage of slavery. This method of
connecting the social phenomena with their economical causes cannot
commend itself to the metaphysical mind of Mr. Spencer, who prefers to
soar above the clouds, pouncing upon whatever random facts come within
his range of vision. His method has great advantages of its own; it is
an easy one, does not necessitate much thinking, and allows a
philosopher to prove anything he pleases. Thus, Mr. Spencer after having
shown, to his own satisfaction, that slavery, characterized by
compulsory labour, does not exist in our capitalist society,
demonstrates with equal ease that it *will* exist in the communistic
society of the future.

The capitalists are well advised in making a great philosopher of Mr.
Herbert Spencer, for he is ready at any time to demonstrate by learnedly
scientific and deeply philosophical reasonings, that if employers
condemn men, women and children to hard labour in mines and factories,
they do so not for the extorting of compulsory labour, but from mere
philanthropy; it is to prevent the poor from being idle; for they know
that idleness is the mother of vices, and that he who works prays. Of
course this giving of labour to the poor means profit for the
capitalists, but the millions of pounds they pocket annually are the
reward of their "golden conduct." This Christian feeling impelled Mr.
Bright and other leaders of the Liberal and Radical parties to oppose
the ten hours' bill and impels Mr. Spencer to denounce the factory laws
which protect women and children against the pitiless greed of their
employers. These laws are compulsory laws, they prevent capitalists from
extorting from their hands as much free labour as they would wish. These
laws are a scandal and a shame; a blot on Liberal England; an outrage to
capitalist liberty!

If slavery is characterised (on that point we are at one) by compulsory
labour for the benefit of others; in no society whatever, or at any
time, whether in the feudal ages or in times of slavery, has a greater
amount of compulsory labour been extracted from the producing classes.
The slave-holder, even in the worst time of slavery, did not overwork
his slave when young, because the slave was valuable cattle to him, not
to he used up too quickly; the pious Brights have no such fear; the
enquiry on "Children's Employment," has shown that before passing the
factory laws, it was customary with manufacturers to keep children of
seven and eight years old, during twelve, fourteen and more hours at
work, resorting to the lash, to dippings into cold water and other such
amenities. to prevent them from sleeping. These children being free-born
Britons and not the property of any Bright or Cobden, it mattered little
whether they lived or died.

Slavery is a very rude system of extorting compulsory labour, which
ceases to pay, when great industry makes its appearance. Whether the
slave be young or old, in or out of work, his master is compelled to
feed him; the capitalist is under no such compulsion. When work is slack
he sends his hands into the streets to beg and fill their bellies with
staring at the ribs of beef and legs of mutton in the butchers' shops.

Although the philanthropists of our century have invented and applied
the cellulary system of imprisonment, copied just now from civilised
Europe by barbarous Russia: although great philosophers bike Mr. Herbert
Spencer, patronise the lash and tread wheels, nevertheless, we may boast
of living in a humane age: working men, unlike slaves, are no longer
compelled to work under the lash. This worn-out instrument of torture
has been replaced by a more efficacious and refined one --- by hunger,
that cat-o\'-nine-tails, which drives men, women, and children into the
factories and mines. It is because Mr. Spencer belongs to the happy few
who are not doomed to compulsory labour for the maintenance of the idle
classes in luxury that he is so blind to the *present* slavery and so
wide awake with regard to the "Coming Slavery."

Mr. Herbert Spencer denounces Communism not only as the future restorer
of slavery but as the inventor and introducer of Bureaucracy. Is the
great philosopher so hopelessly blind that when he cashes a cheque or
takes a railway ticket he fails to catch sight of whole armies of clerks
or bureaucrats? Does he believe that banks, railways and other
commercial and industrial enterprises can dispense with clerks and
officials any more than the post, the telegraph, the naval and military
establishments, and other industrial enterprises already carried on by
the State? As far as bureaucracy is concerned, what is the difference
between the enterprises of the State and those of limited companies? In
both, part of the work is done by clerks, officials, or bureaucrats (the
name will not alter the function), they are salaried workers equally
with the carpenters, postmen, engineers, skilled and unskilled labourers
employed in them; no more than the manual workers do they reap all the
fruits of their exertions; they have to divide the same with the State
or with the shareholders, whose duty does not consist in working but in
confiscating the produce of others' work.

What characterises capitalistic production, whether done under the
control of the State or of private capitalists, is that the producer
(manual or intellectual, skilled or unskilled) has no interest in the
prosperity of the enterprise in which he is employed. What interest has
the engineer or ticket clerk of any railway that the expenses should be
covered twice or thrice by the receipts? What benefit do the compositor
and the penny-a-liner reap when the *Daily Telegraph* increases its sale
from one to ten thousand? When their salaries are paid, the employer
thinks that nothing more is due to the employé. The capitalist system
leaves to the producer one only interest in the production, his wages:
so long as they are paid him he does not care whether the business
thrives or barely makes a shift to live. But if all the shareholders,
landlords and other drones of society were suppressed, then the producer
would share the profits with no useless giver of work; no longer working
as paid hands, but as joint-partners, they would have an interest in the
success of the undertaking. Even a bourgeois philosopher will understand
that any enterprise is more likely to succeed when it is worked by its
owners than by wage-slaves. At present the producer works in a
devil-may-care way and he is right in doing so; but in a communistic
society, his own interest will make him do his best; self-interest, not
to speak of nobler sentiments, ignored by bourgeois philosophers, will
replace hunger and the lash employed till now for extorting compulsory
labour. Self-interest is the alchemy that will get golden conduct out of
the producing classes.

Mr. Spencer complains of the expensiveness of maintaining the necessary
officials and clerks when land, banks, factories and other instruments
of production shall be nationalised, but our present directors, managers
and other officials of banks, railways, &c., are they not maintained by
us notwithstanding that the instruments of production are not yet
nationalised? But if the great philosopher is so bent on economy why
does he not complain of the cost of the ever growing domestic class?

Karl Marx, in his great work, *Das Kapital*, called attention to the
importance of that class analysing the figures given by the Census of
1861, he finds in Wales and in England, that:-

  ------------------------------------------- ----------- -------------
  The domestic class numbered                 1,208,648   individuals
  The agricultural class                      1,098,261   
  Working men employed in textile factories   642,607     
  in mines 565,835 total industry             1,605,440   
  in metal works                              396,998     
  ------------------------------------------- ----------- -------------

Thus in 1861 the domestic class in England and Wales, that is the class
doing no productive work but maintained for ministering to the private
wants of the capitalist classes was greater than the agricultural class
and three fourths of the number of the workers employed in three of the
most important industries.

Since 1861 the domestic class has been always on the increase. The
following figures are for Great Britain.

  -------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  CLASSES        1861        1871        1881        Rate of     & Decrease\
                                                     Increase\   In 20 years
                                                     In 10 years 

  Domestic       1,367,782   1,633,514   1,803,810   +10.4       +31.9

  Agricultural   2,010,454   1,657,138   1,383,184   -15.9       -31.2

  Industrial     5,184,201   5,940,028   6,373,367   +7.3        +22.9
  -------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

In the twenty years from 1861 to 1881, the agricultural class decreased
in the same ratio that the domestic class increased. This evil, the
increase of the domestic class, is the magnificent result of the
development of capitalist civilisation. These figures ought to reassure
the "great philosopher," for no communistic society will have to
maintain so numerous a body of officials as the present non-producing
domestic class.

In the mutual admiration society founded by the Darwinians, Mr. Herbert
Spencer is lauded as a "great philosopher;" all things being relative,
he may be such for the evolutionists. The Socialists neither purpose nor
wish to disturb them in their Pickwickian performances: but if Mr.
Herbert Spencer desires to have his philosophical merits uncontested,
let him keep from meddling with scientific Socialism and social
questions, let him confine himself to the compiling of confused,
ponderous and unreadable books, surcharged with unimportant facts,
ill-studied and selected without discrimination. Socialists at all
events, he may be sure, will not interfere with his *self-imposed
labour*; on the contrary they owe him all thanks for the services he has
rendered and renders to the world at large in cudgelling the dull heads
of his addle-brained friends and admirers, the middle-class men.

Paul Lafargue.

Paris, April, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} CHARLES DARWIN. *The Descent of Man*.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} H.S. MAINE. *Village Communities in the East and the
West*.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Mr. Spencer's deplorable and inveterate habit of
recording facts without studying them leads him to think that the
*obrock* was an alleviation instead of an aggravation of serfdom. The
*obrock* was not a constant feature of Russian bondage; it was
introduced when the serf-holder could not profitably apply the labour of
his serfs. Outside of the crown dominions it was principally in usage in
unfertile countries and near industrial centres. The obrock was paid by
men only from the age of 18 to the age of 55 and amounted to an average
of from 20 to 50 shillings according to the skill of the serf. In order
to satisfy this *direct tax* the peasant was, as a rule, obliged to
leave his home for a part of the year, and often for years, in search of
employment in the towns and thus have to condemn himself to the horrors
of Russian factories. To the hardships of serfdom, then, the *obrock*
superadded the miseries of proletarian life.

The interest of the English debt, called national, because paid by the
nation, amounted in 1881 to £29,275,263; according to the census of 1881
the population numbered 34,788,814 souls; so that every English person,
young or old, male or female was bound to pay under the name of taxes
and imports, direct and indirect, an *obrock* of 17 shillings to support
the Money-lords in idleness; the *obrock* for an English family of five
persons (parents and 3 children) amounted to 85 shillings. Thus the
family of the free born Englishman paid a superior *obrock* to the
capitalist classes than did the family of a Russian serf to his master.
This is how --- "slavery which is characterised by how much one labours
for other benefit than his own" --- has been on the decrease in Great
Britain, "the land of the free."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
