---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Imperialism and Socialism

#### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, 4 November 1899.\
Transcribed by *The Workers' Web ASCII Pamphlet Project* in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As Socialists -- and therefore anxious to at all times throw the full
weight of whatever influence we possess upon the side of the forces
making most directly for Socialism -- we have often been somewhat
disturbed in our mind by observing in the writings and speeches of some
of our foreign comrades a tendency to discriminate in favour of Great
Britain in all the international complications in which that country may
be involved over questions of territorial annexation, spheres of
influence, etc., in barbarous or semi-civilised portions of the globe.
We are, we repeat, disturbed in our mind upon the subject because we
ourselves do not at all sympathise with this pro-British policy, but, on
the contrary, would welcome the humiliation of the British arms in any
one of the conflicts in which it is at present engaged, or with which it
has been lately menaced. This we freely avow, but the question then
arises: Is this hostility to the British Empire due to the fact of our
national and racial subjection by that power, and does it exist in spite
of our Socialism, or is it consistent with the doctrines we hold as
adherents of the Marxist propaganda, and believers in the Marxist
economics.

This is the question we propose briefly to discuss in our article this
week. We are led to the discussion of this topic by observing that the
English Socialists are apparently divided over the question of the war
on the Transvaal; one section of the Social Democratic Federation going
strongly for the Boers and against the war; another also declaring
against the war, but equally denouncing the Boers; and, finally, one
Socialist leader, Mr. Blatchford, editor of the **Clarion** and author
of **Merrie England**, coming out bluntly for the war and toasting the
health of the queen, and the "Success of the British arms". On the other
hand all the journals of the party on the continent of Europe and in
America, as far as we are aware, come out in this instance
whole-heartedly on the side of the Transvaal and against what the organ
of our Austrian comrades fittingly terms England's act of "blood-thirsty
piracy".

We ask then is there no common ground upon which Socialists can agree to
treat all matters of international politics -- a common standpoint from
which all questions of race or nationality shall be carefully excluded,
and every question dealt with from the position of its effect upon the
industrial development required to bring the Socialist movement to a
head? Nominally all Socialists hold to the international solidarity of
Labour, and the identity of the interests of the workers the world over,
and during the Franco-German and Spanish-American wars the Socialists of
those countries demonstrated that the belief was no mere abstract
theory, but a living, concrete fact. But our English friend, Mr.
Blatchford, deliberately throws the doctrine to the winds, and declares
that "when England is at war he is English and regards all those who
have taken up arms against England as enemies to be fought and beaten."
This is unqualifiedly chauvinist, and as a brutal endorsement of every
act of brigandage and murder in which the capitalists of England may
involve their country it throws a curious sidelight on the mental
make-up of this man -- who very nearly shed tears of pity over the
wrongs and "Christ-like appearance" of the Anarchists expelled from the
International Socialist Congress in London. Our esteemed comrade, H.M.
Hyndman of the Social Democratic Federation, also in an article
contributed to the Berlin **Vorwaerts** and reprinted in **Justice**
took the position that England ought not to have given way to Russia at
Port Arthur, but ought to have fought her and asserted English supremacy
in the far East. His reason for so contending being the greater freedom
enjoyed under British than under Russian rule.

Mr. Blatchford's chauvinist pronouncement can be ignored as simply a
personal predilection, and therefore binding no one, but the opinions of
our comrades in the Social Democratic Federation of England hardly stand
upon the same footing, but require severer consideration.

That we may not be accused of criticising the attitude of others without
stating our own, we hereby place on record our position on all questions
of international policy.

Scientific revolutionary Socialism teaches us that Socialism can only be
realised when Capitalism has reached its zenith of development; that
consequently the advance of nations industrially undeveloped into the
capitalistic stage of industry is a thing highly to be desired, since
such advance will breed a revolutionary proletariat in such countries
and force forward here the political freedom necessary for the speedy
success of the Socialist movement; and finally, that as colonial
expansion and the conquest of new markets are necessary for the
prolongation of the life of capitalism, the prevention of colonial
expansion and the loss of markets to countries capitalistically
developed, such as England, precipitates economic crises there, and so
gives an impulse to revolutionary thought and helps to shorten the
period required to develop backward countries and thus prepare the
economic conditions needed for our triumph.

That is our position. Arguing from such premises we hold that as England
is the most capitalistically developed country in Europe, every fresh
conquest of territory by her armies, every sphere of influence acquired
in the interests of her commercialists, is a span added to the life of
capitalist society; and that every market lost, every sphere of
influence captured by the non-capitalist enemies of England, shortens
the life of Capitalism by aiding the development of reactionary
countries, and hurling back upon itself the socially conservative
industrial population of England.

Comrade Hyndman claims that we should oppose Russia because her people
are ruled despotically, and favour England because her people are
politically free. But that is the reasoning of a political Radical, not
the dispassionate analysis of contemporary history we have a right to
expect from an economist and a Socialist of Hyndman\'s reputation. Our
comrade quite forgets to apply that materialist philosophy of history
which he himself has done so much to popularise in its Marxian form,
viz., that the economic system of any given society is the basis of all
else in that society -- its political superstructure included. If he did
so apply it, he would realise that the political freedom of England is
born of her capitalism. Her capitalist class required a wage slave class
possessing such freedom or mobility of movement as would make them
available at short notice wherever the exigencies of capitalism
demanded. To gain such absolute freedom of migration a political
movement had to be inaugurated placing the capitalist class in a
position to break the bonds of serfdom for the labourer. This once
achieved the capitalistic concentration of the workers in great centres
of population gave to the proletariat the sense of numbers and
opportunities of organisation required to complete the work of political
enfranchisement. Thus the economic necessities of capitalism always and
everywhere beget a measure of political freedom for its slaves.

Russia is not yet a capitalist country, therefore her people bow beneath
the yoke of an autocrat. This is only saying that her capitalist class
is not strong enough yet to force upon the government laws establishing
the conditions most helpful to capitalist development. But every forward
move of Russia in the direction of colonial expansion strengthens that
capitalist class in Russia and in so doing breeds there the
revolutionary working class. On the other hand, if the wishes of comrade
Hyndman were to be realised Russian capitalism would be checked in its
growth, and the discontent in that country, lacking capitalistic
conditions, would resolve itself into a purely agrarian movement. The
revolutionary proletariat would remain unborn.

Drive the Russian out of Poland! By all means! Prevent his extension
towards Europe! certainly; but favour his extension and his acquisition
of new markets in Asia (at the expense of England if need be) if you
would see Capitalism hurry onward to its death.

It may be urged that our Irish nationality plays a large part in forming
this conception of international politics here set forth. We do not
plead guilty, but even if it were so the objection would be puerile. As
Socialists we base our political policy on the class struggle of the
workers, because we know that the self-interest of the workers lies our
way. That the self-interest may sometimes be base does not affect the
correctness of our position. In like manner the mere fact that the
inherited (and often unreasoning) anti-British sentiment of a chauvinist
Irish patriot impels him to the same conclusion as we arrived at as the
result of our economic studies does not cause us to shrink from
proclaiming our position, but rather leads us to rejoice that our
propaganda is thus made all the easier by this none too common identity
of aim established as a consequence of what we esteem the strong and
irreconcilable hostility between English Imperialism and Socialism.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
