---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Landlordism in Towns

### (November 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 18 November 1899.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.18.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In an early issue of the **Workers' Republic** we pointed out that the
Corporation of Dublin had it in its power to sensibly mitigate the
sufferings of the industrial population in the City by a wise and
intelligent application of its many powers as a public board. Among the
various directions we enumerated as immediately practical outlets for
corporate enterprise, there were two allied measures which, were they
applied, might do much to at once relieve the most odious and directly
pressing evils arising from the congested state of our cities. Those two
measures were:--

-   Taxation of unlet houses,

and

-   Erection at public expense of Artisans' Dwellings, to be let at a
    rent covering cost of construction and maintenance alone.
    [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

The wisdom of the proposal to increase the funds and utilise the
borrowing powers of the Corporation in this manner cannot be questioned.
The housing accommodation of the Dublin workers is a disgrace to the
City; high rents and vile sanitary arrangements are the rule, and no one
in the Corporation seems to possess courage enough to avow the truth, or
to face the storm of obloquy which would be directed upon the head of
the councillor who would take the opportunity to expose on the floor of
the City Hall the manner in which the interests of house landlords are
protected, and the spirit of sanitative legislation set at naught.

The so-called philanthropic companies which profess to cater to the
needs of the workers by providing cottages, etc., in reality charge
higher rents than do most individual house owners elsewhere. We all
remember how the owners of the Coombe area property attempted to raise
the rents on their cottages, because they were compelled to undertake
the construction of some necessary drainage, which they culpably
neglected to supply when their property was being built. Now the Dublin
and Suburban Artisans' Dwellings Company have in like manner initiated
an attempt to raise the rents on their Cork Street buildings by another
sixpence a week, in spite of the fact that the property has lately been
allowed to get into a most dilapidated condition -- roofs leaking,
footpaths all broken up, roadways full of holes and pitfalls, and lamps
never lit in the darkest nights of the year.

We are glad to record that this attempt at extortion is being met by the
tenants in a most spirited fashion, and that it is likely to prove
successful. Councillor Cox has also stood by the tenants in this matter,
and has used his position on the Corporation to stop the rebate of taxes
which this company usually obtains on the score of its philanthropic
character.

This action of our friend, Councillor Cox, shows how much influence for
good can be exerted by our representatives when imbued with the proper
spirit. What a Socialist Republican could do in the way of remedying
grievances, and pushing forward measures for the benefit of the workers,
can be easily surmised by those who have observed the keen grasp of
public questions which at all times distinguishes the Socialist above
his fellows.

But, lacking the measures spoken of at the beginning of this article,
all other measures must be only of a partially remedial character. Each
proposal bears the stamp of a truly practical measure; each can stand
the test of rigid economic analysis, and may be put into operation
whenever the working class democracy are enlightened enough to demand
it.

The taxation of unlet houses would compel the owners of property to
accept rents much lower than they now demand, in order to avoid the
disagreeable necessity of paying taxes upon unremunerative property. But
the erection of houses to be let at cost of construction and maintenance
would place in competition with the speculative house landlord,
dwellings which, not needing to yield a dividend, could easily beat down
his rents to a point more within the compass of the working man's purse.
One point more needs to be noted. It is that a large proportion of the
houses in Dublin are owned by persons too poor to keep them in a
habitable state. When this is the case such houses should be taken over
by the Corporation and made habitable at public expense, or where this
would be too costly, razed to the ground. The owners could be
compensated according to the condition of their property when taken out
of their hands.

It must be remembered, however, that all those measures are merely
tentative. Our cities can never be made really habitable or worthy of an
enlightened people while the habitations of its citizens remain the
property of private individuals. To permanently remedy the evils of city
life the citizens must own their city.

 

### Note

[1.](#f1){#n1} In *Home Thrusts* in the October 8 1898 **Workers'
Republic** Connolly wrote: "The Corporation can provide dwellings for
the working people at a rent to cover the cost of construction and
maintenance alone, and can procure money for the purpose by a stiff tax
on unoccupied houses."

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 6.7.2004
