---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Socialism and Imperialism

#### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From [Workers' Republic]{.underline}, 4 November 1899.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As Socialists -- and therefore anxious at all times to throw the full
weight of whatever influence we possess upon the side of the forces
making most directly for Socialism -- we have often been somewhat
disturbed in our mind by observing in the writings and speeches of some
of our foreign comrades a tendency to discriminate in favour of Great
Britain in all the international complications in which that country may
be involved over questions of territorial annexations, spheres of
influence, etc., in barbarous or semi-civilized portions of the globe.
We are, we repeat, disturbed in our mind because we ourselves do not at
all sympathize with this pro-British policy, but, on the contrary, would
welcome the humiliation of the British arms in any one of the conflicts
in which it is at present engaged, or with which it has been lately
menaced. This we freely avow. But the question then arises: is this
hostility to the British Empire due to the fact of our national and
racial subjection by that Power, or is it consistent with the doctrine
we hold as adherents of the Marxist propaganda, and believers in the
Marxist economics?

The English Socialists are apparently divided over the question of the
war on the Transvaal; one section of the Social Democratic Federation
going strongly for the Boers and against the war; another also declaring
against the war, but equally denouncing the Boers; and finally, one
English Socialist leader, Mr Robert Blatchford, editor of **The
Clarion** and author of **Merrie England**, coming out bluntly for the
war and toasting the health of the Queen, and the success of the British
arms. On the other hand, all the journals of the party on the continent
of Europe and in America, as far as we are aware, come out in this
instance wholeheartedly on the side of the Transvaal and against what
the organ of our Austrian comrades fittingly terms England's act of
'blood-thirsty piracy'. Our esteemed comrade, H.M. Hyndman, took the
position that England ought not to have given way to Russia at Port
Arthur, but ought to have fought her and asserted British supremacy in
the Far East. His reason for so contending being the greater freedom
enjoyed under British than under Russian rule.

That we may not be accused of criticizing the attitude of others without
stating our own, we hereby place on record our position on all questions
of international policy.

Scientific revolutionary Socialism teaches us that Socialism can only be
realized when capitalism has reached its zenith of development; that
consequently the advance of nations industrially undeveloped into the
capitalistic stage of industry is a thing highly to be desired, since
such an advance will breed a revolutionary proletariat in such countries
and force forward there the political freedom necessary for the speedy
success of the Socialist movement; and finally, that as colonial
expansion and the conquest of new markets are necessary for the
prolongation of the life of capitalism, the prevention of colonial
expansion and the loss of markets to countries capitalistically
developed, such as England, precipitates economic crises there, and so
gives an impulse to revolutionary thought and helps to shorten the
period required to develop backward countries and thus prepare the
economic conditions needed for our triumph.

Comrade Hyndman claims that we should oppose Russia because her people
are ruled despotically, and favour England because her people are
politically free. But that is the reasoning of a political radical, not
the dispassionate analysis of contemporary history we have a right to
expect from an economist and a Socialist of Hyndman's reputation. Russia
is not yet a capitalist country, therefore her people bow beneath the
yoke of an autocrat. Drive the Russian out of Poland! By all means!
Prevent his extension towards Europe! Certainly! But favour his
extension and acquisition of new markets in Asia (at the expense of
England if need be) if you would see capitalism hurry forward to its
death.

It may be argued that our Irish nationality plays a large part in
forming this conception of international politics. We do not plead
guilty, but even if it were so the objection would be puerile. As
Socialists we base our political policy on the class struggle of the
workers, because we know that the self-interest of the workers lies our
way. That the self-interest may sometimes be base does not affect the
correctness of our position. The mere fact that the inherited (and often
unreasoning) anti-British sentiment of a chauvinist Irish patriot impels
him to the same conclusion as we arrived at as the result of our
economic studies does not cause us to shrink from proclaiming our
position. It rather leads us to rejoice that our propaganda is thus made
all the easier by this none too common identity of aim established as a
consequence of what we esteem strong and irreconcilable hostility
between English imperialism and Socialism.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
