---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Erin's Hope

### The End and the Means

### (1897)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pamphlet first published in 1897.\
A [revised edition](../../1909/hope/erinhope.htm){target="new"} was
published in 1909; the text is also included in this archive.\
**Transcription & HTML Mark-up:** [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
**Proofreading:** Chris Clayton, July 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> "Before the time of the conquest, the Irish people knew nothing of
> absolute property in land. The land belonged to the entire sept; the
> chief was little more than the managing member of the association. The
> feudal idea which came in with the conquest was associated with
> foreign dominion, and has never to this day been recognised by the
> moral sentiment of the people."

In these few words of Mr John Stuart Mill the impartial student may find
the key for unravelling the whole tangled skein of Irish polities.
Latter-day politicians, both on the English and Irish side, have done
their utmost to familiarise the public mind with belief that the Irish
question arises solely out of the aspirations of the Irish people to
have more complete control over the internal administration of the
affairs of their country than it is possible for them to exercise while
the seat of government is located at Westminister, and that, therefore,
some form of local self-government, as, for instance, Mr. Gladstone's
Home Rule Bill, is all that is needed to settle this question, and lay
forever the troubled spirit of Irish discontent. According to this
luminous (?) exposition of Irish history, we are to believe that the two
nations have for seven hundred years been engaged in unceasing warfare,
that the one country (Ireland) has during all that time been compelled
to witness the merciless slaughter of her children by famine, pestilence
and the sword; that each succeeding generation has witnessed a renewal
of the conflict and a renewal of the martyrdom, until the sensitive mind
recoils from a perusal of Irish history as from the records of a
shambles, and all, forsooth, because Irishmen and Englishmen could not
agree upon the form of political administration best suited for Ireland.

If this new reading of Irish history were true the intelligent foreigner
might be forgiven for rating at a very low standard the intelligence of
the two nations, which during seven hundred years had not evolved a
satisfactory solution of such a simple question. At precisely the same
low standard may safely be rated the political acumen of the English and
Irish party leaders, who are to-day complacently trotting out the
discredited abortion of Home Rule as a sovereign remedy for Ireland's
misery.

The Irish question has, in fact, a much deeper source than a mere
difference of opinion on forms of government. Its real origin and inner
meaning lay in the circumstances that the two opposing nations held
fundamentally different ideas upon the vital question of property in
land. Recent scientific research by such eminent sociologists as
Letourneau, Lewis Morgan, Sir Henry Maine, and others, has amply
demonstrated the fact that common ownership of land formed the basis of
primitive society in almost every country. But, whereas, in the majority
of countries now called civilised, such primitive Communism had almost
entirely disappeared before the dawn of history and had at no time
acquired a higher status than that conferred by the social sanction of
unlettered and uneducated tribes. In Ireland the system formed part of
the well defined social organisations of a nation of scholars and
students, recognised by Chief and Tanist, Brehon and Bard, as the
inspiring principle of their collective life, and the basis of their
national system of jurisprudence. Such a striking fact will, of course,
be interpreted in many ways, according to the temperament and political
and racial sympathies of the reader. The adherent of the present order
of society will regard it as proof of the Irish incapacity for
assimilating progressive ideas, and will, no doubt, confidently assert
that this incapacity is the real source of Ireland's misery, since it
has unfitted her sons for the competitive scramble for existence, and so
foredoomed them to the lot of hewers of wood and drawers of water.

 

### Stages of Development

The ardent student of sociology, who believes that the progress of the
human race through the various economic stages of communism, chattel
slavery, feudalism and wage slavery, has been but a preparation for the
higher ordered society of the future; that the most industrially
advanced countries are but, albeit often unconsciously, developing the
social conditions which, since the break-up of universal tribal
communism, have been rendered historically necessary for the
inauguration of a new and juster economic order, in which social,
political and national antagonism will be unknown, will perhaps regard
the Irish adherence to clan ownership at such a comparatively recent
date as the 17th Century as evidence of retarded economical development,
and therefore a real hindrance to progress. But the sympathetic student
of history, who believes in the possibility of a people by political
intuition anticipating the lessons afterwards revealed to them in the
sad school of experience, will not be indisposed to join with the ardent
Irish patriot in his lavish expressions of admiration for the sagacity
of his Celtic forefathers, who foreshadowed in the democratic
organisation of the Irish clan the more perfect organisation of the free
society of the future.

 

### The Pivotal Issue

Whichever be the true interpretation of Irish history, one fact at least
stands out clear and undeniable, viz., that the conflict between the
rival systems of land ownership was the pivot around which centred all
the struggles and rebellions of which that history has been so prolific.
The Irish regarded with inveterate hostility their English rulers, at
all times set little store upon promises of incorporation within the
pale of the constitution, and rose with enthusiasm under their
respective chiefs, because they regarded this as the all-important
question, because in their eyes English rule and Dublin parliaments were
alike identified as the introducers and upholders of the system of
feudalism and private ownership of land, as opposed to the Celtic system
of clan or common ownership, which they regarded, and, I think, rightly,
as the pledge at once of their political and social liberty.

The English Government was also astute enough to perceive that the
political or national subjection of Ireland was entirely valueless to
the conquerors while the politically subjected nation remained in
possession of economic freedom. Consequently, we find that the first
stipulation made to the Irish tribe upon its submission always provided
that the lands of the tribe should be regarded as the private property
of the chief; that he should therefore accept them as a grant from the
crown, from which he should in future hold them; that he should drop his
Irish title, which proclaimed him the freely elected chief of a free
community, and should instead accept an English title, such as duke or
earl, and in all things conform to English ideas of civilisation and
social order. All these stipulations were in the last degree repugnant
to Irish ideas. The chief, as Mill has justly observed, was but the
managing member of the tribal association, although in the stress of
constant warfare they usually limited their choice to the members of one
or two families; yet the right of election was never abdicated by the
tribesmen. Whenever the seductions of English gold overmastered the
patriotism of an Irish chief, and succeeded in inducting his acceptance
of the alien property system and the alien title (as in the case of Art
O'Neil and Nial Garbh O'Donnell, the Queen's O'Reilly and the Queen's
Maguire), they immediately elected another chief in his stead; and from
that moment the unfortunate renegade became an outlaw from his own
people, and could only appear in his native territory under an escort of
English spears.

 

### The Septal System

The Irish system was thus on a par with those conceptions of social
rights and duties which we find the ruling classes to-day denouncing so
fiercely as "Socialistic". It was apparently inspired by the democratic
principle that property was intended to serve the people, and not by the
principle so universally acted upon at present, viz., that the people
have no other function in existing than to be the bondslaves of those
who by force or by fraud have managed to possess themselves of property.
They did not, indeed, regard all forms of productive property as
rightfully belonging to the community; but when we remember that the
land alone was at that time of importance, all other forms of property
being insignificant by comparison, we see that they were as Socialistic
as the industrial development of their time required. The English
civilisation against which they had fought was on the other hand,
thoroughly individualistic; and, as it triumphed, we are reaping the
fruits to-day in the industrial disputes, the agricultural depressions,
the poor-houses, and other such glorious institutions in Church and
State as we are permitted the luxury of enjoying in common with our
fellow-subjects in this "integral portion of the British Empire". The
results of the change on the national life of Erin are well illustrated
in the scornful words in which Aubrey De Vere apostrophises the "new
race" of exploiters which then arose:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| The chiefs of the Gael were the people embodied;\                     |
| The chiefs were the blossoms, the people the root.\                   |
| Their conquerors, the Normans, high-souled and high-blooded,\         |
| Grew Irish at last from the scalp to the foot;\                       |
| And ye, ye are hirelings and satraps, not nobles --\                  |
| Your slaves they detest you, your masters, they scorn;\               |
| The river lives on, but the sun-painted bubbles\                      |
| Pass quickly, to the rapids incessantly borne.                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

 

### The National Struggle

The break-up of the Kilkenny Confederation in 1649, and the consequent
dispersion of the Irish clans, was the immediate cause of that confusion
of thought and apparent lack of directness in aim which down to our day
has characterised all modern Irish politics. Deprived of any form of
political or social organisation which might serve as an effective basis
for its practical realisation, the demand for the common ownership of
the land naturally fell into abeyance until such time as the conquest of
some form of political freedom should enable the dispossessed Irishry to
substitute for the lost tribal association the fuller and broader
conception of an Irish nation as the natural repository and guardian of
the people's heritage. But when the fusing process of a common
subjection had once more welded the heterogenous elements of Irish
society into one compact nationality it was found that in the
intervening period a new class had arisen in the land -- a class which,
while professedly ultra-nationalistic in its political aims, had
nevertheless so far compounded with the enemy as to accept the alien
social system, with its accompanying manifestations, the legal
dispossession and economic dependence of the vast mass of the Irish
people, as part of the natural order of society.

 

### Rising Bourgeoisie

The Irish middle class, who then by virtue of their social position and
education stepped to the front as Irish patriot leaders, owed their
unique status in political life to two entirely distinct and apparently
antagonistic causes. Their wealth they derived from the manner in which
they had contrived to wedge themselves into a place in the commercial
life of the "Saxon enemy", assimilating his ideas and adopting his
methods, until they often proved the most ruthless of the two races in
pushing to its furthest limits their powers of exploitation. Their
political influence they derived from their readiness at all times to do
lip service to the cause of Irish nationality, which in their
phraseology meant simply the transfer of the seat of government from
London to Dublin, and the consequent transfer to their own or their
relatives' pockets of some portion of the legislative fees and lawyers
pickings then, as at present, expended among the Cockneys. With such men
at the helm it is no wonder that the patriot parties of Ireland have
always ended their journey upon the rock of disaster. Beginning by
accepting a social system abhorrent to the best traditions of a Celtic
people, they next abandoned as impossible the realisation of national
independence. By the first act they set the seal of their approval upon
a system founded upon the robbery of their countrymen, and by the second
they bound up the destinies of their country with the fate of an Empire
in the humiliation of whose piratical rulers lies the Irish people's
only chance of national and social redemption.

As compensation for this gross betrayal the middle class politicians
offer -- Home Rule. To exactly analyse what Home Rule would confer on
Ireland is a somewhat difficult task, since every one interprets the
"thing" in his own way and according to his own peculiar bent. Perhaps
the safest way, and at any rate the one least open to objection, will be
to regard as Home Rule the Bill introduced by Mr. Gladstone. As this
scheme represents the utmost that the statesmanlike prowess of Mr.
Parnell, with a solid phalanx of eighty-six members behind him, could
wrest from the fear or favour of English Liberalism, it is surely safe
enough to assume that no other merely political body from Ireland is
ever likely to improve upon this concession by any alliance with either
of the great factions who watch over the interests of the English
propertied class. Home Rule proposed to establish in Ireland a domestic
legislature that would be carefully divested of all those powers and
attributes which by the common consent of civilised peoples are regarded
as properly belonging to the sphere and functions of government; that
would have no power in controlling diplomacy, post office, commerce,
telegraphs, coinage, customs and excise, weights and measures,
copyrights and patents, succession to the Crown, or army, navy, militia
or volunteers.

 

### Home Rule -- Its Meaning

The only conceivable result of such a state of affairs would have been
to create in Ireland a host of place-hunters and Government officials,
who, secure in the enjoyment of a good income themselves, would have
always acted as a barrier between the people and their oppressors. As a
method whereby the English legislature might have been relieved of some
of its duties at home, and thus left more free to pursue its policy of
plunder and aggression abroad, it ought to have delighted the heart of
the Jingo politicians. That they were too dunderheaded to see their
opportunity is a mercy for which far-seeing Irish democrats can never be
sufficiently thankful.

The second Home Rule Bill was slightly more democratic than the first,
therefore the Government made no effort to force it upon the Upper
House. The English Liberal Party -- the most treacherous political party
in Europe -- has always had two favourite devices for destroying
obnoxious proposals of reform. First: unscrupulous slander and
opposition; second: theoretical acceptance of the principle of reform,
but indefinite postponement of its practical realisation, continued on
one pretext or another, until the hearts of the reformers are broken and
their organisations disrupted. The first was defeated by the genius of
Parnell; how well the second method has succeeded let the present
political chaos of Ireland testify.

Realising that, taken on its own merits, Home Rule is simply a mockery
of Irish national aspirations our middle class leaders have
industriously instilled into the public mind the belief that the advent
of Home Rule would mean the immediate establishment of manufactures and
the opening up of mines, etc., in every part of Ireland. This seems to
them the highest possible ideal -- an Irish society composed of
employers making fortunes and workers grinding out their lives for a
weekly wage. But, to say the least, the men who talk in this manner must
either be woefully ignorant of the conditions of modern industry, or
else, for some private reason of their own, are wilfully deceiving those
who believe in them. To establish industry successfully to-day in any
country requires at least two things, neither of which Ireland
possesses, and one of which she never can possess. The first is the
possession of the wherewithal to purchase machinery and raw materials
for the equipment of her factories, and the second is customers to
purchase the goods when they are manufactured. Now, we find that
England, who has had the start in manufacturing over every other nation,
who has been extending her commerce and perfecting her machinery for a
hundred and fifty years at least, who has created a nation of highly
skilled artisans, adept in every form of industrial achievement --
England, the wealthiest country in the world, has brought her industries
to such a degree of mechanical perfection that her customers cannot keep
her going. She can supply goods of every description much quicker than
the world is able to purchase and consume them, and as a direct
consequence of this vast producing power she is compelled every few
years to either wholly or partially stop her machinery and close her
factories, to discharge her artisan subjects, and compel them to walk
about in enforced idleness and semi-starvation until such time as the
goods they have produced are purchased and consumed by other people --
their customers.

 

### Limited Markets

Bear this in mind, and remember also, that Germany, France, Italy,
Belgium, Austria, Russia, every state on the continent of Europe and
America, India, China and Japan, are all entering into the struggle;
that each of them is striving hard, not only to provide what it had
formerly relied on England to provide, but also to beat England out of
the markets of the world. Remember that for all those countries the
great difficulty is to find customers, that the old-established firm in
the business -- viz., the British Empire -- finds that her customers
cannot keep her mills and factories going. Remember all this, and then
tell me how poor Ireland, exhausted and drained of her life-blood at
every pore, with a population almost wholly agricultural and unused to
mechanical pursuits, is to establish new factories, and where she is to
find the customers to keep them going. She cannot create new markets.
This world is only limited after all, and the nations of Europe are
pushing their way into its remote corners so rapidly that in a few years
time, at most, the entire world will have been exhausted as a market for
their wares.

 

### Sweat-Shop Factories

Go to the factory towns, to the ship-building centres, to the coal
mines, to the Trade Unions, or to the Stock Exchanges of England, the
continent of Europe or America, and everywhere you will hear the same
cry: "The supply of cotton and linen goods, of ironwork, of coal and of
ships of every description, is exceeding the demand; we must work short
time, we must reduce the workers' wages, we must close our factories --
there is not enough customers to keep our machinery going." In the face
of such facts the thoughtful Irish patriot will throw rant aside and
freely recognise that it is impossible for Ireland to do what those
other countries cannot do, with their greater advantages, viz., to
attain prosperity by establishing a manufacturing system in a
world-market already glutted with every conceivable kind of commodity.
It is well also to remember that even under the most favourable
circumstances, even if by some miracle, we were able to cover the green
fields of Erin with huge, ugly factories, with chimneys belching forth
volumes of poisonous smoke and coating the island with a sooty
desolation -- even then we would quickly find that under the conditions
born of the capitalist system our one hope of keeping our feet as a
manufacturing nation would depend upon our ability to work longer and
harder for a lower wage than the other nations of Europe, in order that
our middle class may have the opportunity of selling their goods at a
lower price than their competitors. This is equivalent to saying that
our chance of making Ireland a manufacturing country depends upon us
becoming the lowest blacklegs in Europe. Even then the efforts would be
doomed to failure, for the advent of the yellow man into the competitive
arena, the sudden development of the capitalist system on China and
Japan, has rendered forever impossible the uprise of another industrial
nation in Europe.

But, we are told by some of our leaders, "if we cannot compete with
other countries in the world-market, we can at least produce for
ourselves." Under no circumstances can we do so without bringing upon
ourselves disasters as great as those we wish to escape from. With
greater advantages and larger experience in the field than we possess,
the capitalists of the other countries can easily undersell our goods,
even in the home market, and if in order to give our manufactures a
chance we were to adopt protection (impossible under Home rule), the
result would be to immediately increase the price of every kind of goods
while no one would benefit except teh few capitalists for whose sake our
Irish workers would be working harder and longer and paying higher
prices than before.

Again, it is said we need not perhaps establish industry or try it, but
we can at least establish peasant proprietary, and make every man the
owner of his farm, let every man live, if not under his own vine and fig
tree, at least upon his own potato patch. In the first place, I consider
such an act to be, even if practicable, one of very questionable
justice. To make the land of a country the property of a class is to my
mind equally iniquitous, whether that class number a few hundreds or a
few thousands. The land of a country belongs of right to the people of
that country, and not to any particular class, nor even to any single
generation of the people. The private ownership of land by the landlord
class is an injustice to the whole community, but the creation of a
peasant proprietary would only tend to stereotype and consecrate that
injustice, since it would leave out of account the entire labouring
class as well as the dispossessed millions of former tenants whom
landlord rule had driven into the Irish towns or across the sea.

 

### Nationalisation of Land

It is, of course, manifestly impossible to reinstate the Irish people on
the lands from which they have been driven, but that fact only lends
additional point to the demand for the nationalisation of land in the
hands of the Irish State. Setting that fact aside, however, have our
advocates of peasant proprietary really considered the economic
tendencies of the time, and the development of the mechanical arts in
the agricultural world? The world is progressive, and peasant
proprietary, which a hundred years ago might have been a boon, would now
be powerless to save from ruin the agriculture of Ireland. The day of
small farmers, as of small capitalists, is gone, and wherever they are
still found they find it impossible to compete with the improved
machinery and mammoth farms of America and Australia. Whereas each Irish
farm is burdened with the support of its field workers for the entire
365 days in the year, the capitalist farmer of the States hires his
"hands" by the hundred for harvesting operations, and discharges them
immediately it is completed, thus reducing to one-fourth the annual
wages bill of his workers.

 

### Science in Agriculture

How are our small farmers to compete with a state of matters like this,
or like unto that revealed in the report of the American Social Science
Association, even as far back as 1878? It tells how science and
invention, after devoting so much time to industry, have turned their
attention to agriculture, and as a result have effected almost a
revolution in that branch of human activity. Ploughs which, driven by
horses, plough more than five acres per day, or the extent of many an
Irish farm, and steam ploughs which do much more; machines for sowing
seeds, with which a boy and horse can do three times the work of a man,
and do it much better; reaping machines, with which a man with one or
two pairs of horses can do the work of at least sixty men with reaping
hooks; reaping machines which not only cut the harvest, but tie it as
well, are now so common in England and America as to fail to attract
attention, and we hear on good authority of machines which cut, thrash,
winnow, and sack it, without the intervention of any other human hands
than those of the engineer who tends the machine. In cutting the corn a
man or boy, with a horse and machine, can do the work of twenty men
cutting an acre an hour.

All this, be it remembered, is only possible to the farmer who holds his
thousands of acres. The first cost of any one of those machines would be
enough to ruin the average small farmer in Ireland, and the result is
that while he is painfully labouring on his farm his American competitor
can bring in his harvest, send it thousands of miles by railroad, load
it into ships, send it across the Atlantic, and eventually sell it
practically at our doors as cheap as, and cheaper than, our home
produce. The competition of New Zealand beef and frozen mutton has
already inflicted incalculable harm upon the Irish cattle trade, and
within the last few months I have received private information of a
contract entered into with the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company
to transport butter from the huge cattle ranches of Australia to any
port in Great Britain and Ireland at a price that spells ruin to the
dairy farms of these countries. While, then, in order to avoid even the
appearance of injustice, we may rigidly respect those "rights of
property" in land our peasant farmers have acquired by purchase, we must
recognise that peasant proprietary in itself offers no hope of a free
and unanxious life -- not even to the peasant proprietor.

 

### Effects of Conquest

Ere we can forecast the future we must understand the present and bring
a just sense of proportion to our review of the history of the past.
What, then, are the conditions which govern life in Ireland to-day, and
of what are those conditions the outcome? According to the most eminent
authorities who have ever dealt with the subject the soil of Ireland is
capable of sustaining a population many times larger than she has ever
borne upon its surface, yet Ireland is in a state of chronic starvation.
Every ship that leaves our ports is laden down with harvest for human
consumption, while the people whose strong hands have reaped that
harvest pine in wretchedness and want, or fly from the shores of this
fertile land as from the arid sands of a desert. The landlord class,
infatuated with that madness which always precedes destruction, press
for their rents to the uttermost farthing wherever they can wheedle or
coerce a too-compliant legislature and executive to support them in
their exactions. The capitalist farmer, driven to the wall by the stress
of the competition, seeks in vain to maintain his foothold in life by
unceasing struggle with the lord of the soil on one hand and a ruthless
oppression of the labourer on the other; the small farmer, bereft
entirely of hope for the future, settles despairingly into a state of
social wretchedness for which no savage land can furnish a parallel; the
agricultural labourer, with his fellow in the towns, takes his strength,
his brains, his physical and intellectual capabilities to the market,
and offers them to his wealthier fellow-creatures, to be exploited in
return for a starvation wage. On all sides anarchy and oppression reign
supreme, until one could scarcely wonder if even the most orthodox
amongst us were tempted to echo the saying of the Spanish Don Juan
Aguila after the battle of Kinsale: "Surely Christ never died for this
people!"

 

### The Use of the Soil

These are the conditions under which life is endured in Ireland to-day.
From what do such conditions spring? There are two things necessary for
the maintenance of life in Ireland, as in every other country. They are
land and labour. Possessed of these two essentials, the human race has
at its command all the factors requisite for the wellbeing of the
species. From the earth labour extracts alike its foods and the mineral
wealth with which it contrives to construct and adorn its habitations
and prepare its raiment. Therefore the possession of the soil is
everywhere the first requisite of life. Granting this as a proposition
too self-evident to need elaborate demonstration, we at once arrive at
the conclusion that since the soil is so necessary to our existence the
first care of every well-regulated community ought to he to preserve the
use of that soil, and the right to freely share in its fruits, to every
member of the community, present or prospective, born or unborn.

 

### Production for Use

The moment when the land of a country passes from the care of the
community as a public trust, and from being the common property of the
entire people becomes the private property of individuals, marks the
beginning of slavery for that people and of oppression for that country.
With the land held as the property of individuals there are immediately
created two antagonistic classes in society -- one holding the land and
demanding from the other a rent for permission to live upon it, and the
other driven by a constant increase of their own numbers to offer larger
and larger shares of the produce of their labour as tribute to the first
class, who thus become masters of the lives of their fellow-beings. With
the land held as the common property of the people an abundant harvest
would he eagerly welcomed as an addition to the wealth of the community,
guaranteeing against want every one of its members. With the land held
as private property the abundant harvest must be sold to satisfy the
exactions of the holder of the soil, and as he jingles in his pockets
the result of the sale of his tenants' produce the families who reaped
it may be perishing of want.

As one crime begets another, so one economic blunder invariably brings
in its train a series of blunders, each one more fruitful of disaster
than the first. When the production of food for public use was abandoned
in favour of production of agricultural produce for private sale and
private profit, it was almost inevitable that the production of almost
every other necessary of life should be subjected to the same
conditions. Thus we find that food, clothes, houses and furniture are
not produced in order that people may be fed, clad, sheltered or made
comfortable, but rather in order that the class who have obtained
possession of the land, machinery, workshops and stores necessary for
the production of these essentials should be thereby enabled to make a
comfortable living at the expense of their fellow creatures. If the
landlord and employing class think they can make a rent or profit by
allowing the people to feed, clothe, or house themselves, then the
latter are allowed to do so under the direction of the former -- when,
where, and how the masters please. If, on the contrary, they imagine it
will pay them better to refuse that right (as they do in every eviction,
strike, or lock-out), then they do refuse that permission, and their
countrymen go forth starving, their children die of want before their
eyes, and their wives and mothers pine in wretchedness and misery in
what their forefathers were wont to call the "Isle of the Blest".

 

### Labour Power

By the operation of certain historic causes the workers have been
deprived of everything by which they can maintain life and are thus
compelled to seek their livelihood by the sale of their capacity for
work, their labour power. The worker thus finds that the most essential
condition which he must perform in order that he may possess his life is
to sell part of that life into the service and for the profit of
another. Whether he sells it by the hour, the day, the week, or the
month is immaterial -- sell it he must or else starve.

Now, the worker is a human being, with all the powers and capabilities
of a human being within him, just as is a landlord, a capitalist, or any
other ornament of society. But when he approaches the capitalist in
order to complete that bargain, which means the sale of his life
piecemeal in order that he may enjoy it as a whole, he finds that he
must carefully divest himself of all claims to he considered as a human
being, and offer himself upon the market subject to the same law as
govern the purchase or sale of any inanimate, soulless commodity, such
as a pair of boots, a straw hat or a frock coat. That is to say, the
price he will receive for this piecemeal sale of himself will depend
upon how many more are compelled by hunger to make the same horrible
bargain.

 

### No Difference

In like manner with the farmer seeking to rent a farm in the open
market. Each competitor seeks to outbid the other, until the rent is
fixed usually out of all proportion to the price which will in the
future be obtained for the produce of the farm bidden for. The
agriculturist finds that in years of universal plenty, when throughout
the world the earth brings forth its fruits in teeming profusion, the
excess of supply over effective demand operates to lower the price of
his farm produce, until it scarcely repays his labour in garnering it,
and in times of scarcity, when a good price might he obtained, he has
little to sell, his customers have not the wherewithal to buy, and the
landlord or the money lender are as relentless as ever in their
exactions.

As a remedy for such an array of evils Home Rule stands revealed as a
glaring absurdity. The Home Rule parties either ignore the question
altogether or else devote their attention to vain attempts to patch up
the system with schemes of reform which each day tends to discredit more
and more. The tenant who seeks in the Land Court for a judicial
valuation of his holding finds that in face of the steady fall in
agricultural prices (assisted by preferential railway rates in favour of
foreign produce) the 'fair' rent of one year becomes the rack-rent of
another, and the tenant who avails himself of the purchase clauses of
the Land Act finds that he has only escaped from the personal tyranny of
a landlord to have his veins sucked by the impersonal power of the money
lender.

 

### A Socialist Republic

Confronted with such facts, the earnest Irish worker turns in dismay and
joins his voice to that of the uncompromising Nationalist in seeking
from the advocate of an Irish Socialist Republic the clue of the
labyrinthine puzzle of modern economic conditions. The problem is a
grave and difficult one, alike from the general ignorance of its
controlling conditions and because of the multiplicity of vested
interests which must be attacked and overthrown at every forward step
towards its solution. The solution herein set forth is therefore not
guaranteed to be absolutely perfect in all its details, but only to
furnish a rough draft of a scheme of reform by means of which the ground
may be prepared for that revolutionary change in the structure of
society which can alone establish an approximation to an ideally just
social system.

The agriculture of Ireland can no longer compete with the scientifically
equipped farmers of America, therefore the only hope that now remains is
to abandon competition altogether as a rule of life, to organise
agriculture as a public service under the control of boards of
management elected by the agricultural population (no longer composed of
farmers and labourers, but of free citizens with equal responsibility
and equal honour), and responsible to them and the nation at large, and
with all the mechanical and scientific aids to agriculture the entire
resources of the nation can place at their disposal. Let the produce of
Irish soil go first to feed the Irish people, and after a sufficient
store has been retained to insure of that being accomplished, let the
surplus be exchanged with other countries in return for those
manufactured goods Ireland needs but does not herself produce.

Thus we will abolish at one stroke the dread of foreign competition and
render perfectly needless any attempt to create an industrial hell in
Ireland under the specious pretext of 'developing our resources'.

Apply to manufacture the same social principle, let the co-operative
organisation of the workers replace the war of classes under capitalism
and transform the capitalist himself from an irresponsible hunter after
profit into a public servant fulfilling a public function and under
public control. Recognise the right of all to an equal opportunity to
develop to their fullest capacity all the powers and capabilities
inherent in them by guaranteeing to all our countrymen and women, the
weak as well as the strong, the simple as well as the cunning, the
honest equally with the unscrupulous, the fullest, freest, and most
abundant human life intelligently organised society can confer upon any
of its members.

 

### Complete Separation

"But," you will say, "this means a Socialist Republic; this is
subversive of all the institutions upon which the British Empire is
founded -- this cannot be realised without national independence." Well,
I trust no one will accuse me of a desire to fan into flame the dying
embers of national hatred when I state as my deliberate and
conscientious conviction that the Irish democracy ought to strive
consistently after the separation of their country from the yoke that
links her destinies with those of the British Crown. The interests of
Labour all the world over are identical, it is true, but it is also true
that each country had better work out its own salvation on the lines
most congenial to its own people.

The national and racial characteristics of the English and Irish people
are different, their political history and traditions are antagonistic,
the economic development of the one is not on a par with the other, and,
finally, although they have been in the closest contact for seven
hundred years, yet the Celtic Irishman is to-day as much of an insoluble
problem to even the most friendly English as on the day when the two
countries were first joined in unholy wedlock. No Irish revoutionist
worth his salt would refuse to lend a hand to the Social Democracy of
England in the effort to uproot the social system of which the British
Empire is the crown and apex, and in like manner no English Social
Democrat fails to recognize clearly that the crash which would betoken
the fall of the ruling classes in Ireland would sound the tocsin for the
revolt of the disinherited in England. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

 

### Who are the People?

But on whom devolves the task of achieving that downfall of the ruling
classes in Ireland? On the Irish people. But who are the Irish people?
Is it the dividend-hunting capitalist with the phraseology of patriotism
on his lips and the spoil wrung from sweated Irish toilers in his
pockets; is it the scheming lawyer -- most immoral of all classes; is it
the slum landlord who denounces rackrenting in the country and practices
it in the towns; is it any one of these sections who to-day dominate
Irish politics? Or is it not rather the Irish working class -- the only
secure foundation on which a free nation can be reared -- the Irish
working class which has borne the brunt of every political struggle, and
gained by none, and which is to-day the only class in Ireland which has
no interest to serve in perpetuating either the political or social
forms of oppression -- the British connection or the capitalist system?
The Irish working class must emancipate itself, and in emancipating
itself it must, perforce, free its country. The act of social
emancipation requires the conversion of the land and instruments of
production from private property into the public or common property of
the entire nation. This necessitates a social system of the most
absolute democracy, and in establishing that necessary social system the
working class must grapple with every form of government which could
interfere with the most unfettered control by the people of Ireland of
all the resources of their country.

On the working class of Ireland, therefore, devolves the task of
conquering political representation for their class as the preliminary
step towards the conquest of political power. This task can only he
safely entered upon by men and women who recognise that the first action
of a revolutionary army must harmonise in principle with those likely to
be its last, and that, therefore, no revolutionists can safely invite
the co-operation of men or classes, whose ideals are not theirs, and
whom, therefore, they may be compelled to fight at some future critical
stage of the journey to freedom. To this category belongs every section
of the propertied class, and every individual of those classes who
believes in the righteousness of his class position. The freedom of the
working class must be the work of the working class. And let it be
remembered that timidity in the slave induces audacity in the tyrant,
but the virility and outspokenness of the revolutionists ever frightens
the oppressor himself to hide his loathesomeness under the garb of
reform. And thus remembering, fight for your class at every point.
[\[2\]](#n2){#f2}

 

### Shorter Working Week

Our people are flying to the uttermost ends of the earth; seek to retain
them at home by reducing the hours of labour wherever you have the power
and by supporting every demand for legislative restriction. Your Irish
railways employ thousands of men, whose working hours average twelve per
day. Were they restricted to a forty-eight-hour week of labour,
employment would he provided for thousands of Irishmen who at present
are driven exiles from their native land. Pledge every Irish
representative to support an Eight-Hour Bill for railways; if he refuses
you will know that he considers profits as more sacred than patriotism,
and would sacrifice his country on the altar of greed. Our Irish
municipalities and other public bodies controlled by popular vote employ
also many thousands of men. What are their hours of labour? On the
average ten, and their wages just above starvation point. Insist upon
Irish corporations establishing the eight-hour day in all their works.
They at least do not need to fear foreign competition. If you have no
vote in the corporation you can at least help to hound off the political
platform elsewhere every so-called patriot who refuses to perform this
act of justice. Every Irish corporation which declines to institute an
eight-hours' working day at a decent wage for its employees has
virtually entered into a conspiracy with the British Government to
expatriate the Irish people, rather than pay an additional halfpenny in
the pound on the rates. In all our cities the children of the labouring
class are dying off before their time for lack of wholesome nourishing
food. As our municipalities and public trusts provide water for the
people free of direct payment and charge the cost upon the rates, let
them also provide at our schools free breakfasts, dinners and teas to
the children in attendance there, and pay for it from the same source.
No matter what may be the moral character of the parent, let us at least
save the helpless children of our race from physical and mental
degeneracy, and save our teachers from the impossible task of forcing
education upon a child whose brain is enfeebled by the starvation of its
body. As the next step in organisation, let the corporations and public
bodies everywhere throughout the country establish depots for the supply
of bread and all the necessaries of life to the people, at cost price
and without the intervention of the middleman. To save our struggling
farmers from the merciless bleeding of our banking system and
money-lenders in general, let our representatives in parliament force
forward the legislative abolition of our present banking houses and the
suppression of all forms of interest mongering, and the establishment in
their stead of state banking institutions, with popularly elected boards
of directors, issuing loans at rates of interest as low as is consistent
with economic soundness.

When, in addition to the foregoing reforms, we have demanded the
abolition of our hateful poor-house system, and the imposition of a
heavy and steeply graduated income tax on all incomes over £400 a year,
in order to provide comfortable pensions for the aged, the infirm, and
widows and orphans, we will have aroused a new spirit in the people; we
will have based our revolutionary movement upon a correct appreciation
of the needs of the hour, as well as upon the vital principles of
economic justice and uncompromising nationality; we will, as the true
revolutionist should ever do, have called into action on our side the
entire sum of all the forces and factors of social and political
discontent. By the use of the revolutionary ballot we will have made the
very air of Ireland as laden with 'treason', as fully charged with the
spirit of revolt, as it is to-day with the cant of compromise and the
mortal sin of flunkeyism; and thus we will have laid a substantial
groundwork for more effective action in the future, while to those whom
we must remove in our onward march the pledge of our faith in the Social
Revolution will convey the assurance that if we crush their
profit-making enterprises to-day, yet when the sun dawns upon our
freedom, if they have served their fellow creatures loyally in the hour
of strife, they and their children and their children's children will be
guaranteed against want and privation for all time by the safest
guarantee man ever received, the guarantee backed by all the gratitude,
the loyal hearts, the brains and industry of the Irish people, under the
Irish Socialist Republic.

### Footnote

[1.](#f1){#n1} The 1968 pamphlet edition published by New Books does not
contain the last sentence in this paragraph.

[2.](#f2){#n2} According to the text given in Owen Dudley Edwards and
Bernard Ransom (eds.), **James Connolly: Selected Political Writings**
the text in this subsection is as follows:

But while awaiting the propitious moment there remains much to be done
in the political field -- work that can be pushed forward irrespective
of Government opposition, work to which the Irish people can devote
themselves, in open public organisations while there is a rag of a
constitution left. Pending the complete public organisation of
agriculture let our representatives in Parliament press for the
establishment in every rural district of depots for agricultural
machinery of the newest and most improved pattern. Let such depots be
established at the expense of the state and for the use of the
agricultural population, to whom the needful machinery for speedy and
effective harvesting, etc., shall be supplied on hire at a charge
carefully calculated to cover the cost of wear and tear, of maintenance
and construction alone. Take advantage of every political development to
demand the nationalisation of Irish railways, and when effected abolish
at once the unfair charges by which the railway companies seek to injure
home growers in favour of foreign importers.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 22.7.2007
