International Workingmen\'s Association 1871

# Apropos Of Working-Class Political Action

#### Reporter\'s record of the speech made at the London Conference of the International Working Men\'s Association, September 21, 1871

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Spoken:]{.info} in French September 21, 1871;\
[First Published in full:]{.info} *The Communist International* No. 29,
1934;\
[Source:]{.info} Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume 2 (1973), Progress
Publishers;\
[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} Brian Baggins;\
[Copyleft:]{.info} Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2002.
[Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the
terms of the [GNU Free Documentation
License](../../../../../admin/legal/fdl.htm).]{.date}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Complete abstention from political action is impossible. The
abstentionist press participates in politics every day. It is only a
question of how one does it, and of what politics one engages in. For
the rest, to us abstention is impossible. The working-class party
functions as a political party in most countries by now, and it is not
for us to ruin it by preaching abstention. Living experience, the
political oppression of the existing governments compels the workers to
occupy themselves with politics whether they like it or not, be it for
political or for social goals. To preach abstention to them is to throw
them into the embrace of bourgeois politics. The morning after the Paris
Commune, which has made proletarian political action an order of the
day, abstention is entirely out of the question.

We want the abolition of classes. What is the means of achieving it? The
only means is political domination of the proletariat. For all this, now
that it is acknowledged by one and all, we are told not to meddle with
politics. The abstentionists say they are revolutionaries, even
revolutionaries *par excellence*. Yet revolution is a supreme political
act and those who want revolution must also want the means of achieving
it, that is, political action, which prepares the ground for revolution
and provides the workers with the revolutionary training without which
they are sure to become the dupes of the Favres and Pyats the morning
after the battle. However, our politics must be working-class politics.
The workers\' party must never be the tagtail of any bourgeois party; it
must be independent and have its goal and its own policy.

The political freedoms, the right of assembly and association, and the
freedom of the press --- those are our weapons. Are we to sit back and
abstain while somebody tries to rob us of them? It is said that a
political act on our part implies that we accept the exiting state of
affairs. On the contrary, so long as this state of affairs offers us the
means of protesting against it, our use of these means does not signify
that we recognise the prevailing order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[International Workingmen\'s Association
Index](../../../../../history/international/iwma/index.htm)\
[Resolution on Working Class Political Action](politics-resolution.htm)
\| [Speeches by Marx](politics-speech.htm)\
[Marx/Engels Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
