International Workingmen\'s Association 1871

# Resolution of the London Conference on Working Class Political Action

##### as adopted by the London Conference of the International, September, 1871

Considering the following passage of the preamble to the Rules:

\'The economical emancipation of the working classes is the great end to
which every political movement ought to be subordinate *as a means*\';

That the Inaugural Address of the International Working Men\'s
Association (1864) states:

\'The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their
political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their
economical monopolies. So far from promoting, they will continue to lay
every possible impediment in the way of the emancipation of labour\...
To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the
working classes;\'

That the Congress of Lausanne (1867) has passed this resolution:

\'The social emancipation of the workmen is inseparable from their
political emancipation\';

That the declaration of the General Council relative to the pretended
plot of the French Internationalists on the eve of the plebiscite (1870)
says:

\'Certainly by the tenor of our Statutes, all our branches in England,
on the Continent, and in America have the special mission not only to
serve as centres for the militant organization of the working class, but
also to support, in their respective countries, every political movement
tending towards the accomplishment of our ultimate end --- the
economical emancipation of the working class\';

That false translations of the original Statutes have given rise to
various interpretations which were mischievous to the development and
action of the International Working Men\'s Association;

In presence of an unbridled reaction which violently crushes every
effort at emancipation on the part of the working men, and pretends to
maintain by brute force the distinction of classes and the political
domination of the propertied classes resulting from it;

Considering, that against this collective power of the propertied
classes the working class cannot act, as a class, except by constituting
itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all old
parties formed by the propertied classes;

That this constitution of the working class into a political party is
indispensable in order to ensure the triumph of the social revolution
and its ultimate end --- the abolition of classes;

That the combination of forces which the working class has already
effected by its economical struggles ought at the same time to serve as
a lever for its struggles against the political power of landlords and
capitalists ---

The Conference recalls to the members of the *International*:

That in the militant state of the working class, its economical movement
and its political action are indissolubly united.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Works Index](../../date/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
