The International Workingmen\'s Association, 1871

# Political action and the working class

##### Speech by Marx the London Conference of the International, September, 1871

------------------------------------------------------------------------

These are notes taken (in French) from two speeches Marx made at the
London Conference; Protocols of the Sessions of September 20, 21, 1871.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### September 20

Citizen Lorenzo reminds us to stick to the Rules, and Citizen Bastelica
followed his example. In both the [original
Statutes](../../../../../history/international/iwma/documents/1864/rules.htm)
and the [Inaugural Address](../../1864/10/27.htm), I read that the
General Council is obligated to prepare an agenda for the Congresses for
discussion. The program which the General Council prepared for the
Conference deals with the organization of the Association, and Vaillant
proposal relates directly to this point. hence the objection of Lorenzo
and Bastelica is unfounded. [\[1\]](#n1)

In virtually all countries, certain members of the International,
invoking the mutilated conception of the Statutes adopted at the Geneva
Congress, have made propaganda in favor of abstention from politics; and
the governments have been quite careful not to impede this restraint. In
Germany, Schweitzer and others in the pay of Bismarck even attempted to
harness the cart to government policy. In France, this criminal
abstention allowed Favre, Picard, and others, to seize power on
September 4; this abstention made it possible, on March 18, to set up a
dictatorial committee composed largely of Bonapartists and intrigants,
who, in the first days, lost the Revolution by inactivity, days which
they should have devoted to strengthening the Revolution.

In America, a recently held workers\' congress \[National Labor Union,
August 7-10, 1871, Baltimore\] resolved to occupy itself with political
questions and to replace professional politicians with workers like
themselves, who were authorized to defend the interests of their class.

In England, it is not so easy for a worker to get to Parliament. Since
members of Parliament do not receive any compensation, and the worker
has to work to support himself, Parliament becomes unattainable for him,
and the bourgeoisie knows very well that its stubborn refusal to allow
salaries for members of Parliament is a means of preventing the working
class from being represented in it.

One should never believe that it is of small significance to have
workers in Parliament. If one stifles their voices, as in the case of De
Potter and Castian, or if one ejects them, as in the case of Manuel \--
the reprisals and oppressions exercise a deep effect on the people. If,
on the other hand, they can speak from the parliamentary tribune, as do
Bebel and Liebknecht, the whole world listens to them. In the one case
or the other, great publicity is provided for our principles. To give
but one examples: when during the \[Franco-Prussian\] war, which was
fought in France, Bebel and Liebknecht undertook to point out the
responsibility of the working class in the face of those events, all of
Germany was shaken; and even in Munich, the city where revolutions take
place only over the price of beet, great demonstrations took place
demanding an end to the war.

The governments are hostile to us, one must respond to them with all the
means at out disposal. To get workers into Parliament is synonymous with
a victory over the governments, but one must choose the right men, not
Tolains.

Marx supports the proposal of Citizen Vaillant, as well as Frankel\'s
amendment, to state it as a premise, and thus strengthen it, that the
Association has always demanded, and not merely from today, that the
workers must occupy themselves with politics.

##### September 21

Marx said he had already spoken yesterday in favor of Vaillant\'s
motion, and therefore he would not oppose him today. He replied to
Bastelica that at the beginning of the Conference it was already decided
that it would take up exclusively the question of organization and not
the question of principles. In regard to the reference to the Rules, he
calls attention to the fact that the Statutes and the Inaugural Address,
which he hs reread, are to be read as a whole.

He explained the history of abstention from politics and said that one
ought not to let himself be irritated by this question. The men who
propagated this doctrine were well-meaning utopians, but those who want
to take such a road today are not. They reject politics until after a
violent struggle, and thereby drive the people into a formal, bourgeois
opposition, which we must battle against at the same time we fight
against the governments. We must unmask Gambetta, so that the people are
no longer hoodwinked. Marx shares Vaillant\'s opinion. We must reply
with a challenge to all the governments that are subjecting the
International to persecutions.

Reaction exists on the whole Continent; it is general and permanent \--
even in the United States and England \-- in one form or another.

We must announce to the governments: We know you are the armed power
which is directed against the proletarians; we will move against you in
peaceful way where it is possible, and with arms if it should become
necessary.

Marx is of the opinion that Vaillant\'s proposal requires some changes,
and he therefore supports Outine\'s motion. [\[2\]](#n2)

### Notes

[]{#n1}[1.]{.term} This day, French delegate Edouard Vaillant proposed a
resolution stressing the inseparability of politics and economics, they
are inherently intertwined, so he urged workers to unite political
activities. Proudhonists in the International objected.

[]{#n2}[2.]{.term} Note: Outine proposed Vaillant\'s motion, the
amendments by Serraillier and Frankel, be passed to the General Council
for further study, under the subject \"The Political Efficacy of the
Working Class\" \-- Outine\'s motion passed.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Resolution of the London Conference on Working Class Political
Action](politics-resolution.htm)\
[International Workingmen\'s Association
Index](../../1864/iwma/index.htm) \| [Works by
Date](../../date/index.htm#1870)\
[Works Index](../../date/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
