Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890

# Engels to C. Schmidt In Berlin

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} Brian Baggins;\
[Online Version:]{.info} Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org)
2000.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, August 5, 1890

[ \[ \....\] ]{.context}

I saw a review of Paul Barth\'s book \[*Die Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels
und der Hegelianer bis auf Marx und Hartmann*\] by that bird of ill
omen, Moritz Wirth, in the Vienna *Deutsche Worte*, and *this* book
itself, as well. I will have a look at it, but I must say that if
\"little Moritz\" is right when he quotes Barth as stating that the sole
example of the dependence of philosophy, etc., on the material
conditions of existence which he can find in all Marx\'s works is that
Descartes declares animals to the machines, then I am sorry for the man
who can write such a thing. And if this man has not yet discovered that
while the material mode of existence is the *primum agens* [\[primary
agent, prime cause\]]{.context} this does not preclude the ideological
spheres from reacting upon it in their turn, though with a secondary
effect, he cannot possibly have understood the subject he is writing
about. However, as I said, all this is secondhand and little Moritz is a
dangerous friend. The materialist conception of history has a lot of
them nowadays, to whom it serves as an excuse for *not* studying
history. Just as Marx used to say, commenting on the French \"Marxists\"
of the late \[18\]70s: \"All I know is that I am not a Marxist.\"

There has also been a discussion in the *Volks-Tribune* about the
distribution of products in future society, whether this will take place
according to the amount of work done or otherwise. The question has been
approached very \"materialistically\" in opposition to certain
idealistic phraseology about justice. But strangely enough it has not
struck anyone that, after all, the method of distribution essentially
depends on *how much* there is to distribute, and that this must surely
change with the progress of production and social organization, so that
the method of distribution may also change. But everyone who took part
in the discussion, \"socialist society\" appeared not as something
undergoing continuous change and progress but as a stable affair fixed
once for all, which must, therefore, have a method of distribution fixed
once for all. All one can reasonably do, however, is 1) to try and
discover the method of distribution to be used *at the beginning*, and
2) to try and find the *general tendency* of the further development.
But about this I do not find a single word in the whole debate.

[]{#s2} In general, the word \"materialistic\" serves many of the
younger writers in Germany as a mere phrase with which anything and
everything is labeled without further study, that is, they stick on this
label and then consider the question disposed of. But our conception of
history is above all a guide to study, not a lever for construction
after the manner of the Hegelian. All history must be studied afresh,
the conditions of existence of the different formations of society must
be examined individually before the attempt is made to deduce them from
the political, civil law, aesthetic, philosophic, religious, etc., views
corresponding to them. Up to now but little has been done here because
only a few people have got down to it seriously. In this field we can
utilize heaps of help, it is immensely big, anyone who will work
seriously can achieve much and distinguish himself. But instead of this
too many of the younger Germans simply make use of the phrase historical
materialism (and *everything* can be turned into a phrase) only in order
to get their own relatively scanty historical knowledge --- for economic
history is still as yet in its swaddling clothes! --- constructed into a
neat system as quickly as possible, and they then deem themselves
something very tremendous. And after that a Barth can come along and
attack the thing itself, which in his circle has indeed been degraded to
a mere phrase.

However, all this will right itself. We\'re strong enough in Germany now
to stand a lot. One of the greatest services which the Anti-Socialist
Law did us was to free us from the obtuseness of the German intellectual
who had got tinged with socialism. We are now strong enough to digest
the German intellectual too, who is giving himself great airs again.
You, who have really done something, must have noticed yourself how few
of the young literary men who fasten themselves on to the party give
themselves in the trouble to study economics, the history of economics,
the history of trade, of industry, of agriculture, of the formations of
society. How many know anything of Maurer except his name! The
self-sufficiency of the journalist must serve for everything here and
the result looks like it. It often seems as if these gentlemen think
anything is good enough for the workers. If these gentlemen only knew
that Marx thought his best things were still not good enough for the
workers, how he regarded it as a crime to offer the workers anything but
the very best!

[ \[ \....\] ]{.context}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1890 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
