Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890

### Engels to J. Bloch In Königsberg

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} Historical Materialism (Marx, Engels, Lenin), p. 294 -
296;\
[Publisher:]{.info} Progress Publishers, 1972;\
[First Published:]{.info} by *Der sozialistische Akademiker*, Berlin,
October 1, 1895;\
[Translated:]{.info} from German;\
[Online Version:]{.info} marxists.org 1999;\
[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} [Brian
Baggins](../../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm#emeritus);

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, September 21, 1890

[\[\....\]]{.context}  

According to the materialist conception of history, the *ultimately*
determining element in history is the production and reproduction of
real life. Other than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. Hence
if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the
*only* determining one, he transforms that proposition into a
meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. The economic situation is the
basis, but the various elements of the superstructure --- political
forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions
established by the victorious class after a successful battle, etc.,
juridical forms, and even the reflexes of all these actual struggles in
the brains of the participants, political, juristic, philosophical
theories, religious views and their further development into systems of
dogmas --- also exercise their influence upon the course of the
historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in determining their
*form*. There is an interaction of all these elements in which, amid all
the endless host of accidents (that is, of things and events whose inner
interconnection is so remote or so impossible of proof that we can
regard it as non-existent, as negligible), the economic movement finally
asserts itself as necessary. Otherwise the application of the theory to
any period of history would be easier than the solution of a simple
equation of the first degree.

We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place, under very
definite assumptions and conditions. Among these the economic ones are
ultimately decisive. But the political ones, etc., and indeed even the
traditions which haunt human minds also play a part, although not the
decisive one. The Prussian state also arose and developed from
historical, ultimately economic, causes. But it could scarcely be
maintained without pedantry that among the many small states of North
Germany, Brandenburg was specifically determined by economic necessity
to become the great power embodying the economic, linguistic and, after
the Reformation, also the religious difference between North and South,
and not by other elements as well (above all by its entanglement with
Poland, owing to the possession of Prussia, and hence with international
political relations --- which were indeed also decisive in the formation
of the Austrian dynastic power). Without making oneself ridiculous it
would be a difficult thing to explain in terms of economics the
existence of every small state in Germany, past and present, or the
origin of the High German consonant permutations, which widened the
geographic partition wall formed by the mountains from the Sudetic range
to the Taunus to form a regular fissure across all Germany.

In the second place, however, history is made in such a way that the
final result always arises from conflicts between many individual wills,
of which each in turn has been made what it is by a host of particular
conditions of life. Thus there are innumerable intersecting forces, an
infinite series of parallelograms of forces which give rise to one
resultant --- the historical event. This may again itself be viewed as
the product of a power which works as a whole *unconsciously* and
without volition. For what each individual wills is obstructed by
everyone else, and what emerges is something that no one willed. Thus
history has proceeded hitherto in the manner of a natural process and is
essentially subject to the same laws of motion. But from the fact that
the wills of individuals --- each of whom desires what he is impelled to
by his physical constitution and external, in the last resort economic,
circumstances (either his own personal circumstances or those of society
in general) --- do not attain what they want, but are merged into an
aggregate mean, a common resultant, it must not be concluded that they
are equal to zero. On the contrary, each contributes to the resultant
and is to this extent included in it.

I would furthermore ask you to study this theory from its original
sources and not at second-hand; it is really much easier. Marx hardly
wrote anything in which it did not play a part. But especially [*The
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte*](../../1852/18th-brumaire/index.htm) is a most excellent
example of its application. There are also many allusions to it in
[*Capital*](../../1867-c1/index.htm). Then may I also direct you to my
writings: [*Herr Eugen Dühring\'s Revolution in
Science*](../../1877/anti-duhring/index.htm) and [*Ludwig Feuerbach and
the End of Classical German
Philosophy*](../../1886/ludwig-feuerbach/index.htm), in which I have
given the most detailed account of historical materialism which, as far
as I know, exists. [\[[*The German
Ideology*](../../1845/german-ideology/index.htm) was not published in
Marx or Engels lifetime\]]{.context}

[]{#s2} Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the
younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is
due to it. We had to emphasise the main principle *vis-à-vis* our
adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or
the opportunity to give their due to the other elements involved in the
interaction. But when it came to presenting a section of history, that
is, to making a practical application, it was a different matter and
there no error was permissible. Unfortunately, however, it happens only
too often that people think they have fully understood a new theory and
can apply it without more ado from the moment they have assimilated its
main principles, and even those not always correctly. And I cannot
exempt many of the more recent \"Marxists\" from this reproach, for the
most amazing rubbish has been produced in this quarter, too\....

[ \[\....\]]{.context}  

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1890 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
