Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890

# Engels to Otto Von Boenigk In Breslau

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} Brian Baggins;\
[Online Version:]{.info} Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org)
2000;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Folkestone, near Dover August 21, 1890

\... I can reply only briefly and in general terms to your inquiries
^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^, for as concerns the first question I should
otherwise have to write a treatise.

Ad. 1. To my mind, the so-called "socialist society" is not anything
immutable. Like all other social formations, it should be conceived in a
state of constant flux and change. Its crucial difference from the
present order consists naturally in production organized on the basis of
common ownership by the nation of all means of production. To begin this
reorganization tomorrow, but performing it gradually, seems to me quite
feasible. That our workers are capable of it is borne out by their many
producer and consumer cooperatives which, whenever they\'re not
deliberately ruined by the police, are equally well and far more
honestly run than the bourgeois stock companies. I cannot see how you
can speak of the ignorance of the masses in Germany after the brilliant
evidence of political maturity shown by the workers in their victorious
struggle against the Anti-Socialist Law. The patronizing and errant
lecturing of our so-called intellectuals seems to me a far greater
impediment. We are still in need of technicians, agronomists, engineers,
chemists, architects, etc., it is true, but if the worst comes to the
worst we can always buy them just as well as the capitalists buy them,
and if a severe example is made of a few of the traders among them ---
for traders there are sure to be --- they will find it to their own
advantage to deal fairly with us. But apart from the specialists, among
whom I also include schoolteachers, we can get along perfectly well
without the other "intellectuals." The present influx of literati and
students into the party, for example, may be quite damaging if these
gentlemen are not properly kept in check.

The Junker latifundia east of the Elbe could be easily leased under the
due technical management to the present day-laborers and other retinue,
who work the estates jointly. If any disturbances occur, the Junkers,
who have brutalized people by flouting all the existing school
legislation, will alone be to blame.

The biggest obstacles are the small peasants and the importunate
super-clever intellectuals who always think they know everything so much
the better, the less they understand it.

Once we have a sufficient number of followers among the masses, the big
industries and the large-scale latifundia farming can be quickly
socialized, provided we hold the political power. The rest will follow
shortly, sooner or later. And we shall have it all our own way in
large-scale production.

You speak of an absence of uniform insight. This exists --- but on the
part of the intellectuals to stem from the aristocracy and the
bourgeoisie and who do not suspect how much they still have to learn
from the workers\...

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^[\[A\]](#Ab){#A}^ Boenigk asked Engels whether it was possible and
advisable to effect socialist transformations considering the
differences in education, level of consciousness, etc., among the
various classes of society.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1890 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
