Marx-Engels Correspondence 1890

# Engels to [Conrad Schmidt](../../../../../glossary/people/s/c.htm#schmidt-konrad) In Berlin

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} International Publishers (1968);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gestamtausgabe*;\
[Translated:]{.info} Donna Torr;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} [Sally
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) in 2000;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, October 27, 1890

I think you would do very well to take the post in Zürich. \[Editor of
the *Zürich Post.\]* You could always learn a good deal about economics
there, especially if you bear in mind that Zürich is still only a
third-rate money and speculation market, so that the impressions which
make themselves felt there are weakened or deliberately distorted by
twofold or threefold reflection. But you will get a practical knowledge
of the mechanism and be obliged to follow the stock exchange reports
from London, New York, Paris, Berlin and Vienna at first hand, and in
this way the world market, in its reflex as money and stock market, will
reveal itself to you. Economic, political and other reflections are just
like those in the human eye, they pass through a condensing lens and
therefore appear upside down, standing on their heads. Only the nervous
system which would put them on their feet again for representation is
lacking. The money market man only sees the movement of industry and of
the world market in the inverted reflection of the money and stock
market and so effect becomes cause to him. I noticed that in the
\'forties already in Manchester: the London Stock Exchange reports were
utterly useless for the course of industry and its periodical maxima and
minima because these gentry tried to explain everything from crises on
the money market, which were generally only symptoms. At that time the
object was to explain away the origin of industrial crises as temporary
overproduction, so that the thing had in addition its tendentious side,
provocative of distortion. This point has now gone (for us, at any rate,
for good and all), added to which it is indeed a fact that the money
market can also have its own crises, in which direct disturbances of
industry only play a subordinate part or no part at all -- here there is
still much, especially in the history of the last twenty years, to be
examined and established.

Where there is division of labour on a social scale there is also mutual
independence among the different sections of work. In the last instance
production is the decisive factor. But when the trade in products
becomes independent of production itself, it follows a movement of its
own, which, while it is governed as a whole by production, still in
particular cases and within this general dependence follows particular
laws contained in the nature of this new factor; this movement has
phases of its own and in its turn reacts on the movement of production.
The discovery of America was due to the thirst for gold which had
previously driven the Portuguese to Africa (compare Soetbeer\'s
*Production of Precious Metals*), because the enormously extended
European industry of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and the
trade corresponding to it demanded more means of exchange than Germany,
the great silver country from 1450 to 1550, could provide. The conquest
of India by the Portuguese, Dutch and English between 1500 and 1800 had
*imports from* India as its object -- nobody dreamt of exporting
anything there. And yet what a colossal reaction these discoveries and
conquests, solely conditioned by the interests of trade, had upon
industry: they first created the need for *exports to* these countries
and developed large-scale industry.

So it is too with the money market. As soon as trading in money becomes
separate from trade in commodities it has (under certain conditions
imposed by production and commodity trade and within these limits) a
development of its own, special laws and separate phases determined by
its own nature. If, in this further development, trade in money extends
in addition to trade in securities and these securities are not only
government securities but also industrial and transport stocks and
shares, so that money trade conquers the direct control over a portion
of the production by which, taken as a whole, it is itself controlled,
then the reaction of money trading on production becomes still stronger
and more complicated. The money traders have become the owners of
railways, mines, iron works, etc. These means of production take on a
double aspect if their working has to be directed sometimes in the
immediate interests of production but sometimes also according to the
requirements of the shareholders, in so far as they are money traders.
The most striking example of this is the American railways, whose
working is entirely dependent on the stock exchange operations of a Jay
Gould or a Vanderbilt, etc., these having nothing whatever to do with
the particular railway concerned and its interests as a means of
communication. And even here in England we have seen struggles lasting
for tens of years between different railway companies over the
boundaries of their respective territories -- struggles in which an
enormous amount of money was thrown away, not in the interests of
production and communications but simply because of a rivalry which
usually only had the object of facilitating the stock exchange dealings
of the shareholding money traders.

With these few indications of my conception of the relation of
production to commodity trade and of both to money trading, I have
already also answered, in essence, your questions about \"historical
materialism\" generally. The thing is easiest to grasp from the point of
view of the division of labour. Society gives rise to certain common
functions which it cannot dispense with. The persons selected for these
functions form a new branch of the division of labour *within society.*
This gives them particular interests, distinct too from the interests of
those who gave them their office; they make themselves independent of
the latter and -- the state is in being. And now the development is the
same as it was with commodity trade and later with money trade; the new
independent power, while having in the main to follow the movement of
production, also, owing to its inward independence (the relative
independence originally transferred to it and gradually further
developed) reacts in its turn upon the conditions and course of
production. It is the interaction of two unequal forces: on one hand the
economic movement, on the other the new political power, which strives
for as much independence as possible, and which, having once been
established, is also endowed with a movement of its own. On the whole,
the economic movement gets its way, but it has also to suffer reactions
from the political movement which it established and endowed with
relative independence itself, from the movement of the state power on
the one hand and of the opposition simultaneously engendered on the
other. Just as the movement of the industrial market is, in the main and
with the reservations already indicated, reflected in the money market
and, of course, in inverted form, so the struggle between the classes
already existing and already in conflict with one another is reflected
in the struggle between government and opposition, but also in inverted
form, no longer directly but indirectly, not as a class struggle but as
a fight for political principles, and so distorted that it has taken us
thousands of years to get behind it again.

The reaction of the state power upon economic development can be one of
three kinds: it can run in the same direction, and then development is
more rapid; it can oppose the line of development, in which case
nowadays state power in every great nation will go to pieces in the long
run; or it can cut off the economic development from certain paths, and
impose on it certain others. This case ultimately reduces itself to one
of the two previous ones. But it is obvious that in cases two and three
the political power can do great damage to the economic development and
result in the squandering of great masses of energy and material.

Then there is also the case of the conquest and brutal destruction of
economic resources, by which, in certain circumstances, a whole local or
national economic development could formerly be ruined. Nowadays such a
case usually has the opposite effect, at least among great nations: in
the long run the defeated power often gains more economically,
politically and morally than the victor.

It is similar with law. As soon as the new division of labour which
creates professional lawyers becomes necessary, another new and
independent sphere is opened up which, for all its general dependence on
production and trade, still has its own capacity for reacting upon these
spheres as well. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the
general economic position and be its expression, but must also be an
expression which is *consistent in itself,* and which does not, owing to
inner contradictions, look glaringly inconsistent. And in order to
achieve this, the faithful reflection of economic conditions is more and
more infringed upon. All the more so the more rarely it happens that a
code of law is the blunt, unmitigated, unadulterated expression of the
domination of a class -- this in itself would already offend the
"conception of justice." Even in the Code Napoleon the pure logical
conception of justice held by the revolutionary bourgeoisie of 1792-96
is already adulterated in many ways, and in so far as it is embodied
there has daily to undergo all sorts of attenuation owing to the rising
power of the proletariat. Which does not prevent the Code Napoleon from
being the statute book which serves as a basis for every new code of law
in every part of the world. Thus to a great extent the course of the
"development of law" only consists: first in the attempt to do away with
the contradictions arising from the direct translation of economic
relations into legal principles, and to establish a harmonious system of
law, and then in the repeated breaches made in this system by the
influence and pressure of further economic development, which involves
it in further contradictions (I am only speaking here of civil law for
the moment).

The reflection of economic relations as legal principles is necessarily
also a topsy turvy one: it happens without the person who is acting
being conscious of it; the jurist imagines he is operating with *a
priori* principles, whereas they are really only economic reflexes; so
everything is upside down. And it seems to me obvious that this
inversion, which, so long as it remains unrecognised, forms what we call
*ideological conception,* reacts in its turn upon the economic basis and
may, within certain limits, modify it. The basis of the law of
inheritance -- assuming that the stages reached in the development of
the family are equal -- is an economic one. But it would be difficult to
prove, for instance, that the absolute liberty of the testator in
England and the severe restrictions imposed upon him in France are only
due in every detail to economic causes. Both react back, however, on the
economic sphere to a very considerable extent, because they influence
the division of property.

As to the realms of ideology which soar still higher in the air,
religion, philosophy, etc., these have a prehistoric stock, found
already in existence and taken over in the historic period, of what we
should to-day call bunk. These various false conceptions of nature, of
man\'s own being, of spirits, magic forces, etc., have for the most part
only a negative economic basis; but the low economic development of the
prehistoric period is supplemented and also partially conditioned and
even caused by the false conceptions of nature. And even though economic
necessity was the main driving force of the progressive knowledge of
nature and becomes ever more so, it would surely be pedantic to try and
find economic causes for all this primitive nonsense. The history of
science is the history of the gradual clearing away of this nonsense or
of its replacement by fresh but already less absurd nonsense. The people
who deal with this belong in their turn to special spheres in the
division of labour and appear to themselves to be working in an
independent field. And in so far as they form an independent group
within the social division of labour, in so far do their productions,
including their errors, react back as an influence upon the whole
development of society, even on its economic development. But all the
same they themselves remain under the dominating influence of economic
development. In philosophy, for instance, this can be most readily
proved in the bourgeois period. Hobbes was the first modern materialist
(in the eighteenth century sense) but he was an absolutist in a period
when absolute monarchy was at its height throughout the whole of Europe
and when the fight of absolute monarchy versus the people was beginning
in England. Locke, both in religion and politics, was the child of the
class compromise of 1688. The English deists and their more consistent
successors, the French materialists, were the true philosophers of the
bourgeoisie, the French even of the bourgeois revolution. The German
petty bourgeois runs through German philosophy from
[Kant](../../../../../glossary/people/k/a.htm#kant-immanuel) to
[Hegel](../../../../../glossary/people/h/e.htm#hegel), sometimes
positively and sometimes negatively. But the philosophy of every epoch,
since it is a definite sphere in the division of labour, has as its
presupposition certain definite intellectual material handed down to it
by its predecessors, from which it takes its start. And that is why
economically backward countries can still play first fiddle in
philosophy: France in the eighteenth century compared with England, on
whose philosophy the French based themselves, and later Germany in
comparison with both. But the philosophy both of France and Germany and
the general blossoming of literature at that time were also the result
of a rising economic development. I consider the ultimate supremacy of
economic development established in these spheres too, but it comes to
pass within conditions imposed by the particular sphere itself: in
philosophy, for instance, through the operation of economic influences
(which again generally only act under political, etc., disguises) upon
the existing philosophic material handed down by predecessors. Here
economy creates nothing absolutely new *(a novo),* but it determines the
way in which the existing material of thought is altered and further
developed, and that too for the most part indirectly, for it is the
political, legal and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest direct
influence upon philosophy.

About religion I have said the most necessary things in the last section
on [Feuerbach](../../../../../glossary/people/f/e.htm#feuerbach-ludwig).

If therefore Barth supposes that we deny any and every reaction of the
political, etc., reflexes of the economic movement upon the movement
itself, he is simply tilting at windmills. He has only got to look at
Marx\'s *Eighteenth Brumaire,* which deals almost exclusively with the
*particular* part played by political struggles and events; of course,
within their general dependence upon economic conditions. Or *Capital,*
the section on the working day, for instance, where legislation, which
is surely a political act, has such a trenchant effect. Or the section
on the history of the bourgeoisie. (Chapter XXIV.) Or why do we fight
for the political dictatorship of the proletariat if political power is
economically impotent? Force (that is state power) is also an economic
power.

But I have no time to criticise the book now. I must first get Vol. III
out and besides I think too that
[Bernstein](../../../../../glossary/people/b/e.htm#eduard-bernstein),
for instance, could deal with it quite effectively.

What these gentlemen all lack is dialectic. They never see anything but
here cause and there effect. That this is a hollow abstraction, that
such metaphysical polar opposites only exist in the real world during
crises, while the whole vast process proceeds in the form of interaction
(though of very unequal forces, the economic movement being by far the
strongest, most elemental and most decisive) and that here everything is
relative and nothing is absolute -- this they never begin to see. Hegel
has never existed for them.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1890 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
