---
layout: default
title: 
---
History and Class Consciousness Georg Luk√°cs 1923

# The Marxism of Rosa Luxemburg

Economists explain how production takes place in the above-mentioned
relations, but what they do not explain is how these relations
themselves are produced, that is, the historical movement that gave them
birth.\
Marx: The Poverty of Philosophy.

### 1

IT is not the primacy of economic motives in historical explanation that
constitutes the decisive difference between Marxism and bourgeois
thought, but the point of view of totality. The category of totality,
the all-pervasive supremacy of the whole over the parts is the essence
of the method which Marx took over from Hegel and brilliantly
transformed into the foundations of a wholly new science. The capitalist
separation of the producer from the total process of production, the
division of the process of labour into parts at the cost of the
individual humanity of the worker, the atomisation of society into
individuals who simply go on producing without rhyme or reason, must all
have a profound influence on the thought, the science and the philosophy
of capitalism. Proletarian science is revolutionary not just by virtue
of its revolutionary ideas which it opposes to bourgeois society, but
above all because of its method. *The primacy of the category of
totality is the bearer of the principle of revolution in science.*

The revolutionary nature of Hegelian dialectics had often been
recognised as such before Marx, notwithstanding Hegel's own conservative
applications of the method. But no one had converted this knowledge into
a science of revolution. It was Marx who transformed the Hegelian method
into what Herzen described as the 'algebra of revolution'. It was not
enough, however, to give it a materialist twist. The revolutionary
principle inherent in Hegel's dialectic was able to come to the surface
less because of that than because of the validity of the method itself,
viz. the concept of totality, the subordination of every part to the
whole unity of history and, thought. In Marx the dialectical method aims
at understanding society as a whole. Bourgeois thought concerns itself
with objects that arise either from the process of studying phenomena in
isolation, or from the division of labour and specialisation in the
different disciplines. It holds abstractions to be 'real' if it is
naively realistic, and 'autonomous' if it is critical.

Marxism, however, simultaneously raises and reduces all specialisations
to the level of aspects in a dialectical process. This is not to deny
that the process of abstraction and hence the isolation of the elements
and concepts in the special disciplines and whole areas of study is of
the very essence of science. But what is decisive is whether this
process of isolation is a means towards understanding the whole and
whether it is integrated within the context it presupposes and requires,
or whether the abstract knowledge of an isolated fragment retains its
'autonomy' and becomes an end in itself. In the last analysis Marxism
does not acknowledge the existence of independent sciences of law,
economics or history, etc.: there is nothing but a single, unified --
dialectical and historical -- science of the evolution of society as a
totality.

The category of totality, however, determines not only the object of
knowledge but also the subject. Bourgeois thought judges social
phenomena consciously or unconsciously, naively or subtly, consistently
from the standpoint of the individual.^[\[1\]](#n1)^ No path leads from
the individual to the totality; there is at best a road leading to
aspects of particular areas, mere fragments for the most part, 'facts'
bare of any context, or to abstract, special laws. The totality of an
object can only be posited if the positing subject is itself a totality;
and if the subject wishes to understand itself, it must conceive of the
object as a totality. In modern society only the classes can represent
this total point of view. By tackling every problem from this angle,
above all in *Capital*, Marx supplied a corrective to Hegel who still
wavered between the "great individual and the abstract spirit of the
people." Although his successors understood him even less well here than
on the issue of 'idealism' versus 'materialism' this corrective proved
even more salutary and decisive.

Classical economics and above all its vulgarisers have always considered
the development of capitalism from the point of view of the individual
capitalist. This involved them in a series of insoluble contradictions
and pseudo-problems. Marx's *Capital* represents a radical break with
this procedure. Not that he acts the part of an agitator who treats
every aspect exclusively from the proletarian standpoint. Such a
one-sided approach would only result in a new vulgar economics with plus
and minus signs reversed. His method is to consider the problems of the
whole of capitalist society as problems of the classes constituting it,
the classes being regarded as totalities. My aim in this essay is to
point to methodological problems and so it is not possible to show here
how Marx's method throws a completely new light on a whole series of
problems, how new problems emerge which classical economics was unable
even to glimpse, let alone solve, and how many of their pseudo-problems
dissolve into thin air. My aim here is to elucidate as clearly as
possible the two premises of a genuine application of the dialectical
method as opposed to the frivolous use made of it by Hegel's
traditionalist successors. These premises are the need to postulate a
totality firstly as a posited object and then as a positing subject.

### 2

Rosa Luxemburg's major work [*The Accumulation of
Capital*](../../../luxemburg/1913/accumulation-capital/index.htm) takes
up the problem at this juncture after decades of vulgarised Marxism. The
trivialisation of Marxism and its deflection into a bourgeois 'science'
was expressed first, most clearly and frankly in Bernstein's *Premises
of Socialism*. It is anything but an accident that the chapter in this
book which begins with an onslaught on the dialectical method in the
name of exact 'science' should end by branding Marx as a Blanquist. It
is no accident because the moment you abandon the point of view of
totality, you must also jettison the starting-point and the goal, the
assumptions and the requirements of the dialectical method. When this
happens revolution will be understood not as part of a process but as an
isolated act cut off from the general course of events. If that is so it
must inevitably seem as if the revolutionary aspects of Marx are really
just a relapse into the primitive period of the workers' movement, i.e.
Blanquism. The whole system of Marxism stands and falls with the
principle that revolution is the product of a point of view in which the
category of totality is dominant. Even in its opportunism Bernstein's
criticism is much too opportunistic for all the implications of this
position to emerge clearly.^[\[2\]](#n2)^

But even though the opportunists sought above all to eradicate the
notion of the dialectical course of history from Marxism, they could not
evade its ineluctable consequences. The economic development of the
imperialist age had made it progressively more difficult to believe in
their pseudo-attacks on the capitalist system and in the 'scientific'
analysis of isolated phenomena in the name of the 'objective and exact
sciences'. It was not enough to declare a political commitment for or
against capitalism. One had to declare one's theoretical commitment
also. One had to choose: either to regard the whole history of society
from a Marxist point of view, i.e. as a totality, and hence to come to
grips with the phenomenon of imperialism in theory and practice. Or else
to evade this confrontation by confining oneself to the analysis of
isolated aspects in one or other of the special disciplines. The
attitude that inspires monographs is the best way to place a screen
before the problem the very sight of which strikes terror into the heart
of a Social-Democratic movement turned opportunist. By discovering
'exact' descriptions for isolated areas and 'eternally valid laws' for
specific cases they have blurred the differences separating imperialism
from the preceding age. They found themselves in a capitalist society
'in general' -- and its existence seemed to them to correspond to the
nature of human reason, and the 'laws of nature' every bit as much as it
had seemed to Ricardo and his successors, the bourgeois vulgar
economists.

It would be un-Marxist and undialectical to ask whether this theoretical
relapse into the methodology of vulgar economics was the cause or the
effect of this pragmatic opportunism. In the eyes of historical
materialism the two tendencies belong together: they constitute the
social ambience of Social Democracy before the War. The theoretical
conflicts in Rosa Luxemburg's *Accumulation of Capital* can be
understood only within that milieu.

The debate as conducted by Bauer, Eckstein and Co. did not turn on the
truth or falsity of the solution Rosa Luxemburg proposed to the problem
of the accumulation of capital. On the contrary, discussion centred on
whether there was a real problem at all and in the event its existence
was denied flatly and with the utmost vehemence. Seen from the
standpoint of vulgar economics this is quite understandable, and even
inevitable. For if it is treated as an isolated problem in economics and
from the point of view of the individual capitalist it is easy to argue
that no real problem exists.^[\[3\]](#n3)^

Logically enough the critics who dismissed the whole problem also
ignored the decisive chapter of her book ("The historical determinants
of Accumulation"). This can be seen from the way they formulated their
key question. The question they posed was this: Marx's formulae were
arrived at on the basis of a hypothetical society (posited for reasons
of method) which consisted only of capitalists and workers. Were these
formulae correct? How were they to be interpreted? The critics
completely overlooked the fact that Marx posited this society for the
sake of argument, i.e. to see the problem more clearly, before pressing
forward to the larger question of the place of this problem within
society as a whole. They overlooked the fact that Marx himself took this
step with reference to so-called primitive accumulation, in Volume I of
*Capital*. Consciously or unconsciously they suppressed the fact that on
this issue *Capital* is an incomplete fragment which stops short at the
point where this problem should be opened up. In this sense what Rosa
Luxemburg has done is precisely to take up the thread where Marx left
off and to solve the problem in his spirit.

By ignoring these factors the opportunists acted quite consistently. The
problem is indeed superfluous from the standpoint of the individual
capitalist and vulgar economics. As far as the former is concerned,
economic reality has the appearance of a world governed by the eternal
laws of nature, laws to which he has to adjust his activities. For him
the production of surplus value very often (though not always, it is
true) takes the form of an exchange with other individual capitalists.
And the whole problem of accumulation resolves itself into a question of
the manifold permutations of the formulae M-C-M and C-M-C in the course
of production and circulation, etc. It thus becomes an isolated question
for the vulgar economists, a question unconnected with the ultimate fate
of capitalism as a whole. The solution to the problem is officially
guaranteed by the Marxist 'formulae' which are correct in themselves and
need only to be 'brought up to date' -- a task performed e.g. by Otto
Bauer. However, we must insist that economic reality can never be
understood solely on the basis of these formulae because they are based
on an abstraction (viz. the working hypothesis that society consists
only of capitalists and workers). Hence they can serve only for
clarification and as a springboard for an assault on the real problem.
Bauer and his confreres misunderstood this just as surely as the
disciples of Ricardo misunderstood the problematics of Marx in their
day.

*The Accumulation of Capital* takes up again the methods and questions
posed by the young Marx in *The Poverty of Philosophy.* In that work
Marx had subjected to scrutiny the historical conditions that had made
Ricardo's economics possible and viable. Similarly, Rosa Luxemburg
applied the same method to the incomplete analyses in Volumes 2 and 3 of
*Capital.* As the ideological representatives of capitalism in the
ascendant, bourgeois economists were forced to identify the 'Laws of
Nature' discovered by Adam Smith and Ricardo with the existing social
order so as to be able to see capitalist society as the only form of
society corresponding to the reason and the nature of man. Likewise
here: Social Democracy was the ideological exponent of a workers'
aristocracy turned petty bourgeois. It had a definite interest in the
imperialist exploitation of the whole world in the last phase of
capitalism but sought to evade its inevitable fate: the World War. It
was compelled to construe the evolution of society as if it were
possible for capitalist accumulation to operate in the rarified
atmosphere of mathematical formulae, i.e. unproblematically and without
a World War. In the upshot, their political insight and foresight
compared very unfavourably with that of the great bourgeois and
capitalist classes with their interest in imperialist exploitation
together with its militarist consequences. However, it did enable them
even then to take up their present theoretical position as guardians of
the everlasting capitalist economic order; guardians against the fated
catastrophic consequences towards which the true exponents of capitalist
imperialism were drifting with open but unseeing eyes.

For a capitalist class in the ascendant the identification of Ricardo's
'Laws of Nature' with the existing social order had represented a means
of ideological self-defence. Likewise here, the interpretation of Marx
current in the Austrian school and especially its identification of
Marx's abstractions with the totality of society represents a 'rational'
means of self-defence for a capitalism in decline. And just as the young
Marx's concept of totality cast a bright light upon the pathological
symptoms of a still-flourishing capitalism, so too in the studies of
Rosa Luxemburg we find the basic problems of capitalism analysed within
the context of the historical process as a whole: and in her work we see
how the last flowering of capitalism is transformed into a ghastly dance
of death, into the inexorable march of Oedipus to his doom.

### 3

Rosa Luxemburg devoted a whole pamphlet (which was published
posthumously) exclusively to the refutation of 'Marxist' vulgar
economics. Both its approach and its method make it appear as a kind of
natural appendage to the end of Section II of *The Accumulation of
Capital* where it would take its place as the fourth round in her
treatment of this crucial problem of capitalist development.
Characteristically, the larger part of it is concerned with historical
analysis. By this I mean more than the Marxian analysis of simple and
expanded reproduction which forms the starting-point of the whole study
and the prelude to the conclusive solution of this problem. At the core
of the work is what we can describe as the literary-historical
examination of the great debates of the question of accumulation: the
debate between Sismondi and Ricardo and his school; between Rodbertus
and Kirchmann; between the Narodniki and the Russian Marxists.

The adoption of this approach does not place her outside the Marxist
tradition. On the contrary, it implies a return to the pristine and
unsullied traditions of Marxism: to Marx's own method. For his first,
mature, complete and conclusive work, *The Poverty of Philosophy,*
refutes Proudhon by reaching back to the true sources of his views, to
Ricardo and Hegel. His analysis of where, how, and above all, why
Proudhon *had* to misunderstand Hegel is the source of light that
relentlessly exposes Proudhon's self-contradictions. It goes even
further, and illuminates the dark places, unknown to Proudhon himself,
from which these errors spring: the class relations of which his views
are the theoretical expression. For as Marx says, "economic categories
are nothing but the theoretical expressions, the abstractions of the
social relations of production." ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ It is true that in his
principal theoretical works he was prevented by the scope and wealth of
the individual problems treated from employing a historical approach.
But this should not obscure *the essential similarity in his approach.
Capital* and *The Theories of Surplus Value* are in essence a single
work whose internal structure points to the solution of the problem so
brilliantly sketched in broad outline in *The Poverty of Philosophy.*

The question of the internal structuring of the problem leads us back to
the central issue confronting the dialectical method: to the right
understanding of the dominant position held by the concept of totality
and hence to the philosophy of Hegel. On this essential point Marx never
abandoned Hegel's philosophical method. And this was at all times -- and
most convincingly in *The Phenomenology of Mind* -- both the history of
philosophy and the philosophy of history. For the Hegelian --
dialectical -- identification of thought and existence, the belief in
their unity as the unity and totality of a process is also, in essence,
the philosophy of history of historical materialism.

Even Marx's materialist polemic against the 'ideological' view of
history is aimed more at Hegel's followers than at the master himself,
who on this point stood much closer to Marx than Marx may himself have
realised from his position in the thick of the struggle against the
fossilised 'idealisation' of the dialectical method. For the 'absolute'
idealism of Hegel's followers implies the dissolution of the original
system;^[\[5\]](#n5)^ it implies the divorce of dialectics from the
living stuff of history and this means ultimately the disruption of the
dialectical unity of thought and existence. In the dogmatic materialism
of Marx's epigones we find a repetition of the process dissolving the
concrete totality of historical reality. And even if their method does
not degenerate into the empty abstract schemata of Hegel's disciples, it
does harden into a vulgar economics and a mechanical preoccupation with
specialised sciences. If the purely ideological constructions of the
Hegelians proved unequal to the task of understanding historical events,
the Marxists have revealed a comparable inability to understand either
the connections of the so-called 'ideological' forms of society and
their economic base or the economy itself as a totality and as social
reality.

Whatever the subject of debate, the dialectical method is concerned
always with the same problem: knowledge of the historical process in its
entirety. This means that 'ideological' and 'economic' problems lose
their mutual exclusiveness and merge into one another. *The history of a
particular problem* turns into the *history of problems.* The literary
or scientific exposition of a problem appears as the expression of a
social whole, of its possibilities, limits and problems. The approach of
literary history is the one best suited to the problems of history. The
history of philosophy becomes the philosophy of history.

It is therefore no accident that the two fundamental studies which
inaugurate the theoretical rebirth of Marxism, Rosa Luxemburg's *The
Accumulation of Capital* and Lenin's *State and Revolution*, both use
the approach adopted by the young Marx. To ensure that the problems
under consideration will arise before us dialectically, they provide
what is substantially a literary-historical account of their genesis.
They analyse the changes and reversals in the views leading up to the
problem as it presents itself to them. They focus upon every stage of
intellectual clarification or confusion and place it in the historical
context conditioning it and resulting from it. This enables them to
evoke with unparalleled vividness the historical process of which their
own approach and their own solutions are the culmination. This method
has absolutely nothing in common with the tradition in bourgeois science
(to which social-democratic theoreticians also belong) of "taking the
achievements of their forerunners into account". For there the
distinction drawn between theory and history, and the lack of
reciprocity between the separate disciplines leads to the disappearance
of the problem of totality in the interests of greater specialisation.
As a result, the history of a problem becomes mere theoretical and
literary ballast. It is of interest only to the experts who inflate it
to the point where it obscures the real problems and fosters mindless
specialisation.

Reviving the literary and methodological traditions of Marx and Hegel,
Lenin converts the history of his problem to an inner history of the
European revolutions of the nineteenth century; and the
literary-historical approach of Rosa Luxemburg grows into a history of
the struggles of the capitalist system to survive and expand. The
struggle was triggered off by the great crises of 1815 and 1818/19, the
first great shocks sustained by a capitalism that was growing but was as
yet undeveloped. The debate was introduced by Sismondi's *Nouveaux
Principes d\'√âconomie Politique.* Despite his reactionary purpose his
work gives us our first insight into the dilemmas of capitalism.
Ideologically, this undeveloped form of capitalism has recourse to
attitudes as one-sided and wrong-headed as those of its opponents. While
as a reactionary sceptic Sismondi deduces from the existence of crises
the impossibility of accumulation the advocates of the new system of
production, their optimism unimpaired, deny that crises are inevitable
and that there is in fact any dilemma at all.

If we look at the problem now we see that the social distribution of the
questioners and the social significance of their answers has now been
completely inverted. The present theme -- even though it has not
received the recognition it deserves -- is the fate of the revolution
and the doom of capitalism. The Marxist diagnosis has had a decisive
impact on this change and this is itself symptomatic of the way in which
the ideological leadership is slipping from the hands of the
bourgeoisie. For while the petty bourgeois nature of the Narodniki shows
itself blatantly in their theory, it is interesting to observe how the
Russian 'Marxists' are developing more and more strongly into the
ideological champions of capitalism. They view the prospects of the
growth of capitalism in terms that show them to the worthy heirs to Say
and MacCulloch. "Without doubt the 'legal' Russian Marxists have gained
a victory", Rosa Luxemburg states,^[\[6\]](#n6)^ "over their enemies,
the Populists; but their victory goes too far. \... The question is
whether capitalism in general and Russian capitalism in particular is
capable of growth and these Marxists have demonstrated this capability
so thoroughly that in theory they have proved that it is possible for
capitalism to last for ever. It is evident that if the limitless
accumulation of capital can be assumed, then the limitless viability of
capitalism must follow \.... If the capitalist mode of production can
ensure the unlimited increase in the forces of production and hence of
economic progress, it will be invincible."

At this point the fourth and last round in the controversy about
accumulation begins; it is the passage of arms between Otto Bauer and
Rosa Luxemburg. The question of social optimism has now shifted. In Rosa
Luxemburg's hands the doubts about the possibility of accumulation shed
their absolute form. The problem becomes the *historical* one of the
*conditions* of accumulation and thus it becomes certain that unlimited
accumulation is not possible. Placed into its total social context
accumulation becomes dialectical. It then swells into the dialectics of
the whole capitalist system. As Rosa Luxemburg puts it:^[\[7\]](#n7)^
"The moment the Marxian scheme of expanded reproduction corresponds to
reality it points to the end, the historical limits of the movement of
accumulation and therewith to the end of capitalist production. If
accumulation is impossible then further growth in the forces of
production is impossible too. And this means that the destruction of
capitalism becomes an objective historical necessity. From this there
follow the contradictory movements of the last, imperialist phase, which
is the terminal phase in the historical career of capital." As doubt
develops into certainty the petty-bourgeois and reactionary elements
disappear without a trace: *doubt turns to optimism and to the
theoretical certainty of the coming social revolution.*

Through a comparable shift the opposed view, the faith in limitless
accumulation is assailed by doubts, hesitations and petty bourgeois
vacillations. Otto Bauer embraces this faith but with a marked falling
off from the sunny, untroubled optimism of Say or Tugan-Baranovsky.
Bauer and his associates work with a Marxist terminology, but their
theory is essentially that of Proudhon. In the last analysis their
attempts to solve the problem of accumulation, or rather their attempts
to deny its existence, come to no more than Proudhon's endeavours to
preserve the 'good sides' of capitalism while avoiding the 'bad
sides'.^[\[8\]](#n8)^ However, to recognise the existence of the problem
of accumulation is to perceive that these 'bad sides' are an integral
part of capitalism; and this in turn is to concede that imperialism,
world war and world revolution are necessary factors in its evolution.
But to admit this is not in the immediate interests of the classes whom
the Centre Marxists have come to represent and who wish to believe in an
advanced capitalism without any imperialist 'excrescences', and a
'well-regulated' production free of the 'disruptions' of war. According
to Rosa Luxemburg,^[\[9\]](#n9)^ "the essence of this position is the
attempt to persuade the bourgeoisie that imperialism and militarism are
damaging to itself even from the point of view of their own capitalist
interests. It is hoped that by this manoeuvre the alleged handful of
people who profit from imperialism will be isolated and that it will be
possible to form a bloc consisting of the proletariat together with
large sections of the bourgeoisie. This bloc will then be able to 'tame'
imperialism and 'remove its sting'! Liberalism in decline directs its
appeal away from the badly informed monarchy and towards a monarchy that
is to be better informed. In the same way the 'Marxist Centre' appeals
over the heads of a misguided bourgeoisie to one which is to be better
instructed. \..."

Bauer and his colleagues have made both an economic and ideological
submission to capitalism. Their capitulation comes to the surface in
their economic fatalism, in the belief that capitalism is as immortal as
the 'laws of nature'. But as genuine petty bourgeois they are the
ideological and economic appendages of capitalism. Their wish to see a
capitalism without any 'bad sides' and without 'excrescences' means that
their opposition to capitalism is the typically *ethical* opposition of
the petty bourgeoisie.

### 4

Economic fatalism and the reformation of socialism through ethics are
intimately connected. It is no accident that they reappear in similar
form in Bernstein, Tugan-Baranovsky and Otto Bauer. This is not merely
the result of the need to seek and find a subjective substitute for the
objective path to revolution that they themselves have blocked. It is
the logical consequence of the vulgar-economic point of view and of
methodological individualism. The 'ethical' reformation of socialism is
the subjective side of the missing category of totality which alone can
provide an overall view. For the individual, whether capitalist or
proletarian, his environment, his social milieu (including Nature which
is the theoretical reflection and projection of that milieu) must appear
the servant of a brutal and senseless fate which is eternally alien to
him. This world can only be understood by means of a theory which
postulates 'eternal laws of nature'. Such a theory endows the world with
a rationality alien to man and human action can neither penetrate nor
influence the world if man takes up a purely contemplative and
fatalistic stance.

Within such a world only two possible modes of action commend themselves
and they are both apparent rather than real ways of actively changing
the world. Firstly, there is the exploitation for particular human ends
(as in technology, for example) of the fatalistically accepted and
immutable laws which are seen in the manner we have already described.
Secondly, there is action directed wholly inwards. This is the attempt
to change the world at its only remaining free point, namely man himself
(ethics). But as the world becomes mechanised its subject, man,
necessarily becomes mechanised too and so this ethics likewise remains
abstract. Confronted by the totality of man in isolation from the world
it remains merely normative and fails to be truly active in its creation
of objects. It is only prescriptive and imperative in character. The
logical nexus between Kant's *Critique of Pure Reason* and his *Critique
of Practical Reason* is cogent and inescapable. And every 'Marxist'
student of socio-economic realities who abandons the method of Hegel and
Marx, i.e. the study of the historical process from a total point of
view and who substitutes for it a 'critical' method which seeks
unhistorical 'laws' in the special sciences will be forced to return to
the abstract ethical imperatives of the Kantian school as soon as the
question of action becomes imminent.

For the destruction of a totalising point of view disrupts *the unity of
theory and practice.* Action, praxis -- which Marx demanded before all
else in his *Theses on Feuerbach --* is in essence the penetration and
transformation of reality. But reality can only be understood and
penetrated as a totality, and only a subject which is itself a totality
is capable of this penetration. It was not for nothing that the young
Hegel erected his philosophy upon the principle that "truth must be
understood and expressed not merely as substance, but also as
subject."^[\[10\]](#n10)^ With this he exposed the deepest error and the
ultimate limitation of Classical German philosophy. However, his own
philosophy failed to live up to this precept and for much of the time it
remained enmeshed in the same snares as those of his predecessors.

It was left to Marx to make the concrete discovery of 'truth as the
subject' and hence to establish the unity of theory and practice. This
he achieved by focusing the known totality upon the reality of the
historical process and by confining it to this. By this means he
determined both the knowable totality and the totality to be known. The
scientific superiority of the standpoint of class (as against that of
the individual) has become clear from the foregoing. Now we see the
reason for this superiority: *only the class can actively penetrate the
reality of society and transform it in its entirety.* For this reason,
'criticism' advanced from the standpoint of class is criticism from a
total point of view and hence it provides the dialectical unity of
theory and practice. In dialectical unity it is at once cause and
effect, mirror and motor of the historical and dialectical process. The
proletariat as the subject of thought in society destroys at one blow
the dilemma of impotence: the dilemma created by the pure laws with
their fatalism and by the ethics of pure intentions.

Thus for Marxism the knowledge that capitalism is historically
conditioned (the problem of accumulation) becomes crucial. The reason
for this is that only this knowledge, only the unity of theory and
practice provide a real basis for social revolution and the total
transformation of society. Only when this knowledge can be seen as the
product of this process can we close the circle of the dialectical
method -- and this analysis, too, stems from Hegel.

As early as her first polemics with Bernstein, Rosa Luxemburg lays
emphasis on this essential distinction between the total and the
partial, the dialectical and the mechanical view of history (whether it
be opportunistic or terrorist). "Here lies the chief difference," she
explains," "between the Blanquist coups d\'√©tat of a 'resolute minority'
which always explode like pistol-shots and as a result always come at
the wrong moment, and the conquest of the real power of a state by the
broad, class-conscious mass of the people which itself can only be the
product of the incipient collapse of bourgeois society and which
therefore bears in itself the economic and political legitimation of its
timely appearance." And in her last work^[\[12\]](#n12)^ she writes in a
similar vein: "The objective tendency of capitalism towards that goal
suffices to aggravate the social and political conflicts within society
to such an extent and so much earlier than was expected, that they must
bring about the demise of the ruling system. But these social and
political conflicts are themselves ultimately only the product of the
*economic* instability of the capitalist system. Their increasing
gravity springs from this source in exact proportion as that instability
becomes acute."

The proletariat is, then, at one and the same time the product of the
permanent crisis in capitalism and the instrument of those tendencies
which drive capitalism towards crisis. In Marx's words: "The proletariat
carries out the sentence which private property passes upon itself by
its creation of a proletariat.\"^[\[13\]](#n13)^ By recognising its
situation it acts. By combating capitalism it discovers its own place in
society.

But the class consciousness of the proletariat, the truth of the process
'as subject' is itself far from stable and constant; it does not advance
according to mechanical 'laws'. It is the consciousness of the
dialectical process itself: it is likewise a dialectical concept. For
the active and practical side of class consciousness, its true essence,
can only become visible in its authentic form when the historical
process imperiously requires it to come into force, i.e. when an acute
crisis in the economy drives it to action. At other times it remains
theoretical and latent, corresponding to the latent and permanent crisis
of capitalism:^[\[14\]](#n14)^ it confronts the individual questions and
conflicts of the day with its demands, as 'mere' consciousness, as an
'ideal sum', in Rosa Luxemburg's phrase.

Marx had understood and described the proletariat's struggle for freedom
in terms of the dialectical unity of theory and practice. This implied
that consciousness cannot exist on its own either as 'pure' theory, or
as a simple postulate, a simple imperative or norm of action. The
postulate, too, must have a reality. That is to say, the moment when the
class consciousness of the proletariat begins to articulate its demands,
when it is 'latent and theoretical', must also be the moment when it
creates a corresponding reality which will intervene actively in the
total process.

The form taken by the class consciousness of the proletariat is the
*Party.* Rosa Luxemburg had grasped the spontaneous nature of
revolutionary mass actions earlier and more clearly than many others.
(What she did, incidentally, was to emphasise another aspect of the
thesis advanced earlier: that these actions are the necessary product of
the economic process.) It is no accident, therefore, that she was also
quicker to grasp the role of the party in the
revolution.^[\[15\]](#n15)^ For the mechanical vulgarisers the party was
merely a form of organisation -- and the mass movement, the revolution,
was likewise no more than a problem of organisation.

Rosa Luxemburg perceived at a very early stage that the organisation is
much more likely to be the effect than the cause of the revolutionary
process, just as the proletariat can constitute itself as a class only
in and through revolution. In this process which it can neither provoke
nor escape, the Party is assigned the sublime role of *bearer of the
class consciousness of the proletariat and the conscience of its
historical vocation.* The superficially more active and 'more realistic'
view allocates to the party tasks concerned predominantly or even
exclusively with organisation. Such a view is then reduced to an
unrelieved fatalism when confronted with the realities of revolution,
whereas Rosa Luxemburg's analysis becomes the fount of true
revolutionary activity. The Party must ensure that "in every phase and
every aspect of the struggle the total sum of the available power of the
proletariat that has already been unleashed should be mobilised and that
it should be expressed in the fighting stance of the Party. The tactics
of Social Democracy should always be more resolute and vigorous than
required by the existing power relations, and never
less."^[\[16\]](#n16)^ It Must immerse its own truth in the spontaneous
mass movement and raise it from the depths of economic necessity, where
it was conceived, on to the heights of free, conscious action. In so
doing it will transform itself in the moment of the outbreak of
revolution from a party that makes demands to one that imposes an
effective reality.

This change from demand to reality becomes the lever of the truly
class-oriented and truly revolutionary organisation of the proletariat.
Knowledge becomes action, theory becomes battle slogan, the masses act
in accordance with the slogans and join the ranks of the organised
vanguard more consciously, more steadfastly and in greater numbers. The
correct slogans give rise organically to the premisses and possibilities
of even the technical organisation of the fighting proletariat.

Class consciousness is the 'ethics' of the proletariat, the unity of its
theory and its practice, the point at which the economic necessity of
its struggle for liberation changes dialectically into freedom. By
realising that the party is the historical embodiment and the active
incarnation of class consciousness, we see that it is also the
incarnation of the ethics of the fighting proletariat. This must
determine its politics. Its politics may not always accord with the
empirical reality of the moment; at such times its slogans may be
ignored. But the ineluctable course of history will give it its due.
Even more, the moral strength conferred by the correct class
consciousness will bear fruit in terms of practical
politics.^[\[17\]](#n17)^

The true strength of the party is moral: it is fed by the trust of the
spontaneously revolutionary masses whom economic conditions have forced
into revolt. It is nourished by the feeling that the party is the
objectification of their own will (obscure though this may be to
themselves), that it is the visible and organised incarnation of their
class consciousness. Only when the party has fought for this trust and
earned it can it become the leader of the revolution. For only then will
the masses spontaneously and instinctively press forward with all their
energies towards the party and towards their own class consciousness.

By separating the inseparable, the opportunists have barred their own
path to this knowledge, the active self-knowledge of the proletariat.
Hence their leaders speak scornfully, in the authentic tones of the
free-thinking petty bourgeoisie of the 'religious faith' that is said to
lie at the roots of Bolshevism and revolutionary Marxism. The accusation
is a tacit confession of their own impotence. In vain do they disguise
their moth-eaten doubts, by cloaking their negativity in the splendid
mantle of a cool and objective 'scientific method'. Every word and
gesture betrays the despair of the best of them and the inner emptiness
of the worst: their complete divorce from the proletariat, from its path
and from its vocation. What they call faith and seek to deprecate by
adding the epithet 'religious' is nothing more nor less than the
certainty that capitalism is doomed and that -- ultimately -- the
proletariat will be victorious. There can be no 'material' guarantee of
this certitude. It can be guaranteed methodologically -- by the
dialectical method. And even this must be tested and proved by action,
by the revolution itself, by living and dying for the revolution. A
Marxist who cultivates the objectivity of the academic study is just as
reprehensible as the man who believes that the victory of the world
revolution can be guaranteed by the 'laws of nature'.

The unity of theory and practice exists not only in theory but also for
practice. We have seen that the proletariat as a class can only conquer
and retain a hold on class consciousness and raise itself to the level
of its -- objectively-given -- historic task through conflict and
action. It is likewise true that the party and the individual fighter
can only really take possession of their theory if they are able to
bring this unity into their praxis. The so-called religious faith is
nothing more than the certitude that regardless of all temporary defeats
and setbacks, the historical process will come to fruition *in our deeds
and through our deeds.*

Here too the opportunists find themselves confronted by the dilemma
posed by impotence. They argue that if the Communists foresee 'defeat'
they must either desist from every form of action or else brand
themselves as unscrupulous adventurers, catastrophemongers and
terrorists. In their intellectual and moral degradation they are simply
incapable of *seeing themselves and their action as an aspect of the
totality and of the process:* the 'defeat' as the necessary prelude to
victory.

It is characteristic of the unity of theory and practice in the life
work of Rosa Luxemburg that the unity of victory and defeat, individual
fate and total process is the main thread running through her theory and
her life. As early as her first polemic against Bernstein's she argued
that the *necessarily 'premature' seizure of power* by the proletariat
was inevitable. She unmasked the resulting opportunist fear and lack of
faith in revolution as "political nonsense which starts from the
assumption that society progresses mechanically and which imagines a
definite point in time external to and unconnected with the class
struggle in which the class struggle will be won". It is this
clear-sighted certitude that guides Rosa Luxemburg in the campaign she
waged for the emancipation of the proletariat: its economic and
political emancipation from physical bondage under capitalism, and its
ideological emancipation from its spiritual bondage under opportunism.
As she was the great spiritual leader of the proletariat her chief
struggles were fought against the latter enemy -- the more dangerous foe
as it was harder to defeat. Her death at the hands of her bitterest
enemies, Noske and Scheidemann, is, logically, the crowning pinnacle of
her thought and life. Theoretically she had predicted the defeat of the
January rising years before it took place; tactically she foresaw it at
the moment of action. Yet she remained consistently on the side of the
masses and shared their fate. That is to say, the unity of theory and
practice was preserved in her actions with exactly the same consistency
and with exactly the same logic as that which earned her the enmity of
her murderers: the opportunists of Social Democracy.

January 1921.

[]{#n1} []{#n2} []{#n3} []{#n4} []{#n5} []{#n6} []{#n7} []{#n8} []{#n9}
[]{#n10} []{#n11} []{#n12} []{#n13} []{#n14} []{#n15} []{#n16} []{#n17}

¬†

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Lukacs Archive](../../index.htm)
