---
layout: default
title: 
---
Georg Lukacs\
History & Class Consciousness

### II: The Antinomies of Bourgeois Thought, continued

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#p01}

I may be permitted to devote a few words -- as a sort of excursus -- to
the views expressed by Friedrich Engels on the problem of the
thing-in-itself. In a sense they are of no immediate concern to us, but
they have exercised such a great influence on the meaning given to the
term by many Marxists that to omit to correct this might easily give
rise to a misunderstanding. He says: [\[36\]](#36) "The most telling
refutation of this as of all other philosophical crotchets is practice,
namely, experiment and industry. If we are able to prove the correctness
of our conception of a natural process by making it ourselves, bringing
it into being out of its conditions and making it serve our own purposes
into the bargain, then there is an end to the ungraspable Kantian
'thing-in-itself'. The chemical substances produced in the bodies of
plants and animals remained such 'things-in-themselves' until organic
chemistry began to produce them one after another, whereupon the 'thing
in-itself' became a thing for us, as, for instance, alizarin, the
colouring matter of the madder, which we no longer trouble to grow in
the madder roots in the field, but produce much more cheaply and simply
from coal tar."

Above all we must correct a terminological confusion that is almost
incomprehensible in such a connoisseur of Hegel as was Engels. For Hegel
the terms 'in itself' and 'for us' are by no means opposites; in fact
they are ***necessary correlatives***. That something exists merely 'in
itself' means for Hegel that it merely exists 'for us'. The antithesis
of 'for us or in itself' [\[37\]](#37) is rather 'for itself', namely
that mode of being posited where the fact that an object is thought of
implies at the same time that the object is conscious of itself.
[\[38\]](#38) In that case, it is a complete misinterpretation of Kant's
epistemology to imagine that the problem of the thing-in-itself could be
a barrier to the possible concrete expansion of our knowledge. On the
contrary, Kant who sets out from the most advanced natural science of
the day, namely from Newton's astronomy, tailored his theory of
knowledge precisely to this science and to its future potential. For
this reason he necessarily assumes that the method was capable of
***limitless expansion***. His 'critique' refers merely to the fact that
even the complete knowledge of all phenomena would be no more than a
knowledge of phenomena (as opposed to the things-in-themselves).
Moreover, even the complete knowledge of the phenomena could never
overcome the ***structural limits*** of this knowledge, i.e. in our
terms, the antinomies of totality and of content. Kant has himself dealt
sufficiently clearly with the question of agnosticism and of the
relation to Hume (and to Berkeley who is not named but whom Kant has
particularly in mind) in the section entitled 'The Refutation of
Idealism'. [\[39\]](#39)

But Engels' deepest misunderstanding consists in his belief that the
behaviour of industry and scientific experiment constitutes praxis in
the dialectical, philosophical sense. In fact, scientific experiment is
contemplation at its purest. The experimenter creates an artificial,
abstract milieu in order to be able to ***observe*** undisturbed the
untrammelled workings of the laws under examination, eliminating all
irrational factors both of the subject and the object. He strives as far
as possible to reduce the material substratum of his observation to the
purely rational 'product', to the 'intelligible matter' of mathematics.
And when Engels speaks, in the context of industry, of the "product"
which is made to serve "our purposes", he seems to have forgotten for a
moment the fundamental structure of capitalist society which he himself
had once formulated so supremely well in his brilliant early essay.
There he had pointed out that capitalist society is based on "a natural
law that is founded on the unconsciousness of those involved in it".
[\[40\]](#40) Inasmuch as industry sets itself 'objectives' -- it is in
the decisive, i.e. historical, dialectical meaning of the word, only the
object, not the subject of the natural laws governing society.

Marx repeatedly emphasised that the capitalist (and when we speak of
'industry' in the past or present we can only mean the capitalist) is
nothing but a puppet. And when, for example, he compares his instinct to
enrich himself with that of the miser, he stresses the fact that "what
in the miser is a mere idiosyncrasy, is, in the capitalist, the effect
of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels. Moreover,
the development of capitalist production makes it constantly necessary
to keep increasing the amount of the capital invested in a given
industrial undertaking, and competition makes the immanent laws of
capitalist production to be felt as external coercive laws by each
individual capitalist." [\[41\]](#41) The fact, therefore, that
'industry', i.e. the capitalist as the incarnation of economic and
technical progress, does not act but is acted upon and that his
'activity' goes no further than the correct observation and calculation
of the objective working out of the natural laws of society, is a truism
for Marxism and is elsewhere interpreted in this way by Engels also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 3.

To return to our main argument, it is evident from all this that the
attempt at a solution represented by the turn taken by critical
philosophy towards the practical, does not succeed in resolving the
antinomies we have noted. On the contrary it fixes them for eternity.
[\[42\]](#42) For just as objective necessity, despite the rationality
and regularity of its manifestations, yet persists in a state of
immutable contingency because its material substratum remains
transcendental, so too the freedom of the subject which this device is
designed to rescue, is unable, being an empty freedom, to evade the
abyss of fatalism. "Thoughts without content are empty," says Kant
programmatically at the beginning of the 'Transcendental Logic',
"Intuitions without concepts are blind." [\[43\]](#43) But the
*Critique* which here propounds the necessity of an interpretation of
form and content can do no more than offer it as a methodological
programme, i.e. for each of the discrete areas it can indicate the point
where the real synthesis *should* begin, and where it *would* begin if
its formal rationality *could* allow it to do more than predict formal
possibilities in terms of formal calculations.

The freedom (of the subject) is neither able to overcome the sensuous
necessity of the system of knowledge and the soullessness of the
fatalistically conceived laws of nature, nor is it able to give them any
meaning. And likewise the contents produced by reason, and the world
acknowledged by reason are just as little able to fill the purely formal
determinants of freedom with a truly living life. The impossibility of
comprehending and 'creating' the union of form and content concretely
instead of as the basis for a purely formal calculus leads to the
insoluble dilemma of freedom and necessity, of voluntarism and fatalism.
The 'eternal, iron' regularity of the processes of nature and the purely
inward freedom of individual moral practice appear at the end of the
*Critique of Practical Reason* as wholly irreconcilable and at the same
time as the unalterable foundations of human existence. [\[44\]](#44)
Kant's greatness as a philosopher lies in the fact that in both
instances he made no attempt to conceal the intractability of the
problem by means of an arbitrary dogmatic resolution of any sort, but
that he bluntly elaborated the contradiction and presented it in an
undiluted form.[]{#03}

#### 3.

As everywhere in classical philosophy it would be a mistake to think
that these discussions are no more than the problems of intellectuals
and the squabbles of pedants. This can be seen most clearly if we turn
back a page in the growth of this problem and examine it at a stage in
its development when it had been less worked over intellectually, when
it was closer to its social background and accordingly more concrete.
Plekhanov strongly emphasises the intellectual barrier that the
bourgeois materialism of the eighteenth century came up against and he
puts it into perspective by means of the following antinomy: on the one
hand, ***man appears as the product*** of his social milieu, whereas, on
the other hand, "***the social milieu*** is ***produced*** by 'public
opinion', i.e. ***by man***". [\[45\]](#45) This throws light on the
social reality underlying the antinomy which we encountered in the --
seemingly -- purely epistemological problem of production, in the
systematic question of the subject of an 'action', of the 'creator' of a
unified reality. Plekhanov's account shows no less clearly that the
duality of the contemplative and the (individual) practical principles
which we saw as the first achievement and as the starting-point for the
later development of classical philosophy, leads towards this antinomy.

However, the na√Øver and more primitive analysis of Holbach and Helvetius
permits a clearer insight into the life that forms the true basis of
this antinomy. We observe, firstly, that following on the development of
bourgeois society all social problems cease to transcend man and appear
as the products of human activity in contrast to the view of society
held by the Middle Ages and the early modern period (e.g. Luther).
Secondly, it becomes evident that the man who now emerges must be the
individual, egoistic bourgeois isolated artificially by capitalism and
that his consciousness, the source of his activity and knowledge, is an
individual isolated consciousness a la Robinson Crusoe. [\[46\]](#46)
But, thirdly, it is this that robs social action of its character as
action. At first this looks like the after-effects of the sensualist
epistemology of the French materialists (and Locke, etc.) where it is
the case, on the one hand, that "his brain is nothing but wax to receive
the imprint of every impression made in it" (Holbach according to
Plekhanov, *op. cit*.) and where, on the other hand, only
***conscious*** action can count as activity. But examined more closely
this turns out to be the simple effect of the situation of bourgeois man
in the capitalist production process.

We have already described the characteristic features of this situation
several times: man in capitalist society confronts a reality 'made' by
himself (as a class) which appears to him to be a natural phenomenon
alien to himself; he is wholly at the mercy of its 'laws', his activity
is confined to the exploitation of the inexorable fulfilment of certain
individual laws for his own (egoistic) interests. But even while
'acting' he remains, in the nature of the case, the object and not the
subject of events. The field of his activity thus becomes wholly
internalised: it consists on the one hand of the awareness of the laws
which he uses and, on the other, of his awareness of his inner reactions
to the course taken by events.

This situation generates very important and unavoidable
problem-complexes and conceptual ambivalences which are decisive for the
way in which bourgeois man understands himself in his relation to the
world. Thus the word 'nature' becomes highly ambiguous. We have already
drawn attention to the idea, formulated most lucidly by Kant but
essentially unchanged since Kepler and Galileo, of nature as the
"aggregate of systems of the laws" governing what happens. Parallel to
this conception whose development out of the economic structures of
capitalism has been shown repeatedly, there is another conception of
nature, a ***value concept***, wholly different from the first one and
embracing a wholly different cluster of meanings.

A glance at the history of natural law shows the extent to which these
two conceptions have become inextricably interwoven with each other. For
here we can see that 'nature' has been heavily marked by the
revolutionary struggle of the bourgeoisie: the 'ordered', calculable,
formal and abstract character of the approaching bourgeois society
appears natural by the side of the artifice, the caprice and the
disorder of feudalism and absolutism. At the same time if one thinks of
Rousseau, there are echoes of a quite different meaning wholly
incompatible with this one. It concentrates increasingly on the feeling
that social institutions (reification) strip man of his human essence
and that the more culture and civilisation (i.e. capitalism and
reification) take possession of him, the less able he is to be a human
being. And with a reversal of meanings that never becomes apparent,
nature becomes the repository of all these inner tendencies opposing the
growth of mechanisation, dehumanisation and reification.

Nature thereby acquires the meaning of what has grown organically, what
was not created by man, in contrast to the artificial structures of
human civilisation. [\[47\]](#47) But, at the same time, it can be
understood as that aspect of human inwardness which has remained
natural, or at least tends or longs to become natural once more. "They
are what we once were," says Schiller of the forms of nature, "they are
what we should once more become." But here, unexpectedly and
indissolubly bound up with the other meanings, we discover a third
conception of nature, one in which we can clearly discern the ideal and
the tendency to overcome the problems of a reified existence. 'Nature'
here refers to authentic humanity, the true essence of man liberated
from the false, mechanising forms of society: man as a perfected whole
who has inwardly overcome, or is in the process of overcoming, the
dichotomies of theory and practice, reason and the senses, form and
content; man whose tendency to create his own forms does not imply an
abstract rationalism which ignores concrete content; man for whom
freedom and necessity are identical.

With this we find that we have unexpectedly discovered what we had been
searching for when we were held up by the irreducible duality of pure
and practical reason, by the question of the subject of an 'action', of
the 'creation' of reality as a totality. All the more as we are dealing
with an attitude (whose ambivalence we recognise as being necessary but
which we shall not probe any further) which need not be sought in some
mythologising transcendent construct; it does not only exist as a 'fact
of the soul', as a nostalgia inhabiting the consciousness, but it also
possesses a very real and concrete field of activity where it may be
brought to fruition, namely art. This is not the place to investigate
the ever-increasing importance of aesthetics and the theory of art
within the total world-picture of the eighteenth century. As everywhere
in this study, we are concerned solely to throw light on the social and
historical background which threw up these problems and conferred upon
aesthetics and upon consciousness of art philosophical importance that
art was unable to lay claim to in previous ages. This does not mean that
art itself was experiencing an unprecedented golden age. On the
contrary, with a very few exceptions the actual artistic production
during this period cannot remotely be compared to that of past golden
ages. What is crucial here is the theoretical and philosophical
importance which the ***principle of art*** acquires in this period.

This principle is the creation of a concrete totality that springs from
a conception of form orientated towards the concrete content of its
material substratum. In this view form is therefore able to demolish the
'contingent' relation of the parts to the whole and to resolve the
merely apparent opposition between chance and necessity. It is well
known that Kant in the *Critique of Judgment* assigned to this principle
the role of mediator between the otherwise irreconcilable opposites,
i.e. the function of perfecting the system. But even at this early stage
this attempt at a solution could not limit itself to the explanation and
interpretation of the phenomenon of art. If only because, as has been
shown, the principle thus discovered was, from its inception,
indissolubly bound up with the various conceptions of nature so that its
most obvious and appropriate function seemed to provide a principle for
the solution of all insoluble problems both of contemplative theory and
ethical practice. Fichte did indeed provide a succinct programmatic
account of the use to which this principle was to be put: art
"transforms the transcendental point of view into the common one",
[\[48\]](#48) that is to say, what was for transcendental philosophy a
highly problematic postulate with which to explain the world, becomes in
art perfect achievement: it proves that this postulate of the
transcendental philosophers is necessarily anchored in the structure of
human consciousness.

However, this proof involves a vital issue of methodology for classical
philosophy which -- as we have seen -- was forced to undertake the task
of discovering the subject of 'action' which could be seen to be the
maker of reality in its concrete totality. For only if it can be shown
that such a subjectivity can be found in the consciousness and that
there can be a principle of form which is not affected by the problem of
indifference *vis-a-vis* content and the resulting difficulties
concerning the thing-in-itself, 'intelligible contingency', etc., only
then is it methodologically possible to advance concretely beyond formal
rationalism. Only then can a logical solution to the problem of
irrationality (i.e. the relation of form to content) become at all
feasible. Only then will it be possible to posit the world as conceived
by thought as a perfected, concrete, meaningful system 'created' by us
and attaining in us the stage of self-awareness. For this reason,
together with the discovery of the principle of art, there arises also
the problem of the 'intuitive understanding' whose content is not given
but 'created'. This understanding is, in Kant's words [\[49\]](#49) ,
spontaneous (i.e. active) and not receptive (i.e. contemplative) both as
regards knowledge and intuitive perception. If, in the case of Kant
himself, this only indicates the point from which it would be
***possible*** to complete and perfect the system, in the works of his
successors this principle and the postulate of an intuitive
understanding and an intellectual intuition becomes the cornerstone of
systematic philosophy.

But it is in Schiller's aesthetic and theoretical works that we can see,
even more clearly than in the systems of the philosophers (where for the
superficial observer the pure edifice of thought sometimes obscures the
living heart from which these problems arise), the need which has
provided the impetus for these analyses as well as the function to be
performed by the solutions offered. Schiller defines the aesthetic
principle as the play-instinct (in contrast to the form-instinct and the
content-instinct) and his analysis of this contains very valuable
insights into the question of reification, as is indeed true of all his
aesthetic writings) . He formulates it as follows: "For it must be said
once and for all that man only plays when he is a man in the full
meaning of the word, and ***he is fully human only when he plays***."
[\[50\]](#50) By extending the aesthetic principle far beyond the
confines of aesthetics, by seeing it as the key to the solution of the
question of the meaning of man's existence in society, Schiller brings
us back to the basic issue of classical philosophy. On the one hand, he
recognises that social life has destroyed man as man. On the other hand,
he points to the principle whereby ***man having been socially
destroyed, fragmented and divided between different partial systems is
to be made whole again in thought***. If we can now obtain a clear view
of classical philosophy we see both the magnitude of its enterprise and
the fecundity of the perspectives it opens up for the future, but we see
no less clearly the inevitability of its failure. For while earlier
thinkers remained na√Øvely entangled in the modes of thought of
reification, or at best (as in the cases cited by Plekhanov) were driven
into objective contradictions, here the problematic nature of social
life for capitalist man becomes fully conscious.

"When the power of synthesis", Hegel remarks, "vanishes from the lives
of men and when the antitheses have lost their vital relation and their
power of interaction and gain independence, it is then that philosophy
becomes a felt need." [\[51\]](#51) At the same time, however, we can
see the limitations of this undertaking. Objectively, since question and
answer are confined from the very start to the realm of pure thought.
These limitations are objective in so far as they derive from the
dogmatism of critical philosophy. Even where its method has forced it
beyond the limits of the formal, rational and discursive understanding
enabling it to become critical of thinkers like Leibniz and Spinoza its
***fundamental systematic posture*** still remains rationalistic. The
dogma of rationality remains unimpaired and is by no means superseded.
[\[52\]](#52) The limitations are subjective since the principle so
discovered reveals when it becomes conscious of itself the narrow
confines of its own validity. For if man is fully human "only when he
plays", we are indeed enabled to comprehend all the contents of life
from this vantage point. And in the aesthetic mode, conceived as broadly
as possible, they may be salvaged from the deadening effects of the
mechanism of reification. But only ***in so far*** as these contents
become aesthetic. That is to say, either the world must be
aestheticised, which is an evasion of the real problem and is just
another way in which to make the subject purely contemplative and to
annihilate 'action'. Or else, the aesthetic principle must be elevated
into the principle by which objective reality is shaped: but that would
be to mythologise the discovery of intuitive understanding.

From Fichte onwards it became increasingly necessary to make the
mythologising of the process of 'creation' into a central issue, a
question of life and death for classical philosophy; all the more so as
the critical point of view was constrained, parallel with the antinomies
which it discovered in the given world and our relationship with it, to
treat the subject in like fashion and to tear it to pieces (i.e. its
fragmentation in objective reality had to be reproduced in thought,
accelerating the process as it did so). Hegel pours scorn in a number of
places on Kant's 'soul-sack' in which the different 'faculties'
(theoretical, practical, etc.) are lying and from which they have to be
'pulled out'. But there is no way for Hegel to overcome this
fragmentation of the subject into independent parts whose empirical
reality and even necessity is likewise undeniable, other than by
creating this fragmentation, this disintegration out of a concrete,
total subject. On this point art shows us, as we have seen, the two
faces of Janus, and with the discovery of art it becomes possible either
to provide yet another domain for the fragmented subject or to leave
behind the safe territory of the concrete evocation of totality and
(using art at most by way of illustration) tackle the problem of
'creation' from the side of the subject. The problem is then no longer
-- as it was for Spinoza -- to create an objective system of reality on
the model of geometry. It is rather ***this*** creation which is at once
philosophy's premise and its task. This creation is undoubtedly given
("There are synthetic judgements a priori -- how are they possible ?"
Kant had once asked). But the task is to deduce the unity -- which is
not given -- of this disintegrating creation and to prove that it is the
product of a creating subject. In the final analysis then: to create the
subject of the 'creator'.[]{#04}

#### 4.

This extends the discussions to the point where it goes beyond pure
epistemology. The latter had aimed at investigating only the 'possible
conditions' of those forms of thought and action which are given in
'our' reality. Its cultural and philosophical tendency, namely the
impulse to overcome the reified disintegration of the subject and the --
likewise reified -- rigidity and impenetrability of its objects, emerges
here with unmistakable clarity. After describing the influence Hamann
had exercised upon his own development, Goethe gives a clear formulation
to this aspiration: "Everything which man undertakes to perform, whether
by word or deed, must be the product of all his abilities acting in
concert; everything isolated is reprehensible." [\[54\]](#54) But with
the shift to a fragmented humanity in need of reconstruction (a shift
already indicated by the importance of the problem of art), the
different meanings assumed by the subjective 'we' at the different
stages of development can no longer remain concealed. The fact that the
problematics have become more conscious, that it is harder to indulge
confusions and equivocations than was the case with the concept of
nature only makes matters more difficult. The reconstitution of the
unity of the subject, the intellectual restoration of man has
consciously to take its path through the realm of disintegration and
fragmentation. The different forms of fragmentation are so many
necessary phases on the road towards a reconstituted man but they
dissolve into nothing when they come into a true relation with a grasped
totality, i.e. when they become dialectical.

"The antitheses," Hegel observes, "which used to be expressed in terms
of mind and matter, body and soul, faith and reason, freedom and
necessity, etc., and were also prominent in a number of more restricted
spheres and concentrated all human interests in themselves, became
transformed as culture advanced into contrasts between reason and the
senses, intelligence and nature and, in its most general form, between
absolute subjectivity and absolute objectivity. To transcend such
ossified antitheses is the sole concern of reason. This concern does not
imply hostility to opposites and restrictions in general; for the
necessary course of evolution is one factor of life which advances by
opposites: and the totality of life at its most intense is only possible
as a new synthesis out of the most absolute separation." [\[55\]](#55)
The genesis, the creation of the creator of knowledge, the dissolution
of the irrationality of the thing-in-itself, the resurrection of man
from his grave, all these issues become concentrated henceforth on the
question of ***dialectical method.*** For in this method the call for an
intuitive understanding (for method to supersede the rationalistic
principle of knowledge) is clearly, objectively and scientifically
stated. Of course, the history of the dialectical method reaches back
deep into the history of rationalistic thought. But the turn it now
takes distinguishes it qualitatively from all earlier approaches. (Hegel
himself underestimates the importance of this distinction, e.g. in his
treatment of Plato.) In all earlier attempts to use dialectics in order
to break out of the limits imposed by rationalism there was a failure to
connect the dissolution of rigid concepts clearly and firmly to the
problem of the logic of the content, to the problem of irrationality.

Hegel in his *Phenomenology* and *Logic* was the first to set about the
task of consciously recasting all problems of logic by grounding them in
the qualitative material nature of their content, in matter in the
logical and philosophical sense of the word. [\[56\]](#56) This resulted
in the establishment of a completely new logic of the ***concrete
concept***, the logic of totality -- admittedly in a very problematic
form which was not seriously continued after him.

Even more original is the fact that the subject is neither the unchanged
observer of the objective dialectic of being and concept (as was true of
the Eleatic philosophers and even of Plato), nor the practical
manipulator of its purely mental possibilities (as with the Greek
sophists): the dialectical process, the ending of a rigid confrontation
of rigid forms, is enacted essentially ***between the subject and the
object***. No doubt, a few isolated earlier dialecticians were not
wholly unaware of the different levels of subjectivity that arise in the
dialectical process (consider for example the distinction between
'ratio' and 'intellectus' in the thought of Nicholas of Cusa). But this
relativising process only refers to the possibility of different
subject-object relations existing simultaneously or with one
subordinated to the other, or at best developing dialectically from each
other; they do not involve the relativising or the interpenetration of
the subject and the object themselves. But only if that were the case,
only if "the true \[were understood\] not only as substance but also as
subject", only if the subject (consciousness, thought) were both
producer and product of the dialectical process, only if, as a result
the subject moved in a self-created world of which it is the conscious
form and only if the world imposed itself upon it in full objectivity,
only then can the problem of dialectics, and with it the abolition of
the antitheses of subject and object, thought and existence, freedom and
necessity, be held to be solved. It might look as if this would take
philosophy back to the great system-builders of the beginning of the
modern age. The identity, proclaimed by Spinoza, of the order to be
found in the realm of ideas with the order obtaining in the realm of
things seems to come very close to this point of view. The parallel is
all the more plausible (and made a strong impression on the system of
the young Schelling) as Spinoza, too, found the basis of this identity
in the object, in the substance. Geometric construction is a creative
principle that can create only because it represents the factor of
self-consciousness in objective reality. But here \[in Hegel's
argument\] objectivity tends in every respect in the opposite direction
to that given it by Spinoza for whom every subjectivity, every
particular content and every movement vanishes into nothing before the
rigid purity and unity of this substance. If, therefore, it is true that
philosophy is searching for an identical order in the realms of ideas
and things and that the ground of existence is held to be the first
principle, and if it is true also that this identity should serve as an
explanation of concreteness and movement, then it is evident that the
meaning of substance and order in the realm of things must have
undergone a fundamental change.

Classical philosophy did indeed advance to the point of this change in
meaning and succeeded in identifying the substance, now appearing for
the first time, in which philosophically the underlying order and the
connections between things were to be found, namely ***history***. The
arguments which go to show that here and here alone is the concrete
basis for genesis are extraordinarily diverse and to list them would
require almost a complete recapitulation of our analysis up to this
point. For in the case of almost every insoluble problem we perceive
that the search for a solution leads us to history. On the other hand,
we must discuss some of these factors at least briefly for even
classical philosophy was not fully conscious of the ***logical
necessity*** of the link between genesis and history and for social and
historical reasons to be spelled out later, it could not become fully
conscious of it.

The materialists of the eighteenth century were aware that history is an
insuperable barrier to a rationalist theory of knowledge. [\[57\]](#57)
But in accordance with their own rationalistic dogma they interpreted
this as an eternal and indestructible limit to human reason in general.
The logical and methodological side of this fallacy can easily be
grasped when we reflect that rationalist thought by concerning itself
with the formal calculability of the contents of forms made abstract,
***must define*** these contents as ***immutable*** -- within the system
of relations obtaining at any given time. The evolution of the ***real
contents***, i.e. the problem of history, can only be accommodated by
this mode of thought by means of a system of laws which strives to do
justice to every ***foreseeable possibility***.

How far this is practicable need not detain us here; what we find
significant is the fact that thanks to this conclusion ***the method
itself*** blocks the way to an understanding both of the quality and the
concreteness of the contents and also of their evolution, i.e. of
history: it is of the essence of such a law that within its jurisdiction
nothing new can happen by definition and a system of such laws which is
held to be perfect can indeed reduce the need to correct individual laws
but cannot calculate what is novel. (The concept of the 'source of
error' is just a makeshift to cover up for the fact that for rational
knowledge process and novelty have the \[unknowable\] quality of
things-in-themselves.) But if genesis, in the sense given to it in
classical philosophy, is to be attained it is necessary to create a
basis for it in a logic of contents which change. It is only in history,
in the historical process, in the uninterrupted outpouring o f what is
qualitatively new that the requisite paradigmatic order can be found in
the realm of things. [\[58\]](#58)

For as long as this process and this novelty appear merely as an
obstacle and not as the simultaneous result, goal and substratum of the
method, the concepts -- like the objects of reality as it is experienced
-- must preserve their encapsulated rigidity which only appears to be
eliminated by the ***juxtaposition*** of other concepts. Only the
historical process truly eliminates the-actual-autonomy of the objects
and the concepts of objects with their resulting rigidity As Hegel
remarks with reference to the relation between body and soul: "Indeed,
if both are presumed to be ***absolutely independent*** of each other
they are as impenetrable for each other as any material is for any other
and the presence of one can be granted only in the non-being, in the
pores of the other; just as Epicurus assigned to the gods a dwelling
place in the pores but was logical enough not to impose upon them any
community with the world." [\[59\]](#59) But historical evolution annuls
the autonomy of the individual factors. By compelling the knowledge
which ostensibly does these factors justice to construct its conceptual
system upon content and upon what is qualitatively unique and new in the
phenomena, it forces it at the same time to refuse to allow any of these
elements to remain at the level of mere concrete uniqueness. Instead,
the concrete totality of the historical world, the concrete and total
historical process is the only point of view from which understanding
becomes possible.

With this point of view the two main strands of the irrationality of the
thing-in-itself and the concreteness of the individual content and of
totality are given a positive turn and appear as a unity. This signals a
change in the relation between theory and practice and between freedom
and necessity. The idea that we have made reality loses its more or less
fictitious character: we have -- in the prophetic words of Vico already
cited -- made our own history and if we are able to regard the whole of
reality as history (i.e. as our history, for there is no other), we
shall have raised ourselves in fact to the position from which reality
can be understood as our 'action'. The dilemma of the materialists will
have lost its meaning for it stands revealed as a rationalistic
prejudice, as a dogma of the formalistic understanding. This had
recognised as deeds only those actions which were consciously performed
whereas the historical environment we have created, the product of the
historical process was regarded as a reality which influences us by
virtue of laws alien to us.

Here in our newly-won knowledge where, as Hegel puts it in the
*Phenomenology*, "the true becomes a Bacchantic orgy in which no one
escapes being drunk", reason seems to have lifted the veil concealing
the sacred mystery at Sa√Øs and discovers, as in the parable of Novalis,
that it is itself the solution to the riddle. But here, we find once
again, quite concretely this time, the decisive problem of this line of
thought: ***the problem of the subject of the action, the subject of the
genesis***. For the unity of subject and object, of thought and
existence which the 'action' undertook to prove and to exhibit finds
both its fulfilment and its substratum in the unity of the genesis of
the determinants of thought and of the history of the evolution of
reality. But to comprehend this unity it is necessary both to discover
the site from which to resolve all these problems and also to exhibit
***concretely*** the 'we' which is the subject of history, that 'we'
whose action is in fact history.

However, at this point classical philosophy turned back and lost itself
in the endless labyrinth of conceptual mythology. It will be our task in
the next section to explain why it was ***unable*** to discover this
concrete subject of genesis, the methodologically indispensable
subject-object. At this stage it is only necessary to indicate what
obstacle it encountered as a result of this aberrancy.

Hegel, who is in every respect the pinnacle of this development, also
made the most strenuous search for this subject. The 'we' that he was
able to find is, as is well known, the World Spirit, or rather, its
concrete incarnations, the spirits of the individual peoples. Even if we
-- provisionally -- ignore the mythologising and hence abstract
character of this subject, it must still not be overlooked that, even if
we accept all of Hegel's assumptions without demur, this subject remains
incapable of fulfilling the methodological and systematic function
assigned to it, even from Hegel's own point of view. Even for Hegel, the
spirit of a people can be no more than a 'natural' determinant of the
World Spirit, i.e. one "which strips off its limitation only at a higher
moment, namely at the moment when it ***becomes conscious of its own
essence*** and it possesses its absolute truth only in this recognition
and not immediately in its ***existence***." [\[60\]](#60)

From this follows above all that the spirit of a people only seems to be
the subject of history, the doer of its deeds: for in fact it is the
World Spirit that ***makes use*** of that 'natural character' of a
people which corresponds to the actual requirements and to the idea of
the World Spirit and accomplishes its deeds ***by means of and in spite
of*** the spirit of the people. [\[61\]](#61) But in this way the deed
becomes something transcendent for the doer himself and the freedom that
seems to have been won is transformed unnoticed into that specious
freedom to reflect upon laws which themselves govern man, a freedom
which in Spinoza a thrown stone would possess if it had consciousness.
It is doubtless true that Hegel whose realistic genius neither could nor
would disguise the truth about the nature of history as he found it did
nevertheless seek to provide an explanation of it in terms of "the ruse
of reason". But it must not be forgotten that "the ruse of reason" can
only claim to be more than a myth if authentic reason can be discovered
and demonstrated in a truly concrete manner. In that case it becomes a
brilliant explanation for stages in history that have not yet become
conscious. But these can only be understood and evaluated as stages from
a standpoint already achieved by a reason that has discovered itself. At
this point Hegel's philosophy is driven inexorably into the arms of
mythology. Having failed to discover the identical subject-object in
history it was forced to go out beyond history and, there, to establish
the empire of reason which has discovered itself. From that vantage
point it became possible to understand history as a mere stage and its
evolution in terms of "the ruse of reason". History is not able to form
the living body of the total system: it becomes a part, an aspect of the
totality that culminates in the 'absolute spirit', in art, religion and
philosophy.

But history is much too much the natural, and indeed the uniquely
possible life-element of the dialectical method for such an enterprise
to succeed. On the one hand, history now intrudes, illogically but
inescapably into the structure of those very spheres which according to
the system were supposed to lie beyond its range. [\[62\]](#62) On the
other hand, this inappropriate and inconsistent approach to history
deprives history itself of that essence which is so important precisely
within the Hegelian system.

For, in the first place, its relation to reason will now appear to be
accidental. "When, where and in what form such self-reproductions of
reason make their appearance as philosophy is accidental," Hegel
observes in the passage cited earlier concerning the "needs of
philosophy". [\[63\]](#63) But in the absence of necessity history
relapses into the irrational dependence on the 'given' which it had just
overcome. And if its relation to the reason that comprehends it is
nothing more than that of an irrational content to a more general form
for which the concrete *hic et nunc*, place, time and concrete content
are contingent, then reason itself will succumb to all the antinomies of
the thing-in-itself characteristic of pre-dialectical methods.

In the second place, the unclarified relation between absolute spirit
and history forces Hegel to the assumption, scarcely comprehensible in
view of this method, that ***history has an end*** and that in his own
day and in his own system of philosophy the consummation and the truth
of all his predecessors are to be found. This necessarily means that
even in the more mundane and properly historical spheres, history must
find its fulfilment in the restored Prussian state.

In the third place, genesis, detached from history, passes through its
own development from logic through nature to spirit. But as the
historicity of all categories and their movements intrudes decisively
into the dialectical method and as dialectical genesis and history
necessarily belong together objectively and only go their separate ways
because classical philosophy was unable to complete its programme, this
process which had been designed to be suprahistorical, inevitably
exhibits a historical structure at every point. And since the method,
having become abstract and contemplative, now as a result falsifies and
does violence to history, it follows that history will gain its revenge
and violate the method which has failed to integrate it, tearing it to
pieces. (Consider in this context the transition from the logic to the
philosophy of nature.)

In consequence, as Marx has emphasised in his criticism of Hegel, the
demiurgic role of the 'spirit' and the 'idea' enters the realm of
conceptual mythology." [\[64\]](#64) Once again -- and from the
standpoint of Hegel's philosophy itself -- it must be stated that the
demiurge only seems to make history. But this semblance is enough to
dissipate wholly the attempt of the classical philosophers to break out
of the limits imposed on formal and rationalistic (bourgeois, reified)
thought and thereby to restore a humanity destroyed by that reification.
Thought relapses into the contemplative duality of subject and object.
[\[65\]](#65)

Classical philosophy did, it is true, take all the antinomies of its
life-basis to the furthest extreme it was capable of in thought; it
conferred on them the highest possible intellectual expression. But even
for this philosophy they remain unsolved and insoluble. Thus classical
philosophy finds itself historically in the paradoxical position that it
was concerned to find a philosophy that would mean the end of bourgeois
society, and to resurrect in thought a humanity destroyed in that
society and by it. In the upshot, however, it did not manage to do more
than provide a complete intellectual copy and the *a priori* deduction
of bourgeois society. It is only the ***manner*** of this deduction,
namely the dialectical method that points beyond bourgeois society. And
even in classical philosophy this is only expressed in the form of an
unsolved and insoluble antinomy. This antinomy is admittedly the most
profound and the most magnificent intellectual expression of those
antinomies which lie at the roots of bourgeois society and which are
unceasingly produced and reproduced by it -- albeit in confused and
inferior forms. Hence classical philosophy had nothing but these
unresolved antinomies to bequeath to succeeding (bourgeois) generations.
The continuation of that course which at least in method started to
point the way beyond these limits, namely the dialectical method as the
true historical method was reserved for the class which was able to
discover within itself on the basis of its life-experience the identical
subject-object, the subject of action; the 'we' of the genesis: namely
the proletariat.

¬†

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[next section](hcc07_1.htm)

[Georg Lukacs Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Engels on
Thing-in-Itself](../../../marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/ch02.htm#005)
\| [Lenin on Thing-in-Itself](../../../lenin/works/1908/mec/02.htm)\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES

[]{#36} 36 *Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy
in* S.W. II, p. 336.

[]{#37} 37 E.g. the *Phenomenology of Mind,* Preface, Werke II, p. 20;
and also ibid., pp. 67-8, 451, etc.

[]{#38} 38 Marx employs this terminology in the important, oft-quoted
passage about the proletariat (it is to be found in these pages too).
*The Poverty of Philosophy,* p. 195. For this whole question, see also
the relevant passages in the *Logik,* especially in Vol. III, pp. 127
*et. seq*., 166 *et seq*., and Vol. IV, pp. 120 *et seq*., and see also
the critique of Kant in a number of places.

[]{#39} 39 *Die Kritik der reinen Vernunft,* pp. 208 et seq.

[]{#40} 40 Nachlass I, p. 449. \[*An Outline of a Critique of National
Economy*\]*.*

[]{#41} 41 *Capital* I, p. 592, etc. Cf. also the essay on \"Class
Consciousness\" for the question of the \'false consciousness\' of the
bourgeoisie.

[]{#42} 42 It is this that provokes repeated attacks from Hegel. But in
addition Goethe\'s rejection of the Kantian ethic points in the same
direction although Goethe\'s motives and hence his terminology are
different. That Kant\'s ethics is faced with the task of solving the
problem of the thing-in-itself can be seen in innumerable places, e.g.
the *Grundlegung der Metaphysik der Sitien,* Philosophische Bibliothek,
p. 87; *Kritik der praktischen Vernunft,* p. 123.

[]{#43} 43 *Die Kritik der reinen Vernunft,* p. 77.

[]{#44} 44 Cf. also the essay \"The Marxism of Rosa Luxemburg\" on the
question of the methodological interrelatedness of these two principles.

[]{#45} 45 *Beitr√§ge zur Geschichte des Materialismus,* pp. 54 et seq.,
122 et seq. How near Holbach and Helvetius came to the problem of the
thing-in-itself - admittedly in a more naive form - can likewise be seen
there on pp. 9, 51, etc.

[]{#46} 46 The history of the stories 5 la Robinson cannot be undertaken
here. I refer the reader to Marx\'s comments *(A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy,* pp. 266 *et seq*., and to Cassirer\'s
subtle remarks about the role of Robinson Crusoe in Hobbes\'
epistemology. Op. cit. II, pp. 61 et seq.

[]{#47} 47 On this point cf. especially *Die Kritik der Urteilskraft ¬ß*
42. Via Schiller the illustration of the real and the imitated
nightingale strongly influenced later thinkers. It would be of absorbing
interest to follow through the historical development leading from
German Romanticism via the historical school of law, Carlyle, Ruskin,
etc., in the course of which the concept of \'organic growth\' was
converted from a protest against reification into an increasingly
reactionary slogan. To do so, however, would be outside the scope of
this work. Here it is only the *structure of the objects* that need
concern us: namely the fact that what would seem to be the highpoint of
the interiorisation of nature really implies the abandonment of any true
understanding of it. To make moods \[*Stimmung*\] into the content
presupposes the existence of unpenetrated and impenetrable objects
(things-in-themselves) just as much as do the laws of nature.

[]{#48} 48 *Das System der Sittenlehre,* 3. Hauptst√ºck, ¬ß 31, Werke II,
p. 747. It would be both interesting and rewarding to show how the so
rarely understood Nature philosophy of the classical epoch necessarily
springs from this state of affairs. It is not by chance that Goethe\'s
Nature philosophy arose in the course of a conflict with Newton\'s
\'violation\' of nature. Nor was it an accident that it set the pattern
for all later developments. But both phenomena can only be understood in
terms of the relation between man, nature and art. This also explains
the methodological return to the qualitative Nature philosophy of the
Renaissance as being the first assault upon a mathematical conception of
nature.

[]{#49} 49 *Die Kritik der Urteilskraft,* ¬ß 77.

[]{#50} 50 *On the Aesthetic Education of Man,* 15th Letter.

[]{#51} 51 *Die Differenz des Fichteschen und Schellingschen Systems,*
Werke I, p. 174.

[]{#52} 52 It is in his opposition *to this* that we can locate the
substantive core in Schelling\'s later philosophy. However, his
mythologising approach now became wholly reactionary. Hegel represents -
as we shall show - the absolute consummation of rationalism, but this
means that he can be superseded only by an interrelation of thought and
existence that *has ceased to be contemplative,* by the *concrete*
demonstration of the identical subject-object. Schelling made the absurd
attempt to achieve this by going in the reverse direction and so to
reach a purely intellectual solution. He thus ended up, like all the
epigones of classical philosophy, in a reactionary mythology that
glorified an empty irrationality.

[]{#53} 53 It is not possible to examine the question in detail here,
but I should like to point out that this is the point at which to begin
an analysis of the problematics of Romanticism. Familiar, but seldom
understood concepts, such as \'irony\' spring from this situation. In
particular the incisive questions posed by Solger who has wrongly been
allowed to slide into oblivion, place him together with Friedrich
Schlegel as a pioneer of the dialectical method between Schelling and
Hegel, a position in some ways comparable to that occupied by Maimon in
between Kant and Fichte. The role of mythology in Schelling\'s
aesthetics becomes clearer with this in mind. There is an obvious
connection between such problems and the conception of nature as a mood.
The truly critical, metaphysically non-hypostatised, artistic view of
the world leads to an even greater fragmentation of the unity of the
subject and thus to an increase in the symptoms of alienation; this has
been borne out by the later evolution of consistently modern views of
art (Flaubert, Konrad Fiedler, etc.) On this point cf. my essay, *Die
Subjekt-Objekt-Beziehung in der Asthetik,* Logos, jahrgang iv.

[]{#54} 54 *Dichtung und Wahrheit,* Book 12. The subterranean influence
of Hamann is much greater than is usually supposed.

[]{#55} 55 *Werke* I, pp. 173-4. The *Phenomenology* is an attempt -
unsurpassed hitherto, even by Hegel - to develop such a method.

[]{#56} 56 Lask, the most ingenious and logical of the modern
Neo-Kantians, clearly perceives this development in Hegel\'s Logic. \"In
this respect, too, the critic must admit that Hegel is in the right:
irrationality can be overcome *if and only if* dialectically changing
concepts are acceptable.\" *Fichtes Idealismus und die Geschichte,* p.
67.

[]{#57} 57 Cf. Plekhanov, op. cit., pp. 9, 51, etc. But
*methodologically only* formalistic rationalism is confronted by an
insoluble problem at this point. Setting aside the *substantive*
scientific value of medieval solutions to these questions, it is
indubitable that the Middle Ages did not see any problem here, let alone
an insoluble one. We may compare Holbach\'s statement, quoted by
Plekhanov, that we cannot know \"whether the chicken preceded the egg,
or the egg the chicken\" with e.g. the statement of Master Eckhard,
\"Nature makes the man from the child and the chicken from the egg; God
makes the man before the child and the chicken before the egg\" (Sermon
of the noble man). Needless to say, we are here concerned *exclusively*
with the contrast in *methodology.* On the basis of this methodological
limitation as the result of which history is made to appear as a
thing-in-itself, Plekhanov has rightly judged these materialists to be
naive idealists in their approach to history. *Zu Hegels 60. Todestag,*
Neue Zeit X. 1. 273.

[]{#58} 58 Here too we can do no more than refer in passing to the
history of this problem. The opposed positions were clearly established
very early on. I would point to e.g. Friedrich Schlegel\'s critique of
Condorcet\'s attempt (1 795) to provide a rationalist explanation of
history (as it were, of the type of Comte or Spencer). \" *The enduring
qualities* of man are the subject of pure science, but *the changing
aspects of man,* both as an individual and in the mass, are the subject
of a scientific history of mankind.\" *Prosaische jugendschriften,*
Vienna, 1906. Vol. II, p. 52.

[]{#59} 59 *Die Encyclop√§die*, ¬ß 309. For us, of course, *only* the
methodological aspect has any significance. Nevertheless, we must
emphasise that all formal, rationalist concepts exhibit this same
reified impenetrability. The modern substitution of functions for things
does not alter this situation in the least, as concepts of function do
not at all differ from thing-concepts in the only area that matters,
i.e. the form-content relationship. On the contrary, they take their
formal, rationalist structure to its extreme logical conclusion.

[]{#60} 60 Hegel, Werke II, p. 267.

[]{#61} 61 *Die Philosophie des Rechts*, ¬ß *345-7. Encyclop√§die, ¬ß*
548-52.

[]{#62} 62 In the last versions of the system history represents the
transition from the philosophy of right to the absolute spirit. (In the
Phenomenology the relation is more complex but methodologically just as
ambiguous and undefined.) \'Absolute spirit\' is the truth of the
preceding moment, of history and therefore, in accordance with Hegel\'s
logic, it would have to have annulled and preserved history within
itself. However, in the dialectical method history cannot be so
transcended and this is the message at the end of *Hegel\'s Philosophy
of History* where at the climax of the system, at the moment where the
\'absolute spirit\' realises itself, history makes its reappearance and
points beyond philosophy in its turn: \"That the determinants of thought
had this importance is a further insight that does not belong within the
history of philosophy. These concepts are the simplest revelation of the
spirit of the world: this in its most concrete form is history.\" Werke
XV, p. 618.

[]{#63} 63 Werke 1, p. 174. Needless to say, Fichte places an even
heavier emphasis on chance.

[]{#64} 64 Cf. the essay \"What is orthodox Marxism?\"

[]{#65} 65 With this the Logic itself becomes problematic. Hegel\'s
postulate that the concept is \"reconstituted being\" (Werke V, 30) is
only possible on the assumption of the real creation of the identical
subject-object. A failure at this point means that the concept acquires
a Kantian, idealistic emphasis which is in conflict with its dialectical
function. To show this in detail would be well beyond the scope of this
study.

¬†

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Lukacs Archive](../../index.htm)
