[MIA](../../../../../index.htm){.title}:
[Marxists](../../../../index.htm){.title}: [Marx &
Engels](../../../index.htm){.title}: [Library](../../index.htm){.title}:
[1848](../index.htm){.title}: [Manifesto of the Communist
Party](index.htm){.title}: Chapter 4:       [\[German
Original\]](../../../../../deutsch/archiv/marx-engels/1848/manifest/4-stelkomm.htm){.title}

> ::: border
> \
>
> ### Chapter IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> []{#200} [Section II](ch02.htm) has made clear the relations of the
> Communists to the existing working-class parties, such as the
> [Chartists](../../../../../glossary/orgs/c/h.htm#chartists) in England
> and the Agrarian Reformers in America. []{#201}
>
> The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
> enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in
> the movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the
> future of that movement. In France, the Communists ally with the
> Social-Democrats^[(1)](#a1){#ab1}^ against the conservative and
> radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to take up a
> critical position in regard to phases and illusions traditionally
> handed down from the great Revolution. []{#202}
>
> In Switzerland, they support the Radicals, without losing sight of the
> fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of
> Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical
> bourgeois. []{#203}
>
> In Poland, they support the party that insists on an agrarian
> revolution as the prime condition for national emancipation, that
> party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846. []{#204}
>
> In Germany, they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a
> revolutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
> squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie. []{#205}
>
> But they never cease, for a single instant, to instill into the
> working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile
> antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the
> German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against the
> bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the bourgeoisie
> must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, and in order
> that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany, the fight
> against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin. []{#206}
>
> The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that
> country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be
> carried out under more advanced conditions of European civilisation
> and with a much more developed proletariat than that of England was in
> the seventeenth, and France in the eighteenth century, and because the
> bourgeois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an
> immediately following proletarian revolution. []{#207}
>
> In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary
> movement against the existing social and political order of things.
> []{#208}
>
> In all these movements, they bring to the front, as the leading
> question in each, the property question, no matter what its degree of
> development at the time. []{#209}
>
> Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the
> democratic parties of all countries. []{#210}
>
> The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly
> declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow
> of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
> Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but
> their chains. They have a world to win.
>
> ### Working Men of All Countries, Unite!
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> []{#211} [[(1)](#ab1){#a1}]{.info} The party then represented in
> Parliament by Ledru-Rollin, in literature by Louis Blanc, in the daily
> press by the *Réforme*. The name of Social-Democracy signifies, with
> these its inventors, a section of the Democratic or Republican Party
> more or less tinged with socialism. [\[Engels, English Edition
> 1888\]]{.inote}
>
> ### \* \* \*
>
> The famous final phrase of the Manifesto, "Working Men of All
> Countries, Unite!", in the original German is: "*Proletarier aller
> Länder, vereinigt euch!*" Thus, a more correct translation would be
> "Proletarians of all countries, Unite!"
>
> "Workers of the World, Unite. You have nothing to lose but your
> chains!" is a popularisation of the last three sentences, and is not
> found in any official translation. Since this English translation was
> approved by Engels, we have kept the original intact.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> [Photograph of a page of the Manifesto in Marx's
> handwriting](page.jpg)\
> Table of Contents: [Manifesto of the Communist Party](index.htm) \|
> [Marx/Engels Library](../../../index.htm)
> :::
