---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1911

### On Mr Heinrich Rickert's Book

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 481-86.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The review of Rickert's book *Sciences of Nature
and Sciences of Culture* was published in *Sovremenny Mir*, no 9, 1911.
*Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary World*) -- a literary, scientific and
political monthly published in St Petersburg from 1906 to 1918. Heinrich
Rickert (1863-1936) -- German philosopher and sociologist, one of the
main representatives of the Baden school of neo-Kantianism.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

H Rickert, *Sciences of Nature and Sciences of Culture* (translated from
the Second German Edition, edited by S Hessen, Obrazovaniye Publishers,
St Petersburg, 1911).

There is a saying: tell me your friends, and I will tell you who you
are. By the same token it might be said: I will determine who you are if
you tell me your enemies. There are extraordinarily characteristic types
of hostility. Among them is one which many representatives of social
science feel nowadays towards the materialist explanation of history.
Don't think that I am expressing myself inexactly: I mean precisely
hostility, and not a calm denial arising from some more or less correct
theoretical considerations. In other words, in rejecting the materialist
explanation of history, many of our present-day social scientists are,
for the most part, obeying the dictates of their hearts instead of
listening to the voice of their intellects, which usually remain in a
state of considerable vagueness about what they are rejecting. In proof,
I shall cite Heinrich Rickert, the author of a small book, or, if you
like, a large pamphlet, entitled *Sciences of Nature and Sciences of
Culture* and highly recommended by Mr S Hessen.

Rickert discerns in historical materialism an attempt 'to transform all
history into economic history and then into natural science' (p 159).
One would require to be almost completely in the dark about this subject
to believe anything like that. First of all, the adherents of historical
materialism have never attempted to 'transform all history into economic
history'. Secondly, it has even less entered their heads 'then' to
transform economic history into natural science. Rickert would have
known this had he taken the trouble to familiarise himself with the
views of the men who founded historical materialism -- Marx and Engels.
Marx used to state categorically that 'natural-scientific' materialism
was utterly inadequate to explain social phenomena. But while Rickert
thinks nothing of repudiating Marx's historical theory, he does not
consider it necessary to get to know it. He is guided by his heart and
not by his head, as is crystal-clear from all his subsequent
argumentation.

The alleged attempts to transform all history into economic history and
then into natural science are based, he says:

\... on a quite arbitrarily selected principle of separating the
essential from the non-essential, a principle which moreover owed its
preference initially to a completely unscientific political prejudice.
This may be observed already in the works of Condorcet, and the
so-called materialist conception of history, which represents only the
extreme apex of this trend, may serve as a classic example of this. A
very great part of it is dependent on specifically Social-Democratic
aspirations. As the guiding cultural ideal is democratic there is an
inclination to consider the great personalities of the past too as
'non-essential' and to take account only of that which comes from the
masses. Hence the idea of 'collectivist' history. From the standpoint of
the proletariat, or from the standpoint which the theoreticians regard
as the standpoint of the masses, moreover, it is mainly the economic
values which come in for consideration and consequently only that is
'essential' which has a direct bearing on them, that is to say, economic
life. Hence, too, history becomes 'materialist'. (pp 159-60)

Whoever has read the celebrated book *Esquisse d*\'*un tableau
historique des progrès de l\'esprit humain* will be very surprised to
hear from Rickert that Condorcet tried to transform all history into
economic history. True, in Condorcet one does find materialist
explanations of some individual historical phenomena. He also has a
propensity to regard the first stages in the cultural development of
mankind from the angle of the development of the productive forces. But
that is due to the fact that he is unable to discover an adequate level
of knowledge at these stages. Starting approximately with Greece, a
purely idealist view of all subsequent history prevails in Condorcet's
book. Idealism was so predominant in all the historical writings of the
eighteenth century that even the materialists of that day were purely
idealist in their historical outlook, although some of them, for example
Helvétius, sometimes also very shrewdly explained some particular
historical phenomena by materialist considerations. It is strange,
indeed, that the learned Mr Rickert and the enlightened Mr Hessen do not
know about this. (Or, perhaps, they do not want to know about it?)
Further. The adherents of historical materialism are, in fact, very much
concerned with what 'comes' from the masses. But, to begin with, this is
not their 'only' concern; they pay exceptionally great attention also to
what comes from the upper classes. Marx's *Capital* proves this
splendidly by its mere existence. Secondly, the practice of taking into
consideration what comes from the masses -- and of doing so deliberately
-- was begun already by the French historians at the time of the
Restoration (for instance, Augustin Thierry) to whom 'Social-Democratic
aspirations' were utterly alien. Again it is very strange that neither
the enlightened Mr Hessen nor the learned Mr Rickert wish to hear of
this. Finally, is it not ludicrous to affirm that, from the standpoint
of the proletariat, or, as Rickert puts it, from the standpoint which
the theoreticians regard as the standpoint of the masses, attention is
turned mainly to economic values. If anyone is paying chief attention to
these values nowadays it is surely the bourgeoisie in its opposition to
the proletariat. Those who uphold today the materialist explanation of
history are quite well aware of this and never lose sight of it.
Consequently what Rickert says about them does not make sense from that
standpoint either.

Rickert interprets historical materialism in such an astonishing fashion
that F Tönnies, a man, who, as far as we know, has no connection with
Social-Democracy, asks him mockingly (in *Archiv für system Philos*,
Volume 8, p 38): 'From which swamp did he borrow his so characteristic
exposition of the materialist conception of history?' (Quoted by Rickert
in a footnote to page 161.) And, indeed, there is a strong smell of the
swamp about Rickert's exposition. However, the question of what
particular swamp he borrows from is fraught with some complexity. The
fact is that Rickert and other scientists like him do not have the
foggiest notion of historical materialism, not for any *personal*
reason, but because their intellectual field of vision is clouded by
prejudices that are peculiar *to a whole class.* It might truly be said
of them that the rubbish they offer as an exposition of historical
materialism is determined by 'a completely unscientific political
prejudice'. Their aversion to historical materialism speaks most
eloquently of their fear of 'specifically Social-Democratic
aspirations'. And since the materialist explanation of history is the
sole scientific explanation of the historical process (as is revealed by
the fact that even those scientists who close their ears to the very
word materialism have recourse to it more and more often in their
specialised works), those writers whose class prejudices render them
incapable of comprehending and assimilating it, when they attempt to
elaborate a general theory of history, necessarily find themselves in a
blind alley of more or less clever but always arbitrary and, therefore,
barren theoretical constructions. Rickert's theory can be listed in the
category of such arbitrary constructions.

This theory amounts to the division of the empirical sciences into two
groups: the generalising sciences of nature and the individualising
sciences of culture. The natural sciences, says Rickert:

\... see in their objects existence and occurrence, free of anything
pertaining to value; their interest is to study the general abstract
relationships, and as far as possible the laws, whose significance
affects this being and occurrence. The individual case is for them only
a 'copy'.

Elsewhere he follows Kant in advancing the concept of nature as the
existence of things, in so far as it is determined by general laws (p
38). To this concept he opposes the concept of historical phenomena:

We have no one suitable word corresponding to the term 'nature', which
could characterise them \[these sciences\] from the standpoint of their
object as well as from the standpoint of their method. We must,
therefore, select two expressions that correspond to the two meanings of
the word 'nature'. As sciences of culture, they study objects pertaining
to universal cultural values; as historical sciences, they portray their
unique development in its distinctiveness and individuality. And the
fact that their objects are essentially processes of culture imparts to
their historical method at the same time the principle of concept
formation, for what is essential to them is only that which in its
individual originality has significance for the guiding cultural value.
Therefore, by individualising, they select from reality as 'culture'
something quite distinct from the natural sciences which examine in a
generalising way the same reality, as 'nature'. For the significance of
a cultural process, in most cases, rests precisely on the originality
which distinguishes it from other processes, whereas, on the other hand,
that which it possesses in common with other processes, that is to say,
that which constitutes their natural-scientific essence, is
non-essential to the historical science of culture. (pp 142-43)

These passages strikingly reveal the weakness of Rickert's theory.
Leaving aside for the moment the question of cultural values, I will
remark, first, that if the importance of every particular historical
process lies in its originality -- and that is correct -- this by no
means justifies the contrasting of natural science to history, or, as
Rickert puts it, the sciences of nature to the sciences of culture. The
fact is that among the natural sciences there are sciences which do not
cease to be *natural* sciences while at the same time being *historical*
sciences. Such, for example, is *geology*. The special subject it is
concerned with cannot at all be regarded as 'only a copy'. No. Geology
studies the history of the earth and not some other celestial body, just
as the history of Russia is the history of our fatherland and not the
history of some other country. The history of the earth is
'individualised' not a whit less than the history of Russia, France, and
so forth. Consequently it cannot be fitted at all into the framework of
the division that Rickert tries to establish. Our author himself feels
that in this respect things are not at all right with him. He tries to
remedy this by acknowledging the presence of ' intermediate spheres' in
which the historical method passes over to the domain of natural science
(p 147 *et seq*). But this acknowledgement gets him absolutely nowhere.

As an example, he takes phylogenetic biology:

Although it operates exclusively with general concepts \[he agrees\],
these concepts are, however, constituted in such a way that the
investigated whole which it examines is considered from the standpoint
of its singleness and peculiarity. (p 148)

But in his opinion this is no argument against his principles for the
division of the sciences: 'Similar mixed forms, on the contrary, become
comprehensible as mixed forms precisely because of this.' (p 150) The
trouble is that history represents a form *absolutely as mixed* as
phylogenetic biology or geology. If these two last-named sciences belong
to the 'intermediate sphere', history is also part of it. And if that is
so, it shatters the very concept of this sphere, since, according to
Rickert, it lies *between* history and natural science.

Rickert also hopes to save the situation by pointing out that 'in
general, interest in phylogenetic biology is evidently dying out' (p
152). That may be so. But that is beside the point. The point is what
method was used by scientists while they were still interested in this
science. And it was the same method which is used by the scientists
concerned with universal history. Besides, the interest in geology, for
example, is not 'dying out' at all. The very existence of this science
alone is sufficient to refute Rickert's principle of the division of the
sciences.

Our author also refers to such concepts as 'progress' and 'regress'
being used in phylogenetic biology, although they have meaning only from
the standpoint of value (p 151). But this circumstance by no means
settles the question of which *method* is used by phylogenetic biology.
It may, in truth, be said of geology too that it is of interest to man
principally as the history of the planet on which the development of
human culture is taking place. And one could probably agree with that.
But even having agreed with it, we shall nevertheless have to recognise
that what is 'essential' in the eyes of the geologist, *as such*, is not
that which pertains to any kind of cultural value, but that -- and only
that -- which enables him to understand and depict the objective course
of the earth's development.

The same with history. Undoubtedly, every historian arranges his
scientific material -- separating the essential from the non-essential
-- from the viewpoint of a certain value. The whole question is: *what
is the nature* of this value? It is quite impossible to answer this
question by asserting that, in this particular case, the value concerned
is in the category of *cultural values.* Not at all. As a man of science
-- and *within the framework of his science* -- the historian considers
as essential that which helps him to determine the causal connection of
those events the aggregate of which constitutes the individual process
of development he is studying: and as non-essential that which is
irrelevant to this theme. Consequently what is involved there is not at
all the category of values spoken of by Rickert.

With Rickert, generalised natural science is contrasted to history which
depicts the particular processes of development in their individualised
forms. But apart from history, in the broad sense, there is also
sociology, which is concerned with 'the general' to the same degree as
natural science. History becomes a science only in so far as it succeeds
in explaining from the point of view of sociology the processes it
portrays. Therefore history is related to sociology in exactly the same
way as geology is related to 'generalised' natural science. And hence it
follows that Rickert's attempt to *oppose* the sciences of culture to
the sciences of nature has no serious basis.

It is not without interest that some theoreticians of syndicalism at
present have a weakness for Rickert. This gives a fair assessment of the
'value' of their own teaching.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
