---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1911

### Scepticism in Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 459-80.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article was published in *Sovremenny Mir*,
no 7, 1911. *Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary World*) -- a literary,
scientific and political monthly published in St Petersburg from 1906 to
1918. Raoul Richter (1871-1912) -- German idealist philosopher.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Raoul Richter, *Scepticism in Philosophy*, Volume 1 (translated from the
German by V Bazarov and B Stolpner, Library of Contemporary Philosophy,
Issue 5, Shipovnik Publishers, St Petersburg, 1910).

### I

This is a very interesting book. It should be read and reread and that
more than once. It deals with the very latest questions in knowledge,
and presents these very well. But it also suffers from at least one
substantial shortcoming: the proffered solutions of these well-presented
questions are unsatisfactory. Therefore, in reading and rereading the
book, one has to be constantly on the alert. The more so as the author
possesses intelligence and no little knowledge and readers can be easily
influenced by him.

The author's work is still unfinished; this is only the first volume. R
Richter says:

The final solution concerning the measure of truth contained in the
realist or idealist views must be held over till Volume 2. Here we have
been concerned first of all to show in both these views ways out which
have not been obstructed by the scepticism of antiquity and permit us at
least to discern the properties of things. (p 281)

That must be kept in mind. However, judging by the contents of Volume 1,
we may already say with all justification that R Richter, if he does not
exactly uphold the point of view of idealism, has assimilated many of
its arguments; and this fact has brought a very noticeable and very
annoying element of confusion into his world-outlook. The translators,
Messrs V Bazarov and B Stolpner, have not noticed this weak point of the
German writer. It is clear why: idealism has regrettably wrought even
greater havoc in their world-outlook too. But an unbiased person,
capable of thinking consistently and of reading the book carefully, will
easily find where R Richter has gone wrong. His work is concerned with
the question of scepticism. The sceptics used to say: we do not know the
criterion of truth. Anyone agreeing with them on this point must admit
that their position is unshakeable. But R Richter does not agree with
them. How does he refute the proposition that is the key to the whole of
their position? What, in his view, is the criterion of truth, and,
finally, the famous question which Pontius Pilate put to the arrested
Jesus -- what is truth?

'Truth', replies R Richter, 'is a *concept of relationship*, expressing
the relationship of judgements to the senses of the subject.' (p 347)
Elsewhere he says:

Truth\... is a concept the source of which is the human spirit; to find
it is a task set by the human spirit alone, and therefore to be resolved
by it alone; it is a knot tied by the human spirit and therefore to be
unravelled by it alone\... A truth in itself is\... an utterly
unrealisable thought. (p 191)

It follows from this that, according to Richter, only the relationship
of the truth to the subject is possible. He is not a bit afraid of this
conclusion. He declares categorically:

It goes without saying that we reject the ordinary definition of truth
as 'agreement between the conception and its object', and this for two
reasons. First, the sense of the evident attaches only to judgements and
not conceptions. Secondly, the assumption of the relationship between
conceptions and objects -- and this assumption is the basis of the
definition given above -- is either a *petitio principii* ^[\[1\]](#n1)^
or a remote result -- and one, moreover, disputed by all idealists -- of
applying criteria of truth. Both characteristics are circumstances that
are fatal precisely for a definition of truth. (p lvi)

Let us examine this. A particular person seems to me to be pale. Is that
true? A stupid question! Once a particular person seems to me to be
pale, there is nothing to argue about; that is undoubtedly how he seems
to me. It is quite another matter if, on this basis, I utter the
judgement: 'That man is ill.' It may be true, or it may be false. In
which case is it true? In the case when my judgement corresponds to the
actual state of the person's health. In which case is it false? That is
self-evident: when the actual state of the person's health and my
judgement on it do not correspond. That means that truth is precisely
correspondence between the judgement and its object. In other words, it
is the definition rejected by R Richter which is correct. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^
To put it another way: our author says that truth is related only to the
subject. On this point he is strongly influenced by idealism. The
idealist denies the existence of the object outside human consciousness.
Therefore he cannot define truth as a certain relationship between the
judgement of the subject and the actual state of the object. But being
reluctant to contradict idealism, R Richter comes into conflict with the
most legitimate requirements of logic. His view on the criterion of
truth is a great, one may say an unpardonable, mistake. I considered it
my duty to draw the attention of Russian readers to this error which
Messrs Bazarov and Stolpner failed to notice, and could not notice,
because they too, regrettably, are infected with idealism.

### II

R Richter thinks that once we accept the existence of a relationship
between conception (more correctly, judgement) and object, we are
committing a *petitio principii*. But where is the *petitio principii*
in what I have said about the necessary and adequate conditions for the
truth of the judgement: that pale man is ill? In what I said on this
subject there is no sign of the logical error which so frightens our
author that he wards it off by an obvious and gross blunder -- as the
saying goes, jumping out of the frying pan into the fire.

We already know what is the matter. In saying: 'my judgement of a
particular person's state of health is correct only if it agrees with
the actual state of the particular person', I am assuming something
which is unacceptable to idealists and which, as R Richter says, they
dispute. This assumption is that the object exists independently of my
consciousness. But an object existing independently of my consciousness
is an object-in-itself. In assuming that objects have such existence, I
am rejecting the fundamental tenet of idealism that *esse* = *percipi*,
that is to say, that being is equal to being-in-consciousness. But R
Richter wants none of this. True, the object mentioned in my example is
such a special one that only very few idealists venture to apply to it
their principle of *esse = percipi*. I ask, how may one be sure that a
particular *man* is ill? But what do these words *esse = percipi* mean
in their *application to man?* They mean that there are no other people
than the person who at that particular moment is proclaiming the
principle. The consistent application of this principle leads to
*solipsism*. The overwhelming majority of idealists, despite the most
inexorable demands of logic, do not venture to go as far as to land in
*solipsism*. Very many of them stop at the point of view which is now
called *solohumanism*. This means that, for them, being remains
being-in-consciousness, in the consciousness, however, not of an
individual but of all the human race. To agree with them, one would have
to answer the question: 'Is there an external world?' by saying:
'Outside myself, that is to say, independently of my consciousness,
there is only the human race. Everything else -- the stars, the planets,
plants, animals, etc -- exist only in human consciousness.'

The reader will recall the conversation between the sotnik and the
philosopher Khoma Brut. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^

'Who are you, where do you come from, and what is your calling, good
man?', asked the sotnik.

'A seminarist, student of philosophy, Khoma Brut\...'

'Who was your father?'

'I don't know, honoured sir.'

'Your mother?'

'I don't know my mother either. It is reasonable to suppose, of course,
that I had a mother; but who she was, and where she came from, and when
she lived -- upon my soul, good sir, I don't know.'

Obviously, the philosopher Khoma Brut was far from averse to criticism.
Only sound reasoning convinced him that he had had a mother. But he
nevertheless admitted her existence. He did not say: 'My mother exists
(or existed) only in my consciousness.' If he had said so (considering
himself born of a woman who existed only in his consciousness), he would
have been a *solipsist*. Though he was no stranger to criticism, he did
not go the length of drawing such a conclusion. Therefore, we may
presume that he took his stand, for example, on *solohumanism*. If this
presumption is correct, he did not confine himself to admitting his
mother's existence alone, but in general recognised the 'plurality of
individuals'. He did deny, however, the existence independently of
consciousness of those objects on which these individuals act in the
process of social production. So that if his mother was, shall we say, a
baker, he would have had to confess that she existed independently of
his consciousness, whereas the buns she baked existed only in her and
his mind and in the minds of the individuals who bought and ate them,
naively imagining that these buns had existence in themselves,
independently of human consciousness. If he saw a herdsman driving his
cattle, as a solohumanist he would have had to admit that the herdsman
existed independently of his consciousness, while the herd of cows,
sheep and pigs existed only in his mind and in that of the herdsman
tending those conceptual animals. He would have had to utter a similar
'judgement' when he saw protruding from the pocket of his worthy
fellow-traveller Khalyava the huge tail of the fish that had been
filched by the learned theologian. The theologian exists independently
of the consciousness of the philosopher Khoma Brut, but the pilfered
fish has no other existence except in the consciousness of these two
learned men, and, of course, the ox-cart driver from whom Khalyava had
filched it. Philosophy of this sort is, as you see, distinguished by its
great profundity. There is only one thing wrong: on the very same day
and at the very same hour when the philosopher Khoma Brut recognised
that the theologian Khalyava (or the rhetorician Gorobets, it's all the
same) had being apart from his consciousness, he would have run into
irreconcilable contradiction with the principle of *esse = percipi*: he
would have had to admit that the concept *being* is in no way conveyed
by the concept *being-in- consciousness.*

The erudite R Richter looks down on simple-minded realists with the
lofty disdain of the 'critical' thinker; but he himself is so thoroughly
infected with idealism that he is completely blind to the comical
artlessness which, to a greater or lesser extent, is characteristic of
all varieties of this philosophical trend. He takes seriously those
arguments of idealist philosophy which deserve only to be laughed at,
and in consequence he gives a wrong definition of truth. Here is how he
formulates the theoretical-cognitive credo of 'extreme' idealism:

There exist no things, objects, realities, bodies, independent of the
conceptions of them in a consciousness, and the things perceived by the
senses are completely dissolved in the subjective and ideal parts of
which they are composed. (p 247)

Let us assume that this is true -- that no things, objects and bodies
exist independently of the conceptions of them in consciousness. But if
every particular person exists independently of the consciousness of
other people, it positively cannot be said that there are no
'*realities*' independent of consciousness. Surely every person existing
independently of other people's consciousness must be regarded as an
indisputable reality, even though at the same time -- in accordance with
our first assumption -- we regarded him as an incorporeal being. The
penetrating R Richter does not realise this. Further. If an incorporeal
man named Ivan exists independently of the consciousness of an
incorporeal man called Pyotr, he may express certain judgements about
Pyotr. These opinions will be true only if they correspond to reality.
In other words, the incorporeal Ivan's judgements about the condition of
the incorporeal Pyotr are true only if Pyotr is in fact what Ivan
considers him to be. This must be admitted by every idealist, except, of
course, the solipsist, who denies the plurality of individuals. And
whoever admits this, by the same token also admits that truth consists
in a judgement conforming to its object.

### III

Richter says:

Deeply penetrating research is fathoming more and more the *law-governed
relationships* between things and within them, and less and less the
things themselves; these it is simply dissolving in the complex of such
relationships. Consequently, the results of this research may for the
most part be easily formulated in the language of any particular
philosophical trend provided it does not attack these relationships,
though it may have its own opinion about the concept of the thing. When
the historian writes of a ruler possessing a noble or base soul, he
merely wishes to say that the ruler concerned usually responded to such
and such events with morally high or low thoughts, feelings and
volitional impulses, and it is irrelevant to the historian whether the
soul exists or not. (p 289)

Of course, for an historian it is a matter of indifference whether the
*soul* exists or not. But it is by no means a matter of indifference to
him whether the '*ruler*' about whose actions he is forming a judgement
exists or not. And it is precisely the 'ruler' who plays here the part
of the disputed '*thing*'. Let us admit for a moment that natural
science is in fact dissolving things more and more in the complex of
relationships. Can the same be said of the social sciences? Where is the
sociologist who would base his judgements on the proposition that people
do not exist, that there are only social relationships\... of people?
Such a sociologist could be met with only in a mental institution. If
that is so, it is evident that not every 'philosophical trend' can be
reconciled with scientific research, at least into social phenomena. For
example, the concept of evolution plays a titanic part in contemporary
sociology. Can this concept be reconciled with those philosophical
trends under whose influence our author elaborated his definition of the
criterion of truth? If what we call the external world exists only in
people's consciousness, can we speak without an augur's smile of those
periods in the earth's development which *preceded* the coming of the
zoological species we call homo sapiens? If space and time are only
forms of contemplation (*Anschauung*) that I myself possess, it is clear
that when I did not exist these forms did not exist either, that is to
say, there was no time and no space, so that, when I assert, for
instance, that Pericles lived long before me, I am talking arrant
nonsense. Is it not obvious that the 'philosophical' trend bearing the
name of solipsism can in no way be reconciled with the concept of
evolution? It maybe objected, perhaps, that if this is true as regards
*solipsism*, it is untrue in relation to *solohumanism*; since
solohumanism recognises the existence of the human race, then, while
this race is still around, there will exist both forms of contemplation
which are peculiar to it, that is, space and time. However, the
following must be remembered. First, solohumanism, as we have seen,
totally excludes the view of man as a product of zoological evolution.
Secondly, if time does not exist independently of the consciousness of
the individuals making up the human race, it is quite incomprehensible
where we get the right to assert that one of these individuals lived
earlier than another, for example, that the celebrated Athenian Pericles
lived prior to the notorious Frenchman Briand. Why can we not put it the
other way round, namely, that Briand preceded Pericles? Is it not
because our judgements adapt themselves here to the objective sequence
of events, which does not depend upon human consciousness? And if that
is indeed the reason, is it not clear that those thinkers were right who
averred that although space and time as *formal elements of
consciousness* exist not outside us, but within us, nevertheless to both
these elements there correspond certain objective (that is, independent
of consciousness) relationships of things and processes? Is it not
plain, finally, that only by admitting the existence of these objective
relationships do we have any possibility of constructing a scientific
theory which will explain the emergence of the human race itself with
the forms of consciousness peculiar to it! Being is not determined by
consciousness, but consciousness by being.

Nowadays, some people like to dilate on the distinctions between the
'sciences of nature' and the 'sciences of culture'. The writers who
enjoy discussing this theme are all without exception more or less
inclined to consistent idealism. They are trying to find a refuge for
their idealist notions in the 'sciences of culture'. But, in fact, these
sciences, that is, the social science in the broad meaning of the term,
are even less reconcilable with idealism than the natural science. The
social science presupposes society. Society presupposes a plurality of
individuals. A plurality of individuals makes inevitable the distinction
between the individual as he exists '*in himself*' and the same
individual as he exists in the consciousness of other people, as well as
in his own. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ And that returns us to that theory of
cognition against which representatives of various trends of
philosophical idealism have raised their differing voices. The
solohumanist is bound to accept the cardinal principle of this theory,
which says that apart from being-in-consciousness there is also
being-in-oneself. But the solohumanist denies the existence of all
'things' and 'bodies'. To him, people are essentially nothing more than
the bearers of consciousness, that is, nothing more than incorporeal
beings. Hence it follows that everyone interested in 'the last word' in
knowledge, yet desirous of steering clear of solipsism, is faced with a
dilemma. To regard himself as an incorporeal being, or to agree with the
materialist Feuerbach: '*Ich bin ein wirkliches, ein sinnliches Wesen,
ja der Leib in seiner Totalität ist mein Ich, mein Wesen selbst*.' ('I
am a real, sensual being, a body; it is this body, taken in its
totality, which is my *ego*, my essence.')

If R Richter had taken all this into consideration, his interesting book
would have been even more interesting and incomparably richer in correct
philosophical content. But if he had taken account of it, he would have
been an exception among present-day German writers on philosophical
matters. But to his misfortune, there is nothing exceptional about him
just as, to their misfortune, there is nothing exceptional about his
Russian translators, who failed to notice the weakness of their author's
arguments.

### IV

I stated, and I trust have proved, that R Richter is deeply infected
with idealism. Now I think it would be useful to add that the most
profound and most orderly system of idealism -- Hegel's philosophy --
has obviously much less attraction for him than other less profound and
less orderly systems of idealism. I would say more. It is very plain
that he has not bothered himself trying to understand Hegel. Here is a
vivid example.

At the beginning of his book, having examined the historical
prerequisites of Greek scepticism, R Richter hastens to caution his
readers:

However, it would be quite wrong to conclude from this that the
achievements of the sceptical philosophers we are about to discuss were
insignificant, as though all they had to do was skilfully to select and
methodically to compare the ideas of their predecessors, as though, in
the Hegelian sense, according to the reasonable development of the world
they were bound to come when and as they did. We hope, on the contrary,
that by our exposition of the philosophy of scepticism we shall succeed
in proving its complete originality -- an originality that is quite
astonishing. Historical prerequisites are not yet spiritual causes. The
spiritual father of philosophical scepticism was the genius of Pyrrho,
and not the philosophers before him nor world reason, about which we
know absolutely nothing. (pp 60-61)

That passage could never have been written by anyone who had taken the
trouble to read Hegel's *Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der
Philosophie*. Did the demands of 'self-developing world reason' induce
Hegel to exclude the 'complete originality' of the creators of the most
important philosophical systems? By no means. Did Hegel ever oppose
world reason to the genius of individual thinkers? Decidedly never. But
that is just the trouble: contemporary German authors of philosophical
treatises know Hegel very badly. They are idealists, but the content of
their idealism is infinitely poorer than that of Hegel. Of course, Hegel
loses nothing at all by being ignored by present-day German writers; it
is they who are the losers. Hegel was a great master of the 'treatment
of ideas', and he who desires to 'treat ideas' must pass through his
school, even if he does not share Hegel's idealist views. Conversely,
present-day German writers who are occupied with philosophical questions
treat ideas very clumsily. This is especially noticeable where they need
most of all to display their intellectual powers, namely, when they are
called upon to defend their idealist standpoint. It is precisely this
point then that these people, who speak so contemptuously of 'naive
dogmatists', themselves produce in their arguments some real pearls of
naive dogmatism. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

### V

The first volume of Richter's work is a study of Greek scepticism. The
first chapter outlines the history of this school of philosophy, the
second sets forth its teaching, while the third is a criticism of the
doctrine of scepticism. Let us dwell for a moment on the third chapter.

Greek scepticism posed three fundamental questions: 1) What is the
nature of things? 2) What should be our attitude to things? 3) What will
result for us from this attitude? Its answer to the first question was
that every thesis on the nature of things may be opposed by an equally
well-founded antithesis: that is, that their nature is unknown to us. To
the second question, scepticism replied that our attitude to things must
be one of unconditional scepticism, always abstaining from making a
judgement of any kind (sceptical 'Εποχή'). Lastly, the third question
was answered in the sense that abstention from expressing judgement
gives one imperturbability of mind (*ataraxia*) and the absence of
suffering (*apatheia*) that make for happiness. What has Richter to say
in his criticism of scepticism regarding these replies?

Let us take the reply to the first question. In his analysis of it,
Richter distinguishes the following fundamental theoretical and
cognitive positions: first, extreme realism; second, extreme idealism;
third, moderate realism, which he also calls moderate idealism or
ideal-realism. According to him, scepticism is capable of mastering only
the first of these positions, namely, that of extreme realism; the other
two are quite beyond it (p 199).

But we have already seen that the philosophical trend to which Richter
gives the title of extreme idealism (that is, in fact, more or less
consistent idealism) leads to insoluble and ludicrous contradictions.
One would have to be very partial to 'extreme idealism' to imagine that
it could possibly be regarded as an at all lasting philosophical
position. Therefore, I shall not enlarge upon it further, but shall turn
my attention to 'extreme realism' and 'ideal-realism'.

The Greek Sceptics, for example, posed the question: is honey sweet or
bitter? To the majority of people it is sweet; but there are certain
invalids to whom honey seems bitter. The sceptics concluded from this
that we cannot know the true nature of honey. It is easy to notice that,
in posing the above question, the Sceptics believed that honey could be
either sweet or bitter in itself, quite apart from the person tasting
it. But when I say that honey is sweet (or bitter) I only mean that it
gives me the sensation of sweetness (or bitterness). Sensation
presupposes a subject who is experiencing it. When there is no such
subject, there is no sensation. To ask whether honey is sweet or bitter
in itself is as absurd as to ask what a particular sensation is when
there is no one to experience it. Yet this question, absurd as it may
be, is perfectly legitimate from the viewpoint which Richter calls
extreme realism. This viewpoint identifies the properties of the object
with the sensations these properties stimulate in us. Richter gives a
good illustration of the standpoint of extreme realism when he says:

The tree whose leaves I see green, whose bark I see brown, whose hard
trunk I touch, whose sweet fruit I taste and the rustle of whose topmost
branches I hear, also has *in itself* green leaves, brown bark, a hard
trunk, sweet fruit and rustling branches. (p 200)

Richter also notes correctly that, so far as science is concerned,
*such* realism died long ago. The materialist Democritus was already
able to distinguish the properties of an object from the sensations
aroused in us by those properties. If the Sceptics could confound their
adversaries by posing such questions as: is honey sweet or bitter in
itself? -- one may only conclude that both they themselves and their
adversaries, who were apparently unable to stand up to them, were (to
use the terminology R Richter has assimilated) 'extreme realists', that
is to say, they held a quite untenable theory of cognition. In this
regard, Richter is not mistaken.

### VI

I pass on to ideal-realism. By ideal-realism (or real-idealism, or
moderate realism) R Richter understands that view which acknowledges the
existence of things independent of the subject, but 'does not ascribe to
these real things, as their objective properties, all the component
parts of perception, but only some of them' (p 221).

He points out correctly that this theory of cognition enjoys the widest
recognition among contemporary naturalists. According to this theory,
definite sensations *correspond* to definite properties or conditions of
things, but do *not resemble* them in any way. A definite sound
corresponds to definite vibrations of the air, but the sensation of
sound does not resemble the vibrations of the atmospheric particles.
This can also be said of sensations of light, produced by vibrations of
the ether, and so on. Thus this theory distinguishes the *primary*
properties of bodies from their *secondary* properties, or the
properties of the first order from the properties of the second order.
The properties of the first order are sometimes called the
physico-mathematical qualities of things. These include, for instance,
density, shape, extension. Pointing out the distinction between the
primary properties of things and their secondary properties, Richter
remarks that this distinction completely invalidates the argument of the
Sceptics which was based on the relativity of sensual perception, for
example, on the fact that honey seems sweet to one person and bitter to
another. From this relativity, the Sceptics deduced that things were
unknowable. But to the 'moderate realists' this deduction is quite
wrong. Indeed, colour exists only in relationship to light, and changes
with changing light. This also applies exactly to the temperature of a
given body, which induces in us sensations of either heat or cold,
according to the temperature level of our blood, and so on. But from
this it follows only that sensations are not primary properties of
things, but the effects of the action of objects possessing certain
primary properties upon the subject. That is all quite true. Here
Richter is once again quite right. But then he goes on to say:

If, finally, the moderate realist cannot come to irreconcilably
contradictory judgements on the secondary properties of things because,
in his view, it is not through sensations at all that the properties of
things become known, *on the other hand, he can get to know very well*
the real properties which correspond to the purely subjective
sensations, that is to say, which, like irritants, arouse these
sensations. For these irritants are always of a spatial, material, and
consequently in principle knowable nature. (p 241)

It is impossible to accept this without a very serious reservation. Take
note of Richter's argument with which he attempts to prove, in
refutation of the Sceptics, that the moderate realist 'cannot come to
irreconcilably contradictory judgements on the secondary properties of
things'. And why not? 'Because, in his view, it is not through
sensations at all that the properties of things become known.' That is
not true. Though it is true that many 'moderate realists', submitting to
the influence of idealist prejudices, imagine that the properties of
things cannot become known through sensations. But how, indeed, can they
not become known? A thing excites a particular sensation. This capacity
to arouse a sensation in us is the property of the thing. Consequently
once the particular sensation is known, this particular property of the
thing also thereby becomes known. Therefore we must say the exact
opposite to what Richter said: according to 'moderate realism' (we shall
call it this for the time being), in general, it is through sensations
(it would be more exact to say: by means of sensations), that the
properties of things are known. This seems to be clear. Only one
argument could really be advanced against this: that the sensation
aroused by the particular property of a thing changes with the changing
condition of the subject. But we have already seen that this objection
will not stand up to criticism. Sensation is the *result* of interaction
of object and subject. It is quite natural that this result should
depend *not only* on the properties of the object, not only on the
properties of what is becoming known, but also on the properties of the
knowing subject. However, this quite natural circumstance does not in
any way prove the unknowability of things. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ Quite the
contrary. It proves their knowability. The sensual and knowing subject
not only can, but in certain circumstances must, be regarded as an
object, for example, when we are referring to an invalid in whom
particular things produce unusual sensations. If honey tastes sweet to a
man in good health and bitter to an invalid, only one conclusion may be
drawn from this, viz: that in certain circumstances the human organism
is capable of reacting in an unusual fashion to a definite irritant.
This capacity is an objective property which can be studied, that is to
say, known. Which means -- and there is no need to be afraid of
repeating this -- that in accordance with the correctly understood view
of 'moderate realism', *in sensations generally the properties of things
become known.* This, in turn, signifies that those who contend that
things are unknowable, citing in support of this the complete
dissimilarity between a sensation (for example, sound) and the objective
process that produces it (in this case, the wave-like motion of the air)
are making a great mistake in the domain of the theory of knowledge.
Incidentally, all that was said against the knowability of things by
Kant and his followers is based upon this mistake. It was also at the
bottom of Greek scepticism. We see that Richter himself is far from
being free from it. This is also because, as we stated above, he is
deeply infected with idealism. Looking at his 'case' from the angle of
my theory of cognition, I would say that in succumbing to the influence
of idealism, Richter acquired the 'property' of comprehending
incorrectly the true meaning of the 'moderate realist' view. His
subjective state distorted in a definite (and moreover most undesirable)
way the effect upon him of the logic of this view. But this has not
rendered either Richter or the doctrine of 'moderate realism'
unknowable.

### VII

In making his remarks regarding the unknowability of the properties of
things in sensations, Richter admits, as we have seen, that 'on the
other hand, the "moderate realist" *can get to know very well*
^[\[7\]](#n7)^ the real properties which correspond to the purely
subjective sensations'. This expression 'to the purely subjective
sensations' is very characteristic of Richter as well as of all those
philosophising writers who, like him, have more or less succumbed to
idealism. We shall recognise it as even more characteristic if we turn
our attention to the conclusion which Richter finally reaches on the
matter under discussion:

*In so far as the elements of perception can be traced back to
properties of things, these properties are basically knowable. In so far
as the component parts of perception as properties of things would be
unknowable, they are in general not properties of things.* (p 241,
author's italics)

What does Richter mean here by the component parts of perception which
are unknowable as properties of things? Sensations. Why? Because
sensations are '*purely subjective*' (my italics); they do not belong to
the properties of the object which arouses these sensations in the
subject. Good. Let us take this for granted, keep it in mind, and ponder
the following example taken from Überweg -- if my memory serves me
right.

In a cellar there are a barrel of meal and two mice. The cellar is
locked, there are no chinks in the floor, on the ceiling or in the
walls, so no other mice can get in. Finding themselves in the happy
possession of a whole barrel of meal, our two mice set about bringing
into the world little mice who are also imbued with the lust for life
thanks to the abundant food supply. In due course they too reproduce a
generation of mice, who then go on to repeat the same story. Thus the
number of mice continues to increase and the store of food decreases.
Finally the moment arrives when the barrel is completely empty. What is
the outcome? It is that a definite quantity of an object which is
*devoid* of sensation (meal) has been transformed into a definite
quantity of objects *that have sensations*; for example: they suffer
hunger now that all the meal has gone (mice). The capacity to have
sensations is just as much a property of certain organisms as is their
capacity to stimulate in us, say, certain visual sensations. Therefore,
from this point of view too, Richter is wrong in saying that everything
'purely subjective' is beyond the meaning of the concept: properties of
things. I am *I* -- for myself and at the same time *Thou --* for
another. I am a subject and at the same time an object. The subject is
not separated from the object by an impassable gulf. Consistent
philosophical thought convinces us of the unity of subject and object.
'That which for me, *subjectively*', says Feuerbach, 'is a purely
spiritual, insensible act, is in itself, *objectively*, a material,
sensible act.' This conception of the unity of subject and object is the
heart of contemporary materialism. It is in this that we find the true
meaning of 'moderate realism' (or ideal-realism). From which it follows
that 'moderate realism' is nothing but materialism, but a materialism
that is timid, inconsistent, hesitating in pursuing its conclusions to
the very end and making more or less significant and (in any case)
illegitimate concessions to idealism.

### VIII

So far we have dealt with, strictly speaking, the first question posed
by the Sceptics, namely, are things knowable? And we have seen that our
author, infected with idealist prejudices, has not an entirely correct
view of this question. But what does he say about the other two basic
questions posed by Greek scepticism? As regards these, he argues as
follows:

The Sceptics' reply to Timon's last two basic questions: What should be
our attitude to things? and: What will result for us from this attitude?
-- only draws the conclusions from the solution of the first and most
important problem concerning the nature of things. Criticism after
examining this solution: 'things are unknowable', and rejecting it as
unjustified, no longer needed to investigate the negative and positive
consequences of the basic viewpoint of scepticism *in isolation*, since
they claim validity only presupposing that viewpoint. (p 370)

Quite so. If criticism found the Sceptics' assertion that things are
unknowable to be erroneous, it must recognise as no less erroneous the
belief that we should refrain from forming any judgements about things,
and equally erroneous the claim that such abstention is essential for
our happiness. That is all true. But since it is true, I again cease to
understand Richter. He has admitted that only an 'extreme realist' would
find the Sceptics' arguments irrefutable. 'Moderate realism' and even
'extreme idealism', in his opinion, refute these arguments easily. As
has been already said, so far as idealism is concerned, Richter is in
this case wrong. Idealism is quite incapable of refuting scepticism for
the simple but fully adequate reason that it itself suffers from
insoluble contradictions. However, I have no intention of returning to
that subject here. I shall repeat just one thing: if the 'moderate
realist' and the 'extreme idealist' are quite capable of refuting the
Sceptic's arguments, neither of them requires to make any concession
whatever to the sceptical mode of thought. Yet Richter himself makes
some very important concessions to it. He says that 'from the very
first' a dose of scepticism has been circulating in the blood of modern
man (pp 348-49) and beseeches us to show some 'resignation' regarding
questions of cognition (p 192). Why resignation? With what object? Well,
just listen to this:

We must\... whether we like it or not, learn from the sceptics and admit
that the truth which is undoubtedly accessible to us is truth pertaining
only to man, and that truth which we, in general, can conceive, is truth
pertaining to beings similar to ourselves. We must not, on the other
hand, be carried away as a result of this to the premature conclusion
that we must, for this reason, despair of ever finding the truth\... But
this resignation will be made much easier for us by the fact that
everything we cannot in any way conceive also does not pertain to us,
does not concern us, can leave us indifferent. Only he who has partaken
of the apple feels the urge to do so again, and is distressed if denied
this enjoyment. But he who cannot form any conception of this sensation
of taste will not miss the apple. Only those who have lost their sight
are unhappy; those born blind are not. As regards extra-human knowledge
-- if there is such a thing -- we are all born blind. (pp 192-93)

Throughout all the foregoing there is a very obvious and nasty note of
philistinism. A fine consolation indeed that we did not lose our sight
but were born blind! Why did Richter have to drag in this
'consolation\'? ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ He only wished to console us because we,
humans, cannot know 'extra-human' truth. According to him, this is not a
very great misfortune. I could not agree more with him; in fact, as I
see it, it is not a misfortune here at all. I shall go further: the very
thought that it is misfortune, even if only a tiny one, is rooted in the
mistaken theory of cognition I spoke about earlier. The process of the
subject getting to know the object is the process whereby the former
arrives at a correct opinion of the latter. The object becomes known to
the subject only because it is capable of influencing the subject in a
certain way. Therefore, we cannot speak of cognition where there is no
relationship between the subject and the object. But those soft-hearted
people who, like Richter, find it necessary to console us because
extra-human truth is beyond us, do admit (perhaps unnoticed by
themselves) that knowledge of an object is possible even where there is
no subject getting to know it. They even imagine that such knowledge --
knowledge independent of the subject, that is to say, that notorious
knowledge of 'things-in-themselves' spoken of by Kant and other
'critical' philosophers in contemporary philosophy -- is the only real
knowledge. If we could have knowledge of *that* kind we should not be
born blind, and would not need Richter's proffered consolation.

Messrs Bazarov and Stolpner might, perhaps, object that their author
does not admit the possibility of such a knowledge of
'things-in-themselves'. But they would not be right at all.

Let us assume that, indeed, Richter does not admit this possibility. But
why? Precisely because, and only because, he thinks that it is
inaccessible to man. He does not realise that *knowledge*, independent
of the person knowing it, is a *contradictio in adjecto* -- a logical
absurdity. One person is convinced that the creature which the Greeks
called a chimera does not and cannot exist. Another thinks that there is
such a creature but we cannot know anything about it owing to the
special way our bodies are constituted. What do you think, can one
assert that both these men have the same view of the unknowability of
the chimera? It is clear that they have not. If I think that the chimera
does not and cannot exist, I can only laugh at those who are worried
because it is inaccessible to their cognition; all talk of resignation
would here be an insult to common sense. And yet Richter considers it
necessary to preach such resignation. How is it possible to avoid
feeling that he resembles the man who admits the existence of the
chimera, but believes it to be inaccessible to his cognition?

### IX

Richter's inclination to extreme idealism in his teaching on the
criterion of truth arises out of his inability to shed his idealist
prejudices in the theory of cognition. According to him, it would appear
that truth for man is truth of some kind of secondary, lower category.
Hence his recommendation that we should show 'resignation', that is to
say, be reconciled with the impossibility of knowing higher truth, truth
of the first category. We have seen that his teaching on the criterion
of truth must be rejected as utterly unsound. Truth is related not only
to the subject but also to the object. That opinion of the object, which
corresponds to its real state, is a true opinion. That which is true for
man is also true in itself, precisely because a correct opinion truly
depicts the actual state of things. ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ Therefore there is no
point in our talking of resignation.

If we throw a man into the fire, he will be burnt; that is truth for
him. And if we throw a cat into the fire? It too will be burnt. That is
truth for the cat. Does truth for the man in this case resemble truth
for the cat? They are as like as two peas! What does that mean? It means
that truth for man has an objective significance that is not confined to
the human race. Naturally, there are truths which are applicable only to
the human race. These truths are the judgements that correspond to the
actual state of all particular human feelings, thoughts or
relationships. But this does not affect the main point. The important
thing is that true judgements regarding the natural laws are true not
only for man, although man alone is capable of forming such judgements.
Systematic cognition of the natural laws became possible only when
'social man' emerged, having reached a certain level of mental
development. A natural law which man has got to know is truth for man.
But natural laws were operating on the earth before the appearance of
man, that is to say, when there was no one capable of studying these
laws. And only because these laws were operating at that time did man
himself appear, bringing with him the systematic cognition of nature.

No one who understands this will accept, as Richter does, the legitimacy
of that dose of scepticism which, he says, from the very first has been
circulating in the blood of modern man. Modern man in a 'certain social
position' has indeed a good dose of scepticism. But this is adequately
explained by the state of modern society.

### X

That brings us to the question: *what is the source* of scepticism?

Richter rightly says that the Sceptics of antiquity were, in the
majority of cases, passive people, of 'tired, enfeebled, broken will'
and devoid of passion (p 377). He is no less correct in linking these
traits of the sceptics of antiquity with the course of development of
ancient Greek society, and in looking on Greek scepticism as the fruit
of the decay of that society. Well, if that is the case, it is quite
natural to assume that the dose of scepticism which, he says, circulates
in everyone's blood may also be explained by social decay. True, we have
no ground for saying, as the Slavophiles ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ used to say,
that the advanced countries of the civilised world are now falling into
decay. Taken as a whole, any one of the present-day civilised nations
represents not a regressing but a progressing society. But what may be
right in relation to the whole may be wrong in relation to its parts.
Richter points to the scepticism that was widespread at the end of the
eighteenth century, and reiterates that it is just as widespread today
as it was then. But what explains the spread of scepticism in the
eighteenth century? The explanation is that the system of social
relations that had for long held sway in European society was then
rapidly falling into decay. Taken as a whole, society at that time was
also progressing, not regressing. But this cannot at all be said of the
then upper class, the temporal and spiritual aristocracy. This class had
long outlived its best days, and existed only in the form of an unwanted
and therefore harmful relic. Something quite like this we see today.
Only now the declining class is not the aristocracy, but the
bourgeoisie. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ Our century, like the eighteenth,
represents the eve of a great social upheaval. All such periods of
decline of the old ruling class provide exceptionally fertile soil for
the development of scepticism. This is what explains that dose of
scepticism which, in Richter's words, circulates in the blood of modern
man. It is not a question of extra-human truth being inaccessible to
man, but of social revolution approaching, and of this approach,
realised instinctively by the bourgeoisie, arousing in its ideologists a
feeling of profound discontent, taking the form of scepticism,
pessimism, etc. This discontent is, however, noticeable only among the
bourgeois ideologists. The proletarian ideologists on the contrary are
full of hope for the future. All of them are ready to repeat with Ulrich
von Hutten his well-known exclamation: 'How good it is to be alive in
our times!' ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ And that is why they are sceptical only,
say, when it is a question of the advantages of the present-day social
order or of certain beliefs which have grown up on the basis of this
social order and others preceding it in historical development, or
perhaps, when the bourgeoisie begins to extol its own virtues. Then
scepticism is perfectly legitimate. Generally speaking, however, there
is no room for scepticism in the mood and world-outlook of the
proletariat. It is not consciousness that determines being, but being
that determines consciousness.

Richter has grasped this incontestable truth very badly indeed,
although, as has been remarked already, he understands fairly well that
Greek scepticism was brought about by the decline of ancient Greece. How
muddled he is here may be seen from the following.

He repudiates the Sceptics' principle of isostheneia, that is to say,
the proposition that to every *thesis* on the nature of things there can
be opposed an equally well-founded *antithesis*. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ He is
willing, however, to acknowledge that isostheneia is an incontrovertible
fact in relation to much '*sham knowledge*', ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ both in
daily life and in science. He instances the question of parties to prove
his point, and his example is worthy of attention:

Here \[he argues\] they unconditionally accept and jealously insist upon
a whole series of solutions to the latest questions, that are still not
theoretically ripe for discussion. Here the right and left often really
confront each other, like thesis and antithesis, like 'yea' and 'nay'.
But he who desires to take an objective decision will often enough have
to say to himself that the liberal is no less justified than the
conservative, the modernist in aesthetics no less than his classic
opponent, the atomist no less than the energeticist, that, to use the
language of the Sceptics, it's a complete isostheneia. (p 178)

And so, if one wishes to be objective, one must agree fairly often that
the conservative is as right as the liberal, the modernist in aesthetics
as the classicist, etc. Here our critic of the Sceptics has himself
become a sceptic.

The Sceptics held that we have no way of knowing truth. Richter says the
same about this sort of questions. It was not without good reason that
he recognised that modern man has a good dose of scepticism in his
blood.

### XI

However, let us see with what criterion of truth we have to judge, for
example, who is right: the 'conservative' or the 'liberal'. Let us
suppose that it is a question of electoral rights. The 'liberals' demand
their extension. The 'conservatives' are against it. Who is right?
Richter says that both are right. Indeed, this is partly true. The
'conservative', *from his point of view*, is quite right; the extension
of electoral rights would, generally speaking, be harmful to his
interests, since it would weaken the political power of those of his own
circle. The 'liberal' is no less right *from his point of view.* If
implemented, the reform of the electoral system which he demands would
strengthen the power of the social group he represents and thus enable
him to promote its interests better. But if everyone is right from his
own point of view, is there really no sense in asking who should be
judged more correct? Richter believes that this question is, in many
cases, insoluble. That is not to be wondered at. Actually, he should
have said that this question is insoluble in general, and not just
fairly often. In his view, truth is relative only to the subject.
Consequently the question of truth must be decided by him sceptically
whenever the contesting subjects *are* each *right from their point of
view.* But his decision is not binding on us. We consider that Richter's
criterion of truth is basically wrong. Therefore we argue differently.

The 'conservative', *from his point of view*, is fully justified in
opposing the extension of electoral rights. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ But what
arguments does he advance against it? He asserts that it would be
harmful to the whole of society. Here is the logical error made by the
conservative who is *right from his point of view*: he identifies his
own interests with the interests of society. And the 'liberal\'? Oh, he
does exactly the same. He, too, identifies his interests with those of
society. But if they are both wrong *in one direction*, it does not
follow that they are both wrong *to the same extent.* In order to judge
which of them is committing the smaller mistake, it suffices to
determine whose interests are less at variance with the interests of
society. Is there really no objective criterion by which such a question
could be solved? Will the historian never be able to decide who was
right in Russia on the eve of the peasant reform: the conservatives who
did not wish to abolish serfdom (there were, of course, such people) or
the liberals who sought for this change? In my opinion, the historian
will have to record that the liberals were right, although they, too,
did not forget their own interests at the time. The interests of their
party were less at variance with the interests of society than were the
conservative interests. To prove this, it is sufficient to recall the
harmful influence of serfdom on all aspects of social life at that time.
History is the process of social development. In its development society
finds advantageous all that promotes this development and rejects as
harmful all that retards it. Stagnation was never useful to society.
This incontestable fact provides the objective criterion by which to
judge which of the two disputing parties is less mistaken, or not
mistaken at all. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

It seems as though our author suspects nothing of this, becoming a
sceptic where there is no sufficient reason at all for scepticism. He
writes:

A motivation in favour of a cause with which we sympathise 'convinces'
us more than one differently oriented but no less conclusive. The
instinct of life compels the urge for knowledge to serve it and obscures
its view to such a degree that it cannot take cognisance of the logical
isostheneia of arguments and counter-arguments. Otherwise, how would it
be possible that, for example, in adopting a political position which
theoretically presupposes a decision in respect of most delicate
questions of sociology, political economy, ethics and the understanding
of history, the parties by and large coincide with the social classes?
Does the same solution of the questions raised occur, so to speak, by
chance to people who by chance belong to the same circle? Their motives
here are certainly not their motives. Just count the Social-Democrats
among the aristocracy and the convinced conservatives among the factory
workers, the supporters of the sharing out of fortunes among the
capitalists and of the centralisation of fortunes among the poor! They
all represent not the interest of truth, but of their own person. (p
179)

Richter is vexed because people who belong to different classes defend
their own interests, and not the interests of truth. But did he not say
that truth always relates to the subject? Now he wants a truth which is
independent of the subject. He is inconsistent. Further. The fact that
the limits of acceptance of varying political convictions, by and large,
coincide with class limits is by no means an argument in favour of the
sceptics' principle of isostheneia. It proves only that being determines
consciousness. It is only by grasping this truth that one is able to
understand the course of development of the various ideologies. Richter
is hopelessly bewildered by it. The reason for this is that it is
difficult for anyone who does not take his stand solidly on the
proletarian point of view to understand and fully to assimilate this
truth at the present time. Richter himself rightly says that the
instinct of life often compels the need for knowledge to serve it and
considerably obscures its view. He who is convinced that it is not
consciousness that determines being, but being that determines
consciousness, thereby recognises that the ideas formed and feelings
experienced by a particular class in the period of its domination have
at best the significance only of temporary, transient truths and values.
And it is not easy for one belonging to that class to realise this. That
is why the best people of the modern bourgeoisie are more easily
reconciled to the idea that the domain of disputed social problems is
dominated by the sceptical principle of isostheneia than they are to the
assertion that the viewpoint of the class of 'factory workers' *is
becoming* the truth just when the viewpoint of the capitalists *is
ceasing* to be truth. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ Richter, too, cannot reconcile
himself to this idea. Hence his scepticism in social questions. The
position of people of this way of thinking is a very unenviable one.
Just as Buridan's ass could not make up its mind which of the two
bundles of hay to eat, neither can such people attach themselves to one
of the two great classes of our time struggling with each other. This
creates a special psychological mood, in which it is necessary to seek
the explanation of all the trends now prevailing among the ideologists
of the upper classes: both the latest aesthetical theories to which
Richter alludes and the subjective idealism with which he is infected.
It is not consciousness that determines being, but being that determines
consciousness.

This is what I thought it essential to tell the reader in recommending
Richter's interesting book to him. I am very sorry that the translators
of this interesting book did not see the need for such a warning.
However, the explanation for this is that they themselves are strongly
influenced by those very ideologies which spring from the psychological
mood I have just mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. '*Petitio principia*', literally, 'request of the
beginning'. Where the proposition to be proved is implicitly or
explicitly assumed in one of the premises -- MIA.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. What is true is that, as we have just seen, not the
concept but the opinion may be true or false: but this does not change
the essence of the judgement. All the same Richter's proposed criterion
of truth is quite untenable.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. The philosopher Khoma Brut, the theologian Khalyava
and the rhetorician Tibery Gorobets, mentioned below -- all seminarists
-- are characters from Gogol's story *Viy* -- Editor.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. An individual in a deep swoon does not exist in his
own consciousness but, as long as he is alive, he exists 'in himself'.
Thus, there is certainly a distinction here too, between existing '*in
oneself*' and existing *in consciousness*.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. *Robert Flint* noted long ago, in his *Philosophy of
History in France and Germany*, that of all varieties of idealism
Hegel's system was the closest to materialism. In a certain sense this
is true. It is only one step from the absolute idealism of Hegel to the
materialism of Feuerbach. This is more or less clearly recognised by
present-day German thinkers and is one of the causes of their invincible
dislike of Hegel. They find various forms of *subjective* idealism more
to their liking. Hegel is too *objective* for them.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. With his customary depth and clarity of thought Hegel
said: 'Ein Ding hat die Eigenschaft dieses oder jenes im Andern zu
bewirken und auf eine eigenthümliche Weise sich in seiner Beziehung zu
äussern. Es beweist diese Eigenschaft nur unter der Bedingung einer
entsprechenden Beschaffenheit der andern Dinge, aber sie ist ihm
zugleich eigenthümlich und seine mit sich identische Grundlage.' \['A
Thing has the property of affecting this or that in another, and of
disclosing itself in a peculiar manner in its relation. It manifests
this property only under one condition -- the other Thing must have a
corresponding nature: but it is also peculiar to the first Thing, and is
its own self-identical foundation.'\] (*Wissenschaft der Logik*, Volume
1, Book 2, p 149)

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. Author's italics.

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. The word 'consolation' is in English in the original
-- Editor.

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. It is raining. If this is indeed true, it is a truth
for man. But it is truth for man only because, and solely in the sense
that, it is indeed true.

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. Slavophiles -- a trend in Russian social thought of
the mid-nineteenth century. The Slavophiles put forward the 'theory' of
a special and exceptional road for Russia's historical development,
based on the communal system and Orthodoxy as inherent only in the
Slavs. Maintaining that Russia's historical development precluded any
possibility of revolutionary upheavals, they strongly opposed the
revolutionary movement in Russia and in the West -- Editor.

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. For the benefit of Russian readers with a certain
way of thinking: I am speaking here of countries with a *fully
developed* capitalist economy. \[Plekhanov's idea that the bourgeoisie
in Russia, a country of not 'fully developed capitalist economy', was
allegedly not a 'declining class' testifies to his Menshevik conception
that Russia still lacked the conditions for the socialist revolution --
Editor.\]

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. The German humanist, opponent of scholasticism and
theology Ulrich von Gutten (1488-1523) finished his 'Address to
Nuremberg Patrician and Humanist Pirkheimer' with the words: 'O seculum!
O literae! Juvat vivere, et si quiescere nondum juvat!' ('O age! O
science! How good to be alive, although it is no time to give up to
peace!')

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. Recall the question as to whether honey was sweet
or bitter.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. My italics -- GP.

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. Bismarck, although a conservative, introduced
universal suffrage in Germany. This was of advantage to the interests he
was defending. But such cases are exceptional, and we are not going into
them here. Neither shall we deal with the case when liberals do not
support an extension of the franchise. What is important for us at the
moment is not the sociological but the logical aspect of the matter.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. There are cases when the interests of a particular
class coincide with the interests of the whole of society.

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. There is no need to prove here that the
class-conscious factory workers of our time have no intention of
'sharing out all property'. Richter thinks this only because he is very
badly acquainted with their aspirations. I trust that in this case, at
least, his translators will agree with me.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
