---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE CONSUMER

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
May 22, 1909\

B y the time the debate on the tariff is ended, there sill be one
English word left so mauled and maimed that it will be hard to tell what
it stands for---the "consumer."

It was Senator Bailey---the eloquent, the erudite, the keen Senator
Bailey of Texas---who took the latest whack at the fated word. The
senator's policy, so he announced, was "to lift the burden from the
consumer and lay it upon those who do not need to work."

By all systems of reasoning, in a sentence so constructed, the words
"consumer" and "those who do not need to work" must stand for opposites.
If "those who do not need to work" are the opposite of the "consumer",
it would follow that "those who do not need to work" do not "consume."
The ultimate conclusion from Senator Bailey's sentence is that there
exists a set of people, a class, an order of beings, a genus, or
whatever you may call it, that can live without consuming - an arrant
piece of nonsense.

How comes it that one illustrious senator after another perpetuates the
same offense? How comes it that, one after another, they tug at the word
"consumer" in such utterly idiotic fashion? The answer is obvious.

Society is not divided between "consumers" and "nonconsumers\";
everybody consumes.

Society is divided between "producers" and "nonproducers," "workers\"
and "nonworkers."

A serious consequence flows from this division. The workers consume
least, the nonworkers consume most. If the quantity of consumption were
taken as the determining factor, and a division were to be made along
the line of "consumption," then the preeminent "consumer" and "those who
do not need to work" would coincide.

It is this fact that accounts for the senatorial tangle on the
"consumer." One and all, the senators seek to escape the ugly fact that
the nonworkers are consumers, as well as the workers, in fact, more so.
One and all, the senators, being the political agents of the nonworkers,
seek to protect these; and, realizing that it would be
self-incriminating to demand protection from burdens for nonworkers, are
driven to the maneuvering of making it appear as if their thoughts were
bent exclusively in the interest of the workers. The calling of these
"consumers" seems to offer a ready way out of the trouble. But it
happens in this as in all such instances. A trouble that cannot be
escaped only tangles hopelessly those who attempt the impossible feat.

He who unravels the senatorial tangle on the "consumer" sees clearly
that the consumer whom the senators with to unburden is he who consumes
without working.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
