---
layout: default
title: 
---
# \"CORPORATIONS" AND "CAPITALISTS"

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Dec. 6, 1909\

A s the best testimony against a person is what he utters against
himself, this recent statement of a mining company constituent of the
capitalist class may be taken as fairly representative of the situation:

"Nine-tenths of the corporations of the United States", said this one of
them, and it ought to know, "simply exist as subterfuges to shield
somebody from the consequences of ownership in the event of disaster."

That the corporate body is a "legal fiction" is well-known. That a
corporation enjoys, in matters of law, all the advantages that a
disembodied spirit would have in evading barbwire fences, is a matter of
common observation.

A corporation can do as it pleases. If caught, a little juggling of
stock holdings, a holding company organized, wheels-within-wheels
fashion---and there you are. Your corporation's as bland and
invulnerable as an oyster in its shell.

And if worst comes to worst, all that can happen is a fine upon the
corporation. The individuals who compose it go scot free, unfinable,
unimpeachable, ready to do it all over again.

In this way, it may well be true that nine-tenths of the corporations of
the country have no reason for existence other than lifting someone
above the law.

It was not always so. The corporation in its origin had a legitimate, a
valid basis for being. It was a progressward combination of previously
competing concerns; it introduced harmony for industrial antagonism;
economy for productive waste. This purpose it still partakes of today,
but another, an extraneous purpose---the dodging of the consequences of
its own illegalities---has grown up and overlaid its original cause to
such an extent that, even in its own camp, the charge is made that
nine-tenths are merely law-evading devices.

So it is with the capitalist. Taking his rise---albeit with crime and
violence---in the necessity for systematized and economic production,
he, at first, filled a useful place as a captain of industry.
Correlative with this function came the minor one of keeping down the
forces that would have overthrown him. Today, however, the palm of
captainship of industry having passed from the capitalist---he having
himself handed it over to his skilled managers and superintendents---he
retains, in the overwhelming majority of cases, merely his function of
coercion, of repressing all society into acquiescence in his plunder of
it.

As with the corporations, it is perfectly safe to say that, with
nine-tenths of the capitalists, their only reason for living is not
their legitimate one of assisting, but their wholly illegitimate one of
victimizing and laming the arm of society.

"Corporations" and "capitalists", both throw light on each other. Both
are ripe for the change.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
