---
layout: default
title: 
---
## Daniel De Leon

# "Syndicalism"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} August 2 or earlier, 1909\
[First Published:]{.info} *Daily People,* August 3, 1909\
[Online Version:]{.info} Daniel De Leon Internet Archive, 2001\
[Transcribed/HTML Markup:]{.info} John-Paul Catusco for the [Socialist
Labor Party On-Line Daniel De Leon PDF
Collection](http://slp.org/De_Leon.htm) & David Walters for the Marxists
Internet Archive\
[Copyedited:]{.info} Robert Bills for the Daniel De Leon Internet
Archive

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Syndicat" is the French word for the English "Union." From that it
would seem that "Syndicalism" must mean "Unionism." It does not. Due to
one of those unaccountable freaks of language, "Syndicalism" has come to
be understood everywhere as meaning a particular sort of "Unionism," to
wit, a theory of economic organization with the revolutionary purpose of
overthrowing capitalism by the specialized means of physical force.

Everybody, whose information is not below par, knows that, in order to
understand an institution, a movement, or a document, the history of the
country and of the times in the country of its birth must first be
known. No play of Aristophanes can be properly appreciated without
knowing the history of Greece; Don Quixote is a closed book, at any
rate, merely a funny book, to those who do not know Spain; or, who could
weigh the Civic Federation who knew nothing of American conditions?
"Syndicalism," a word of French origin, reflects a thing of French
birth. If these facts were kept in mind, then, on the one hand, the
non-French Europeans, who denounce "Syndicalism" sweepingly, would curb
their pens, and, on the other hand, the American would-be imitators of
"Syndicalism" would realize that they but play the role of monkeys at
the North Pole, or Polar bears under the tropics.

The point can be best understood by turning the telescope upon two
typical representatives of the two seemingly opposed currents of the
Movement in France---Guesde, the Anti-Syndicalist, and Lagardelle, or
Herve, Pro-Syndicalists.

At Nancy, in 1907, Guesde expressed his estimate of the economic
organization as a place whither men were attracted in search of
immediate material and individually selfish (not therefor improper, or
unnecessary) gain. The economic organization, according to him, was not
and could not be a body animated with any high ideal, least of all with
that loftiest of ideals, the Socialist Republic. That ideal could be
pursued only by the political movement. Yet, before closing, Guesde
completed his speech saying he by no means meant to deny that the hour
for physical force would arrive. That hour was certain to arrive. Then
the men of the party would seize the gun, and fall to.---Stick a pin
there.

Lagardelle, in his scholastic style, Herve, in his hammer and tongs way,
interspersed with wit and satire, ridiculed the excessive expectations
their opponents entertained from the political movement. That neither
Lagardelle nor Herve repudiate political action appeared substantially
from their being delegates to the convention of a political party. The
burden of their song was, however, that the economic organization had
the pre-eminent mission, and was pre-eminently called upon to gather
within its fold the insurrectionary elements that would furnish the
requisite physical force wherewith to knock down capitalist
rule.---Stick a pin, there, too.

At first blush, it would seem that the two tendencies are
irreconcilable; that they are not off-shoots from a common trunk; that,
consequently, one or other must be a freak affair. Not so. At this stage
of maturity in the International Movement, there is no freak
manifestation that does not, besides betraying intellectual weakness,
generally betray also intellectual uncleanliness. The Guesde and the
Lagardelle-Herve forces are too intellectually powerful and
intellectually clean for either to be a freak-fraud affair, or to be
even remotely tainted therewith. They are children of identical
parentage: their principles will be found to resolve themselves into the
identical practice.

A knowledge of French conditions makes this clear.

Herve stated in Stuttgart to the writer of this article that the factor
that acts as the most powerful deterrent upon the ruling classes to push
the proletariat to extremes, is the knowledge that "on the continent
everyone knows how to handle a gun." The observation is pregnant with
most pregnant conclusions, that bear directly upon "Syndicalism," and,
not very much less directly upon the course that events dictate in other
countries:---

First. In a country where compulsory military service has not only made
the people skillful in the handling of a gun, but has familiarized them
with military tactics, an insurrectionary call to arms cannot be
imagined to gather 50,000 men without the vast majority of them are
readily organizable. From the militarily schooled mass the requisite
military chief and lieutenants will spontaneously spring up, and be
spontaneously acknowledged. The organized insurrectionary force would be
on foot.

Second. In a country like France, where as yet there is no large
capitalism to rank the proletariat into the battalions of an industrial
insurrectionary organization, and thereby to furnish the Revolution, as
an equivalent for a military force, with a mighty non-military engine of
physical force, but where, on the other hand, compulsory military
service has amply prepared the soil for militarily organized
insurrection, and in which, moreover, national traditions lightly turn
the thought to just such methods,---in such a country the only real
difference between the Guesde forces and the Lagardelle-Herve forces is
that the latter utter the still unconscious sentiments of the former. It
is a difference of importance, salutary to both. It rescues present
Anti-Syndicalism from the possible danger of losing itself in the mystic
mazes of what Marx called the "cretinism" (idiocy) of bourgeois
parliamentarism, and it holds Syndicalism in check, lest it rush
headlong, driven by premature impetuosity. It is a difference that marks
the one somewhat unripe, the other somewhat too ripe. In fine, it is a
difference that proves identity---the spot where both currents will and
are bound eventually to merge.

Third. In all the other European countries, where, as in France,
compulsory military service prepares the soil for militarily organized
insurrection, but where, differently from France, temperament and
traditions are other, thoughts of "Syndicalism" naturally seem wild---at
present; and as naturally, will seem rational and be adopted in the
ripeness of time. Present condemnation, provided the condemnation be not
too sweeping, of "Syndicalism" from such quarters is imperative, even to
those who may see beyond the present. Any other policy on their part
would have no effect other than the harmful one of furnishing grist to
the crack-brained mill of Anarchy.

Fourth. In a country like the United States, where, differently from
France and other European countries, there is no compulsory military
service to prepare the soil for militarily organized insurrection, but
where, on the other hand and differently from everywhere else, large
capitalism is in such bloom as to have ranked the proletariat into the
battalions for an industrial insurrection, and thereby to have furnished
the Revolution, as an equivalent for a military force, with a mighty
non-military engine of physical force,---in such a country Syndicalism
has no place. In such a country, whosoever struts in the phraseology of
Syndicalism is as ridiculous as a monkey would be in the frozen North,
or a Polar bear in the wilds of the torrid zone. The social-political
atmosphere makes them freak-frauds.

Fifth. Stripped of some casual expressions, "Syndicalism" is not
"Industrial Unionism." Syndicalism lays hardly any stress---it cannot
choose but fail to lay stress: the capitalist development in the land of
its birth does not furnish it with the foundation for laying such
stress---upon the STRUCTURE, its main stress is laid upon the FUNCTION
of the economic organization,---that function being, according to
"Syndicalism," physical force. Industrial Unionism, on the contrary,
being the product of American highly developed capitalism, lays main
stress upon the STRUCTURE of the economic organization; the FUNCTION of
the same---the overthrow of the Political State and the seizing of the
reins of government as the Socialist or Industrial State---flowing, as a
matter of course, from its structure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
