---
layout: default
title: 
---
# TRIMMING THE POODLE

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Nov. 2, 1908\

T he growing tendency to confuse Socialism with reform of one sort or
another"an attitude assumed, on the part of its unwise friends, to make
it "respectable" and palatable to capitalistically trained minds, and by
its enemies, on the other hand, to sap it of its essence and run it into
the ground"compels the Socialist Labor Party again to draw clear and
true the old line of cleavage between Socialism and social quackery,
between reform and revolution.

On Oct. 26, the New York Times contained a letter which said, "The
assumption by Socialists of credit for championship of many valuable
principles which belong properly to democracy is a usurpation\.... But
any educated thinker knows that these best parts of the good ideals \--
not the antirent, anticapital parts, but the humanitarian parts"are all
essentially democratic and old." So Mr. Shailer Mathews, speaking of the
attempt of Paris in 1790 to feed its poor, declares, "In fact, the
socialistic tendency was marked, and the masses were being supported in
large part by their municipality."

As for the conception of Socialism implied in the above two excerpts, it
is laughable. To use the words of the Times letter, Socialism without
the "the antirent, anticapital parts" would be like astronomy with the
law of gravity left out, or zoology with evolution left out. It would be
an egg with no nutrition, a watch without works, a locomotive minus
driving wheels. It would be inconceivable, a mere inextricable
contradiction in terms. It would not be Socialism at all, any more than
a house without foundation, sidewalls, floors or roof would be a house.

For it cannot be too strongly insisted that Socialism means but one
thing, and that is the abolition of capital in private hands, and the
turning over of the industries into the direct control of the workmen
employed in them. Anything else is not Socialism, and has no right to
sail under that name. Socialism is not the establishment of an
eight-hour day, not the abolition of child labor, not the enforcement of
the pure food laws, not the putting down of the Night Riders, or the
enforcement of the 80-cent gas law. None of these, nor all of them
together, are Socialism. They might all be done by the government
tomorrow, and still we would not have Socialism. They are merely reforms
of the present system, mere patches on the worn-out garment of
industrial servitude, and are no more Socialism than the steam from a
locomotive is the locomotive. Socialism is the collective ownership of
the mechanical equipment of production which would bring in its wake all
the other improvements in conditions above mentioned. But they are only
the wake"Socialism is the vessel which must cast that wake, Socialism is
the locomotive from which these betterments are the trails of steam.

Therefore, while not opposing any reforms or improvements which may be
secured under capitalism, the Socialist Labor Party steadfastly sets its
face against taking time away from its main battle, for revolution, in
order to carry on the struggle for reform. It refuses to be maneuvered
into abandoning its main demand"the tools of production for the
producers"in order to fritter away its energies chasing butterflies in
the field of immediate demands. It turns a blind eye and an unresponsive
lip to the tempting baits so deftly twitched before the noses of the
working class to lead them astray into side issues and blind alleys. The
one demand of the Socialist Labor Party is Socialism, unadulterated and
undiluted"the unconditional surrender by the capitalist class of the
machinery of industry.

And while rejecting the interpretation of socialism which would remove
its "antirent and anticapital parts," the Socialist Labor Party insists
that it is the most humanitarian movement on earth. More so than
philanthropic ventures, reform societies, and charity associations; it,
and it alone, carries within its program the highest humanitarian hopes
and possibilities of the race. All the other movements are based on
aspiration alone. The the Socialist Labor Party stands out unique as the
only one based on the material program which will make the realization
of those aspirations an accomplished fact. Socialism alone will supply
the basis for any permanent improvement in the condition of mankind.

As a poodle may have his hair cut long or his hair cut short, as he may
be trimmed with pink ribbons or with blue ribbons, yet he remains the
same old poodle, so capitalism may be trimmed with factory laws,
tenement laws, divorce laws and gambling laws, but it remains the same
old capitalism. These "humaniitarian parts" are only trimming the
poodle. Socialism, one and inseparable with its "antirent and
anticapital parts," means to get rid of the poodle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
