---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

# The Materialist Conception of History

### (1891)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** 1897.\
**Source: Essays in Historical Materialism** (Approx. the first half of
the essay reproduced here)-\
**Publisher:** International Publishers.\
**Transcribed:** [Andy
Blunden](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/ablunden.htm).\
**HTML Markup:** Andy Blunden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### [I]{#p001}

[We]{#p002} must confess that it was with no little prejudice that we
took up the book of this Roman professor. We had been rather frightened
by certain works of some of his compatriots -- A. Loria, for example
(see, in particular, *La teoria economica della constituzione
politica*). But a perusal of the very first pages was enough to convince
us that we had been mistaken, and that Achille Loria is one thing and
Antonio Labriola another. And when we reached the end of the book we
felt that we would like to discuss it with the Russian reader. We hope
that he will not be annoyed with us. For after all, "So rare are books
that are not banal!"

[Labriola's]{#p003} book first appeared in Italian. The French
translation is clumsy, and in places positively infelicitous. We say
this without hesitation, although we have not the Italian original
before us. But the Italian author cannot be held responsible for the
French translator. At any rate, Labriola's ideas are clear even in the
clumsy French translation. Let us examine them.

[Mr.]{#p004} Kareyev, who, as we know, very zealously reads and most
successfully manages to distort every "work" having any relation at all
to the *materialist conception* of history, would probably inscribe our
author in the list of "*economic materialists*." But that would be
wrong. Labriola firmly, and fairly consistently, adheres to the
materialist conception of history, but he does not regard himself as an
"economic materialist." He is of the opinion that this title applies
more fittingly to writers like Thorold Rogers than to himself and those
who think like him. And that is perfectly true, although at a first
glance it may not seem quite clear.

[Ask]{#p005} any Narodnik or subjectivists what is an economic
materialist, and he will answer that an economic materialist is one who
attributes predominant importance to the economic factor in social life.
That is how our Narodniks and subjec*tivists understand economic
materialism*. And it must be confessed that there undoubtedly are people
who attribute to the economic "factor" a predominant role in the life of
human society. Mr. Mikhailovsky has more than once cited [Louis
Blanc](../../../../glossary/people/b/l.htm#blanqui-louis-auguste) as one
who had spoken of the predominance of this factor long before a certain
master of certain Russian disciples. But one thing we do not understand:
Why did our venerable subjective sociologist pick on Louis Blanc? He
should have known that in this respect Louis Blanc had many
predecessors. [Guizot](../../../../glossary/people/g/u.htm#guizot),
Minier, Augustin Thierry and Toqueville all recognised the predominant
role of the economic "factor," at least in the history of the Middle
Ages and of modern times. Consequently, all these historians were
economic materialists. In our days, the said Thorold Rogers, in his
*Economic Interpretation of History*, also revealed himself as a
convinced economic materialist; he too recognised the predominant
importance of the economic "factor."

[It]{#p006} is not to be concluded from this, of course, that Thorold
Rogers' social and political views were identical with those, say, of
Louis Blanc: Rogers held the view of the bourgeois economists, whereas
Louis Blanc was at one time an exponent of Utopian Socialism. If Rogers
had been asked what he thought of the bourgeois economic system, he
would have said that at the basis of this system lie the fundamental
attributes of human nature, and that, consequently, the history of its
rise is the history of the gradual removal of obstacles that at one time
hindered, and even totally precluded, the manifestation of these
attributes. Louis Blanc, on the other hand, would have declared that
capitalism itself was one of the obstacles raised by ignorance and
violence to the creation of an economic system which would at last
really correspond to human nature. This, as you see, is a very material
difference.

[Who]{#p007} would be nearer to the truth? To be frank, we think that
both these writers were almost equally remote from it, but we have
neither the wish nor the opportunity to dwell on this point here. What
is important to us just now is something else. We would request the
reader to observe that in the opinion of both Louis Blanc and Thorold
Rogers the economic factor, which predominates in social life, was
itself, as the mathematicians put it, a *function* of human nature, and
chiefly of the human mind and human knowledge. The same must be said of
the above-mentioned French historians of the Restoration period. Well,
and what name shall we give to the views on history of people who,
*although they assert that the economic* factor predominates in social
life, yet are convinced that this factor -- the *economics of society --
is in its turn the fruit of human knowledge and ideas?* Such views can
only be *called idealistic*.

[We]{#p008} thus find that *economic materialism does not necessarily
preclude historical idealism*. And even that is not quite accurate; we
say that it does not necessarily preclude idealism but what we should
say is that *perhaps -- as it has been mostly hitherto -- it is nothing
but a variety of idealism*. After this, it will be clear why men like
Antonio Labriola do not regard themselves as economic materialists: *it
is because they are consistent materialists* and because, as regards
history, *their views are the direct opposite of historical idealism*.

#### [II]{#p009}

["However,"]{#p010} Mr. Kudrin will probably tell us, "you, with the
habit common to many of the 'disciples,' are resorting to paradoxes, are
juggling with words, deceiving the eye and sword-swallowing. As you put
it, it is the idealists who are economic materialists. But in that case,
what would you have us understand by genuine and consistent
materialists? Do they reject the idea of the predominance of the
economic factor? Do they believe that side by side with this factor
there are other factors operating in history, and that it would be vain
for us to investigate which of them predominates over all the others? We
can only rejoice at the genuine and consistent materialists if they
really are averse to dragging in the economic factor everywhere."

[Our]{#p011} reply to Mr. Kudrin is that, indeed, the genuine and
consistent materialists really are averse to dragging in the economic
factor everywhere. What is more, even to ask which factor predominates
in social life seems to them pointless. But Mr. Kudrin need not hurry to
rejoice. It was by no means under the influence of Messrs. the Narodniks
and subjectivists that the genuine and consistent materialists arrived
at this conviction. The objections these gentlemen raise to the
domination of the economic factor are only calculated to evoke hilarity
among the genuine and consistent materialists. What is more, these
objections of our friends, the Narodniks and subjectivists, are rather
belated. The inappropriateness of asking which factor predominates in
social life became very noticeable even in the time of Hegel. *Hegelian*
idealism precluded the very possibility of such questions. All the more
is precluded by modern dialectical materialism. Since the appearance of
the *Critique of Critical Criticism*, and especially since the
publication of Marx's well known *Critique of Political Economy*, only
people backward in theory are capable of wrangling about the relative
importance of the various historico-social factors. We are quite aware
that Mr. Kudrin is not the only one who will be surprised at this, and
so we hasten to explain.

[What]{#p012} are the historico-social factors? How does the idea of
them originate?

[Let]{#p013} us take an example. The Gracchi tried to check the process
of appropriation of the public domain by the wealthy Romans which was so
fatal to Rome. The wealthy Romans resisted the Gracchi. A struggle
ensued. Each of the contending sides passionately pursued its own aims.
If I wanted to describe this struggle, I might depict it as a conflict
of human passions. Passions would thus appear as "factors" in the
internal history of Rome. But in this struggle both the Gracchi and
their adversaries took advantage of the weapons furnished them by Roman
public law. I would not fail, of course, to speak of this in my
narrative, and thus Roman public law would also appear as a factor in
the internal development of the Roman republic.

[Further,]{#p014} the people who opposed the Gracchi had a material
interest in preserving a deep-rooted abuse. The people who supported the
Gracchi had a material interest in abolishing it. I would mention this
circumstance, too, and as a result the struggle I am describing would
appear as a conflict of material interests, as a conflict of classes, a
conflict of the poor and the rich. And so I already have a third factor,
and this time the most interesting of all: the famous economic factor.
If you have the time and inclination, dear reader, you may discuss at
length which of the factors in the internal development of Rome
predominated over the rest; you will find in my historical narrative
sufficient data to support any opinion on this subject.

[As]{#p015} for myself, as long as I stick to the role of simple
narrator, I shall not worry much about the factors. Their relative
importance does not interest me. As a narrator my one task is to depict
the given events in as accurate and lively a manner as possible. For
this purpose I have to establish a certain, even if only outward,
connection between them, and to arrange them in a certain perspective.
If I mention the passions that stirred the contending parties, or the
system prevailing in Rome at the time or lastly , the inequality of
property that existed there, I do so with the sole purpose of presenting
a connected and lively account of the events. If I achieve this purpose,
I shall be quite satisfied, and shall unconcernedly leave it to the
philosophers to decide whether passions predominate over economics, or
economics over passions, or, lastly, maybe, that nothing predominates
over anything, each "factor" following the golden rule: Live and let
live!

[All]{#p016} this will be so as long as I stick to the role of simple
narrator to whom all inclination to "subtle speculation" is foreign. But
what if I do not stick to this role, and start philosophising about the
events I am describing? I shall then not be satisfied with a mere
outward connection of events; I shall want to disclose their inherent
causes; and those same factors -- human passions, public law and
economics -- which I formerly stressed and gave prominence to, guided
almost exclusively by artistic instinct, will now acquire a new and vast
importance in my eyes. They will appear to me to be those sought-for
inherent causes, those "latent forces," to whose influence events are to
be attributed. I shall create a theory of factors.

[And,]{#p017} indeed, one or another variety of such a theory is bound
to arise whenever people who are interested in social phenomena pass
from simply contemplating and describing them to investigating the
connections that exist between them.

[The]{#p018} theory of factors, moreover, grows with the growing
division of labor in social science. All the branches of this science --
ethics, politics, jurisprudence, political economy, etc investigate one
and the same thing: the activity of social man. But each investigates it
from its own special angle. Mr. Mikhailovsky would say that each of them
"controls" a special "chord." Each of the "chords" may be regarded as a
factor of social development. And, in fact, we may now count almost as
many factors as there are distinct "disciplines" in social science.

[We]{#p019} hope that what is meant by the historico-social factors and
how the idea of them originates will now be clear.

[A]{#p020} historico-social factor is an *abstraction*, and the idea of
it originates as the result of a process of *abstraction*. Thanks to the
process of abstraction, various *sides* of the social *complex* assume
the form of separate *categories*, and the various manifestations and
expressions of the activity of social man -- morals, law, economic
forms, etc. -- are converted in our minds into separate forces which
appear to give rise to and determine this activity and to be its
ultimate causes.

[Once]{#p021} the theory of factors had come into being, disputes were
bound to arise as to which factor was to be considered the predominant
one.

#### [III]{#p022}

[The]{#p023} "factors" are subject to reciprocal action: each influences
the rest and is in its turn influenced by the rest. The result is such
an intricate web of reciprocal influences, of direct actions and
reflected reactions, that whoever sets out to elucidate the course of
social development begins to feel his head swim and experiences an
unconquerable necessity to find at least some sort of clue out of the
labyrinth. Since bitter experience has taught him that the view of
reciprocal action only leads to dizziness, he begins to seek for another
view: he tries to simplify his task. He asks himself whether one of the
historico-social factors is not the prime and basic cause of all the
rest. If he succeeded in finding an affirmative answer to this basic
question, his task would indeed be immeasurably simplified. Let us
suppose that he reaches the conviction that the rise and development of
all the social relations of any particular country are determined by the
course of its intellectual development, which, in its turn, is
determined by the attributes of human nature (the idealist view). He
will then easily escape from the vicious circle of reciprocal action and
create a more or less harmonious and consistent theory of social
development. Subsequently, as a result of a further stud of the subject
he may perhaps perceive that he was mistaken, and that man's
intellectual development cannot be regarded as the prime cause of all
social movement. Admitting his mistake, he will probably at the same
time observe that his temporary conviction that the intellectual factor
dominates over all the rest was after all of some use to him, for
without it he could never have escaped from the blind alley of
reciprocal action and would not have advanced a single step to. wards an
understanding of social phenomena.

[It]{#p024} would be unfair to condemn such attempts to establish some
hierarchy among the factors of historico-social development. They were
just as indispensable in their time as the appearance of the theory of
factors itself was inevitable. Antonio Labriola, who has given a fuller
and better analysis of this theory than any other materialist writer,
quite rightly remarks that "the historic factors indicate something
which is much less than the truth, but much more than a simple error."
The theory of factors has contributed its mite to the benefit of
science. "The separate study of the historico-social factors has served,
like any other empirical study which does not transcend the apparent
movement of things, to improve the instrument of observation and to
permit us to find again in the facts themselves, which have been
artificially abstracted, the keystones which bind them into the social
*complexus*." Today a knowledge of the special social sciences is
indispensable to anyone who would reconstruct any portion of man's past
life. Historical science would not have got very far without philology.
And the one-sided Romanists -- who believed that Roman law was dictated
by Reason itself -- was it any mean service they rendered to science?

[But]{#p025} however legitimate and useful the theory of factors may
have been in its time, today it will not stand the light of criticism.
It dismembers the activity of social man and converts its various
aspects and manifestations into separate forces, which are supposed to
determine the historical movement of society. In the development of
social science this theory has played a part similar to that played by
the theory of separate physical forces in natural science. The progress
of natural science has led to the theory of the *unity* of these forces,
to the modern theory of energy. In just the same way, the progress of
social science was bound to lead to the replacement of the theory of
factors, that fruit of social analysis, by a *synthetic view of social
life*.

[This]{#p026} synthetic view of social life is not peculiar to modern
dialectical materialism. We already find it in Hegel, who conceived the
task to be to find a scientific explanation of the entire
historico-social process in its totality, that is, among other things,
including all those aspects and manifestations of the activity of social
man which people with an abstract cast of thought pictured as separate
factors. But as an "absolute idealist," Hegel explained the activities
of social man by the attributes of the Universal Spirit. Given these
attributes, the whole history of mankind is given *an sich*, and its
ultimate results as well. Hegel's synthetic view was at the same time a
*teleological* view. Modern dialectical materialism has completely
eliminated teleology from social science.

[It]{#p027} has shown that man makes his history not in order to march
along a line of predetermined progress, and not because he must obey the
laws of some abstract (metaphysical, Labriola calls it) evolution. He
does so in the endeavour to satisfy his own needs, and it is for science
to explain how the various methods of satisfying these needs influence
man's social relations and spiritual activity.

[The]{#p028} methods by which social man satisfies his needs, and to a
large extent these needs themselves, are determined by the nature of the
implements with which he subjugates nature in one degree or another; in
other words, they are determined by the state of his productive forces.
Every considerable change in the state of these forces is reflected in
man's social relations, and, therefore, in his economic relations, as
part of these social relations. The idealists of all species and
varieties held that economic relations were functions of *human nature*;
the dialectical materialists hold that these relations are functions of
the *social productive forces*.

[It]{#p029} therefore follows that if the dialectical materialists
thought it permissible to speak of factors of social development with
any other purpose than to criticise these antiquated fictions, they
would first of all have to rebuke the so-called *economic* materialists
for the *inconstancy* of their "predominant" factor; the modern
materialists do not know of any economic system that would be alone
conformable to human nature, all other social economic systems being the
result of one or another degree of violence to human nature. The modern
materialists teach that any economic system that is conformable to the
state of the productive forces at the given time is conformable to human
nature. And, conversely, any economic system begins to contradict the
demands of human nature as soon as it comes into contradiction with the
state of the productive forces. The "predominant" factor is thus found
to be itself *subordinate* to another "factor." And that being the case,
how can it be called "predominant"?

[If]{#p030} that is so, then it is evident that a veritable gulf divides
the dialectical materialists from those who not without justification
may be called *economic* materialists. And to what trend do those
altogether unpleasant disciples of a not altogether pleasant teacher
belong whom Messrs. Kareyev, N. Mikhailovsky, S. Krivenko and other
clever and learned people quite recently attacked so vehemently, if not
so happily? If we are not mistaken, the "disciples" fully adhered to the
view of dialectical materialism. Why then did Messrs. Kareyev, N.
Mikhailovsky, S. Krivenko and the other clever and learned people father
on them the views of the *economic* materialists and fulminate against
them for supposedly attaching exaggerated importance to the economic
factor? It may be presumed that these clever and learned people did so
because the arguments of the late lamented economic materialists are
easier to refute than the arguments of the dialectical materialists.
Again, it may be presumed that our learned opponents of the "disciples"
have but poorly grasped the latter's views. This presumption is even the
more probable one.

[It]{#p031} may be objected that the "disciples" themselves sometimes
called themselves economic materialists, and that the term it "economic
materialism" was first used by one of the French "disciples." That is
so. But neither the French nor the Russian "disciples" ever associated
with the term "economic materialism" the idea which our Narodniks and
the subjectivists associate with it. We have only to recall that in the
opinion of Mr. N. Mikhailovsky, Louis Blanc and Mr. Y. Zhukovsky were
"economic materialists" just like our present-day supporters of the
materialist view of history. Confusion of concepts could go no further.

#### [IV]{#p032}

[By]{#p033} entirely eliminating teleology from social science and
explaining the activity of social man by his needs and by the means and
methods of satisfying them, prevailing at the given time, dialectical
materialism for the first time imparts to this science the "strictness"
of which her sister -- the science of nature -- would often boast over
her. It may be said that the science of society is itself becoming a
*natural* science: "*notre doctrine naturaliste d'histoire*," as
Labriola justly says. But this does not mean that he merges the sphere
of biology with the sphere of social science. Labriola is an ardent
opponent of "*Darwinism, political and social*," which "has, like an
epidemic, for many years invaded the mind of more than one thinker, and
many more of the advocates and declaimers of sociology," and as a
fashionable habit has even influenced the language of practical men of
politics.

[Man]{#p034} is without doubt an animal connected by ties of affinity to
other animals. He has no privileges of origin; his organism is nothing
more than a particular case of general physiology. Originally, like all
other animals, he was completely under the sway of his natural
environment, which was not yet subject to his modifying action; he had
to adapt himself to it in his struggle for existence. In Labriola's
opinion races are a result of such -- direct -- adaptation to natural
environment, in so far as they differ in physical features -- as, for
example, the white, black and yellow races -- and do not represent
secondary historico-social formations, that is to say, nations and
peoples. The primitive instincts of sociability and the first rudiments
of sexual selection similarly arose as a consequence of adaptation to
natural environment in the struggle for existence.

[But]{#p035} our ideas of "primitive man" are merely conjectures. All
men who inhabit the earth today, like all who in the past were observed
by trustworthy investigators, are found, and were found, already quite a
long way removed from the moment when man ceased to live a purely animal
life. The Iroquois Indians, for example, with their *maternal gens*
studied and described by
[Morgan](../../../../glossary/people/m/o.htm#morgan-henry) had already
made a comparatively big advance along the road of *social* development.
Even the present-day Australians not only have a language which may be
called a condition and instrument, a cause and effect of social life --
are not only acquainted with the use of fire, but live in societies
possessing a definite structure, with definite customs and institutions.
The Australian tribes have their own territory and their art of hunting;
they have certain weapons of defence and attack, certain utensils for
the preservation of supplies, certain methods of ornamenting the body;
in a word, the Australian already lives in a definite, although to be
sure, very elementary, *artificial* environment, to which he accordingly
adapts himself from earliest childhood. This artificial social
environment is an essential condition for all further progress. The
degree of its development serves as a measure of the degree of savagery
or barbarism of all other tribes.

[This]{#p036} primary social formation corresponds to what is called
*the prehistory* of man. The beginning of historical life presumes an
even greater development of the artificial environment and a far greater
power of man over nature. The complex internal relations of societies
entering on the path of historical development are by no means due to
the immediate influence of natural environment. They presuppose the
invention of certain implements of labor, the domestication of certain
animals, the ability to extract certain metals, and the like. These
implements and means of production changed in very different ways in
different circumstances; they showed signs of progress, stagnation, or
even retrogression, but never have these changes returned man to a
purely animal life, that is, to a life directly influenced by the
natural environment.

"Historical science has, then, as its first and principal object the
determination and investigation of this artificial foundation, its
origin, its composition, its changes and its transformations. To say
that all this is only a part and prolongation of nature is to say a
thing which by its too abstract and too generic character has no longer
any meaning."

[Critical]{#p037} as he is of "political and social Darwinism," Labriola
is no less critical of the efforts of certain "amiable dilettantes" to
combine the materialist conception of history with the theory of
universal evolution, which, as he harshly but justly remarks, many have
converted into a mere metaphysical metaphor. He also scoffs at the
naivete of "amiable dilettantes" in trying to place the materialist
conception of history under the patronage of the philosophy of Auguste
Comte or Spencer: "which is to say that they wish to give us for our
allies our most open adversaries," he says.

[The]{#p038} remark about dilettantes evidently refers, among others, to
Professor Enrico Ferri, the author of a very superficial book entitled
*Spencer, Darwin and Marx*, which has been published in a French
translation under the title *Socialisme et science positive*.

#### [V]{#p039}

[Thus,]{#p040} man makes history in striving to satisfy his needs. These
needs, of course, are originally imposed by nature; but they are later
considerably modified quantitatively and qualitatively by the character
of the artificial environment. The productive forces at man's disposal
determine all his social relations. First of all, the state of the
productive forces determines the relations in which men stand towards
each other in the social process of production, that is, their *economic
relations*. These relations naturally give rise to definite interests,
which are expressed in *Law*. "Every system of law protects a definite
interest," Labriola says. The development of productive forces divides
society into classes, whose interests are not only different, but in
many -- and, moreover, essential -- aspects are diametrically
antagonistic. This antagonism of interests gives rise to conflicts, to a
struggle among the social classes. The struggle results in the
replacement of the *tribal* organisation by the *state* organisation,
the purpose of which is to protect the dominant interests. Lastly,
social relations, determined by the given state of productive forces,
give rise to common *morality*, the morality, that is, that guides
people in their common, everyday life.

[Thus]{#p041} the law, the state system and the morality of any given
people are determined *directly and immediately* by its characteristic
economic relations. These economic relations also determine -- but
*indirectly and mediately -- all* the creations of the mind and
imagination: art, science, etc.

[To]{#p042} understand the history of scientific thought or the history
of art in any particular country, it is not enough to be acquainted with
its economics. One must know how to proceed from economics to *social
psychology*, without a careful study and grasp of which a materialist
explanation of the history of ideologies is impossible.

[That]{#p043} does not mean, of course, that there is a social soul or a
collective national "spirit," developing in accordance with its own
special laws and manifesting itself in social life. "That is pure
mysticism," Labriola says. All that the materialist can speak of in this
case is the prevailing state of sentiment and thought in the particular
social class of the particular country at the particular time. This
state of sentiment and thought is the result of social relations.
Labriola is firmly persuaded that it is not the forms of man's
consciousness that determine the forms of his social being, but, on the
contrary, the forms of his social being that determine the forms of his
consciousness. But once the forms of his consciousness have sprung from
the soil of social being, they become a part of history. Historical
science cannot limit itself to the mere anatomy of society; it embraces
the *totality of phenomena* that are *directly or indirectly* determined
by social economics, including the work of the imagination. There is no
historical fact that did not owe its origin to social economics; but it
is no less true to say that there is no historical fact that was not
preceded, not accompanied, and not succeeded by a definite state of
consciousness. Hence the tremendous importance of social psychology. For
if it has to be reckoned with even in the history of law and of
political institutions, in the history of literature, art, philosophy,
and so forth, not a single step can be taken without it.

[When]{#p044} we say that a given work is fully in the spirit of, let us
say, the Renaissance, it means that it completely corresponds with the
then prevailing sentiments of the classes which set the tone in social
life. So long as the social relations do not change, the psychology of
society does not change either. People get accustomed to the prevailing
beliefs, concepts, modes of thought and means of satisfying given
aesthetic requirements. But should the development of productive forces
lead to any substantial change in the economic structure of society,
and, as a consequence, in the reciprocal relations of the social
classes, the psychology of these classes will also change, and with it
the "spirit of the times" and the "national character." This change is
manifested in the appearance of new religious beliefs or new
philosophical concepts, of new trends in art or new aesthetic
requirements.

[Another]{#p045} thing to be borne in mind, in Labriola's opinion, is
that in ideologies a very important part is often played by *the
survivals* of concepts and trends inherited from earlier generations and
preserved only by tradition. Furthermore, ideologies are also influenced
by nature.

[As]{#p046} we already know, the artificial environment very powerfully
modifies the influence of nature on social man. From a *direct*
influence, it becomes an *indirect* influence. But it does not cease to
exist for that. The temperament of every nation preserves certain
peculiarities, induced by the influence of the natural environment,
which are to a certain extent modified, but never completely destroyed,
by adaptation to the social environment. These peculiarities of national
temperament constitute what is known as *race*. Race exercises an
undoubted influence on the history of some ideologies -- art, for
example; and this still further complicates the already far from easy
task of explaining it scientifically.

#### Chapter Six

We have set forth in fair detail, and, we hope, accuracy, Labriola's
view that social phenomena depend on the economic structure of society,
which, in its turn, is determined by the state of its productive forces.
For the most part, we are in full agreement with him. But in places his
views give rise to certain doubts, concerning which we would like to
make a few remarks.

To take the following point to begin with. According to Labriola, the
state is an organisation for the rule of one social class over another
or others. That is so. But it scarcely expresses the whole truth. In
states like China or ancient Egypt, where civilised life was impossible
without highly complex and extensive works for the regulation of the
flow and overflow of big rivers and for irrigation purposes, the rise of
the state may be largely explained by the direct influence of the needs
of the social productive process. There can be no doubt that inequality,
in one or another degree, existed in these countries even in prehistoric
times, both within the tribes that went to constitute the state -- which
often differed completely in ethnographical origin -- and among the
tribes. But the ruling classes we meet with in the history of these
countries held their more or less exalted social position owing to the
state organisation called into being by the needs of the social
productive process. There is scarcely room for doubt that the Egyptian
priestly caste owed their supremacy to the highly important part which
their rudimentary scientific knowledge played in the system of Egyptian
agriculture. (One of the Chaldean kings says "I have mastered the
secrets of the rivers for the benefit of man...I have led the waters of
the rivers into the wilderness; I have filled the parched ditches with
them...I have watered the desert plains; I have brought them fertility
and abundance. I have turned them into habitations of joy." For all its
boastfulness, this is a fairly accurate description of the role of the
oriental state in organising the social process of production.) In the
West -- where Greece, of course, must be included -- we do not observe
that the direct needs of the social process of production, which there
did not entail any extensive social organisation, had any influence on
the rise of the state. But even there the appearance of the state must
in a large measure be attributed to the need for a social division of
labour called forth by the development of the social productive forces.
This, of course, did not prevent the state from being at the same time
an organisation of the rule of a privileged minority over a more or less
enslaved majority. (Just as in certain cases it did not prevent it from
being an outcome of the conquest of one people by another. Force plays a
big part in the replacement of old institutions by new. But force can in
no way explain either the possibility of such a replacement or its
social consequences.) But it must not be lost sight of under any
circumstances, if an incorrect and one-sided idea of the historical role
of the state is to be avoided.

And now let us examine Labriola's views on the historical development of
ideologies. We have seen that in his opinion this development is
complicated by the action of racial peculiarities and by the influence
exercised on man by his natural environment generally. It is a great
pity that our author did not think it necessary to support and explain
this opinion by any illustrations; it would have made it easier for us
to understand him. At any rate, it is clear that it cannot be accepted
in the form in which he expounds it.

The American redskin tribes do not, of course, belong to the same race
as the tribes which in prehistoric times inhabited the Greek archipelago
or the Baltic coast. It is beyond question that in these different
localities primitive man experienced the influences of the natural
environment in very different ways. It might have been expected that
these different influences would be reflected in the rudimentary art of
the primitive inhabitants of the localities mentioned. Yet we do not
observe this to be the case. In all parts of the earth, however much
they may differ from each other, we find similar stages in the
development of art corresponding to similar stages in the development of
primitive man. We know of the art of the Stone Age and of the art of the
Iron Age; but we do not know of any distinctive arts of the different
races: white, yellow, etc. The state of the productive forces is
reflected even in details. For example, in pottery ornamentations we
first meet only with straight and broken lines: squares, crosses,
zigzags, etc. This form of ornamentation was borrowed by primitive art
from the even more primitive handicrafts: weaving and plaiting. In the
Bronze Age, with the appearance of the art of working metals, which are
capable of assuming all sorts of geometrical shapes, we observe the
appearance of curved ornamentations. And, lastly, with the domestication
of animals, their figures, and especially the figure of the horse, make
their appearance.

To be sure, in the depictions of human beings, the influence of racial
features was bound to affect the "ideals of beauty" peculiar to the
primitive artists. We know that every race, especially in its early
stages of social development, considers itself the most beautiful, and
rates very highly the features that distinguish it from other races.
But, firstly, the influence of these peculiarities of racial aesthetics
-- as far as they have any permanency at all -- cannot alter the course
of development of art; and, secondly, these peculiarities themselves
have only a temporary durability, lasting, that is, only as long as
certain definite conditions prevail. When a tribe is forced to admit the
superiority of another, more developed, tribe, its racial complacency
tends to disappear and gives place to an imitation of alien tastes which
were formerly considered ridiculous or even shameful and disgusting.
Here we find occurring to the savage what occurs to the peasant in
civilised society, who at first scoffs at the manners and dress of the
town-dweller, and then, with the growing supremacy of the town over the
country, tries to copy them to the best of his ability.

Passing to historical nations, we must first point out that in relation
to them the word race cannot and should not be used at all. We do not
know of any historical nation that can be regarded as racially pure;
each of them is the product of an extremely lengthy and intense process
of interbreeding and intermingling of different ethnic elements.

Now try, after this, to determine the influence of "race" on the history
of the ideologies of any nation! At a first glance it seems that nothing
could be simpler and more correct than the idea that natural environment
influences national temperament and, through temperament, the history of
the nation's intellectual and aesthetic development. But if Labriola had
only recalled the history of his own country, he would have been
convinced of the erroneousness of this idea. The modern Italians are
surrounded by the same natural environment as that in which the ancient
Romans lived, yet how unlike is the "temperament" of our modern
tributaries of Menelik to the temperament of the stern conquerors of
Carthage! If we were to undertake to explain the history of Italian art,
for example, by the Italian temperament, we should very soon be
confronted by the baffling question why this temperament, for its part,
varied so profoundly at different times and in different parts of the
Apennine Peninsula.

#### VII

The author of the "Essays on the Gogol Period in Russian Literature"
says in one of his commentaries to the first volume of J. S. Mill's work
on political economy: "We would not say that race has no significance
whatever; the development of the natural and historical sciences has not
yet reached such perfection of analysis as to enable us in most cases to
say unreservedly: here that element is absolutely lacking. For all we
know, this steel pen may contain a particle of platinum; it cannot be
denied absolutely. All we can say is that chemical analysis shows that
this pen contains such a quantity of undoubtedly steel particles that
the portion of its composition that might consist of platinum is
perfectly negligible; and even if such a portion did exist, it could be
ignored for all practical purposes\.... As far as practical action is
concerned, you may treat this pen as you would steel pens in general. In
just the same way, pay no attention in practical affairs to people's
race; treat them simply as people\.... It may be that the race of a
nation did have some influence in determining that its state today is
what it is, and no other; it cannot be denied absolutely, historical
analysis has not yet achieved mathematical and absolute accuracy; like
present-day chemical analysis, it still leaves a small, a very small,
residuum, which demands more subtle methods of investigation, methods
that are still unavailable in the present state of science. But this
residium is very small. In the determination of the present state of any
nation, such a large part was due to the action of circumstances that
are in no way dependent on inherent tribal characteristics, that even if
such peculiar qualities differing from general human nature do exist,
the place left for their action is very small, immeasurably,
microscopically small."

We were reminded of these words when reading Labriola's views on the
influence of race on the history of man's spiritual development. The
author of the "Essays on the Gogol Period" was interested in the
significance of race chiefly from the practical standpoint, but what he
says should likewise be constantly borne in mind by those who are
engaged in purely theoretical inquiries. Social science will gain
greatly if we at last abandon the bad habit of attributing to race
everything that seems incomprehensible in the spiritual history of a
given nation. It may be that racial characteristics did have some
influence on its history. But this hypothetical influence was probably
so minute that it were better in the interests of the inquiry to regard
it as nonexistent and to consider the peculiarities observed in the
development of the given nation as the product of the special historical
conditions in which that development took place, and not as a result of
the influence of race. Needless to say, in quite a number of cases we
shall be unable to indicate what exactly were the conditions that gave
rise to the peculiarities in which we are interested. But what does not
yield to the methods of scientific investigation to-day may well yield
to them tomorrow. As to references to racial characteristics, they are
inconvenient because they terminate the investigation just at the point
where it should begin. Why is the history of French poetry unlike the
history of German poetry? For a very simple reason: the temperament of
the French nation was such as not to permit of the rise of a Lessing, or
a Schiller, or a Goethe. Well, thanks for the explanation; now it's all
perfectly clear.

Labriola, of course, would have said that nothing was further from his
mind than explanations of this sort, which explain nothing. And that
would be true. Generally speaking, he is fully aware of their utter
futility, and he also knows very well from what side a problem like the
one we have instanced should be approached. But by granting that the
spiritual development of nations is complicated by their racial
characteristics, he ran the risk of leading his readers gravely astray
and betrayed a readiness to make, even if only in minor particulars,
certain concessions to the old way of thinking that are prejudicial to
social science. It is against such concessions that our remarks are
directed.

When we say that the view we are contesting as to the influence of race
on the history of ideologies is an old one, it is not without good
reason. It is nothing but a variation of a theory which was very
prevalent in the last century, and which endeavoured to explain the
whole course of history by the characteristics of human nature. This
theory is absolutely incompatible with the materialist conception of
history. According to the new view, the nature of social man changes as
social relations change. Consequently, the general characteristics of
human nature can offer no explanation of history. But although an ardent
and convinced believer in the materialist conception of history,
Labriola also granted -- if only in a very small degree -- some truth to
the old view. But it is not for nothing that the Germans say: "Wer A
sagt, muss auch B sagen." Having granted truth to the old view in one
instance, Labriola had to grant it in others too. Need it be said that
this combination of two diametrically opposite views was bound to impair
the harmony of his world outlook?

#### VIII

The organisation of any given society is determined by the state of its
productive forces. As this state changes, the social organisation is
bound sooner or later to change too. Consequently, it is in a state of
unstable equilibrium wherever the social productive forces are
developing. Labriola quite rightly remarks that it is this instability,
together with the social movements and the struggle of social classes to
which it gives rise, that preserves man from mental stagnation.
Antagonism is the principal cause of progress, he says, repeating the
thought of a very well-known German economist. But right away he makes a
reservation. It would be a great mistake, in his opinion, to suppose
that men always and in all cases have a proper understanding of their
situation and clearly perceive the social tasks with which it confronts
them. "To suppose that," he says, "is to suppose the improbable and,
indeed, the unreal."

We would request the reader to pay careful attention to this
reservation. Labriola develops his thought as follows:

"Forms of law, political acts and attempts at social organisation were,
and they still are, sometimes fortunate, sometimes mistaken, that is to
say, disproportionate and unsuitable. History is full of errors; and
this means that if all were necessary, granted the relative intelligence
of those who have to solve a difficulty or to find a solution for a
given problem, if everything in it had a sufficient reason, yet
everything in it is not reasonable, in the sense which the optimists
give to this word. To state it more fully, the determining causes of all
changes, that is to say the modified economic conditions, have ended,
and end, by causing to be found, sometimes through tortuous ways, the
suitable forms of law, the appropriate political orders and the more or
less perfect means of social adjustment. But it must not be thought that
the instinctive wisdom of the reasoning animal has been manifested, or
is manifested, definitely and simply, in the complete and clear
understanding of all situations, and that we have left only the very
simple task of following the deductive road from the economic situation
to all the rest. Ignorance -- which, in its turn, may be explained -- is
an important reason for the manner in which history has proceeded; and,
to ignorance we must add the brutishness which is never completely
subdued, and all the passions, and all the injustices, and the various
forms of corruption, which were and are the necessary product of a
society organised in such a way that, in it, the domination of man over
man is inevitable.

From this domination falsehood, hypocrisy, presumption and baseness were
and are inseparable. We may, without being utopians, foresee as we do in
fact foresee, the coming of a society which, developing from the present
society and from its very contrasts by the laws inherent in its historic
development, will end in an association without class antagonisms\...But
that is the future and it is neither the present nor the past\...
Regulated production will eliminate from life the element of chance
which, thus far, has been revealed in history as a multiform cause of
accidents and incidents." There is a good deal of truth in all this.
But, fantastically interwoven with error, truth itself here assumes the
form of a not altogether felicitous paradox.

Labriola is undoubtedly right when he says that men do not always by far
have a clear understanding of their social situation and are not always
properly aware of the social tasks to which it gives rise. But when, on
this basis, he talks of ignorance or superstition as being the
historical cause of many forms of social life and many customs, be
himself unwittingly reverts to the view point of the enlighteners of the
eighteenth century.

Before speaking of ignorance as an important reason "for the manner in
which history has proceeded," he should have defined the precise sense
in which this word may here be used. It would be a great mistake to
think that this is self-evident. No, it is far from being as evident or
as simple as it seems. Take France of the eighteenth century as an
example. All intelligent representatives of the third estate had a
burning desire for liberty and equality. In furtherance of this aim they
demanded the abolition of many antiquated social institutions. But the
abolition of these institutions implied the triumph of capitalism,
which, as we now know very well, can scarcely be called the kingdom of
liberty and equality. It may therefore be said that the lofty aim of the
philosophers of the last century was not attained. It may likewise be
said that the philosophers were unable to indicate the means for its
attainment; and they may therefore be accused of ignorance, as they
actually were by many utopian socialists.

Labriola himself is astonished at the contradiction between the real
economic tendencies in France in those days and the ideals of its
thinkers. "A singular spectacle and a singular contrast!" he exclaims.
But what is there singular in it? And wherein lay the "ignorance" of the
French enlighteners? Was it in the fact that their idea of the means of
achieving universal happiness was not the same as ours today? But, after
all, there could be no question of such means in those days -- they had
not yet been created by man's historical movement, or, more correctly by
the development of his productive forces. Read Malby's "Doutes, proposes
aux philosophies economistes," read Morelli's "Code de la nature," and
you will find that in so far as these writers differed with the great
majority of the enlighteners as to the conditions of human happiness,
and in so far as they dreamed of the abolition of private property,
they, firstly, came into obvious and crying contradiction with the most
vital and general needs of the people of their times, and, secondly,
vaguely conscious of this, they themselves regarded their dreams as
utterly unrealisable. And, therefore, we once more ask -- wherein lay
the ignorance of the enlighteners? Was it in the fact that, while
realising the social needs of their times and indicating the proper
means of satisfying them (abolition of the old privileges, etc.), they
attached an entirely exaggerated significance to these means, that is,
as a way towards universal happiness? That is not such a preposterous
ignorance; and, taking the practical view, it must even be admitted that
it had its uses, for the more the enlighteners believed in the universal
value of the reforms they demanded, the more energetically they were
bound to fight for them.

Undoubtedly, the enlighteners betrayed ignorance in not being able to
find the thread connecting their views and aspirations with the economic
condition of France at that period, and not even suspecting that such a
thread existed. They looked upon themselves as exponents of absolute
truth. We know today that there is no such thing as absolute truth, that
everything is relative, that everything is dependent on the conditions
of time and place; but precisely for that reason, we should be very
cautious in judging the "ignorance" of various historical periods. Their
ignorance, to the extent that it is manifested in their characteristic
social movements, aspirations and ideals, is also relative.

#### IX

How does law arise? It may be said that all law represents the
supersession or modification of an older law or custom. Why are old
customs superseded? Because they cease to conform to the new
"conditions," that is, to the new actual relations in which men stand
towards each other in the social process of production. Primitive
communism disappeared owing to the development of productive forces.
However, productive forces develop but gradually. Hence the new actual
relations of man to man in the social process of production also develop
but gradually. And hence, too, the restrictiveness of the old laws or
customs, and, consequently, the need to provide a corresponding legal
expression of the new actual (economic) relations of men, also develop
but gradually. The instinctive wisdom of the reasoning animal usually
follows in the wake of these actual changes. If old laws hamper a
section of society in attaining its material aims, in satisfying its
urgent wants, it will infallibly, and with the greatest ease, become
conscious of their restrictiveness: this requires very little more
intelligence than is necessary for the consciousness that tight shoes or
heavy weapons are uncomfortable. But, of course, from being conscious of
the restrictiveness of an existing law to consciously striving to
abolish it is a very far cry. At first men simply try to get round it in
each particular case. Let us recall what used to happen in our country
in large peasant families, when, under the influence of nascent
capitalism, new sources of earnings arose which were not equal for all
members of the family. The customary family code thereupon became
restrictive for the lucky ones who earned more than the others. But it
was not so easy for these lucky ones to make up their minds to revolt
against the old custom, and they did not do so all at once. For a long
time they simply resorted to subterfuge, concealing part of their
earnings from the elders. But the new economic system grew gradually
stronger, and the old family life more and more shaken: those members of
the family who were interested in its abolition grew bolder and bolder;
sons more and more frequently separated off from the common household,
and in the end the old custom disappeared and was replaced by a new
custom, arising out of the new conditions, the new actual relations, the
new economics of society.

Man's cognition of his situation more or less lags as a rule behind the
development of the new actual relations which cause that situation to
change. But it does keep in the wake of the actual relations. Where
man's conscious striving for the abolition of old institutions and the
establishment of a new legal system is weak, there the way for the new
system has not yet been properly paved by the economics of the society.
In other words, in history, lack of clear cognition -- "the blunders of
immature thought," "ignorance" -- not infrequently signifies only one
thing, namely, that the object to be cognised, that is, the new, nascent
things, is still but poorly developed. And obviously, ignorance of this
kind -- lack of knowledge or understanding of what does not yet exist,
of what is still in process of becoming -- is only relative ignorance.

There is another kind of ignorance -- ignorance of nature. That may be
called absolute ignorance. Its criterion is nature's power over man. And
as the development of productive forces signifies the increasing power
of man over nature, it is clear that any increase in productive forces
implies a diminution in absolute ignorance. Natural phenomena which man
does not understand and therefore cannot control give rise to various
kinds of superstition. At a certain stage of social development,
superstitions become closely interwoven with man's moral and legal
ideas, to which they then lend a peculiar hue. (Mr. M. Kovalevsky, in
his "Law and Custom in the Caucasus," says: "An examination of the
religious beliefs and superstitions of the Ishavs leads us to conclude
that, beneath the official cover of Orthodox religion, this people is
still at the stage of development which Tylor has so happily called
animism. This stage, as we know, is usually marked by the decided
subordination of both social morality and law to religion." (Vol. II, p.
82.) But the fact of the matter is that, according to Tylor, primitive
animism has no influence either on morals or on law. At this stage of
development "there is no reciprocal relation between morality and law,
or else this relation is only embryonic\... The animism of the savage is
almost completely exempt from that moral element which in the eyes of
civilised man is the essence of every practical religion\.... Moral laws
have their own special foundation, etc." Hence it would be more correct
to say that religious superstitions become interwoven with moral and
legal ideas only at a certain, and relatively high, stage of social
development. We very much regret that we are unable from considerations
of space to show here how this is explained by modern materialism.) In
the process of the struggle -- called forth by the development of the
new actual relations of men in the social process of production --
religious views often play a very important part. Both the innovators
and the conservatives invoke the aid of the gods, placing various
institutions under their protection or even claiming that they are an
expression of divine will. It goes without saying that the Eumenides,
whom the ancient Greeks regarded as the upholders of the mother right,
did as little in its defence as Minerva did for the triumph of the power
of the father, which was supposedly so dear to her heart. Men simply
wasted their time and effort in calling upon the aid of gods and
fetishes; but the ignorance which made belief in the Eumenides possible
did not prevent the Greek conservatives of the time from realising that
the old legal system (or, more precisely, the old customary law) was a
better guarantee of their interests. Similarly, the superstition that
permitted the innovators to base their hopes on Minerva did not prevent
them from realising the inconvenience of the old order of life.

The use of the wedge in the cutting of wood was unknown to the Dayaks of
Borneo. When the Europeans introduced it, the native authorities
solemnly banned its use. That evidently was a proof of their ignorance,
for what could be more senseless than refusing to use a tool that helps
to lighten labour? But just think a little, and you win perhaps grant
that there may have been extenuating circumstances. The ban on the
employment of European tools was probably one manifestation of the
struggle against European influences, which were beginning to undermine
the old aboriginal order. The native authorities had a vague
apprehension that if European customs were introduced, not a single
stone of that order would be left standing. For some reason the wedge
was more suggestive in their minds of the destructive power of European
influences than any other European implement. And so we find them
solemnly prohibiting its use. Why precisely was it the wedge that came
to be the symbol of dangerous innovations in their eyes ? To that
question we may furnish a sufficient answer; we do not know why the
wedge associated itself in the minds of the natives with the idea of the
danger that menaced their old form of life; but we can say with
certainty that the natives were perfectly right in fearing for the
stability of their old order. European influences do very rapidly and
very seriously impair -- if not altogether destroy -- the customs of the
savages and barbarians who fall beneath their sway.

Tylor tells us that while the Dayaks publicly condemned the use of the
wedge, they nevertheless used it when they could do so in secret. Here
you have "hypocrisy" added to ignorance. But why? It was evidently due
to a recognition of the advantages of the new method of cutting wood,
accompanied, however, by a fear of public opinion, or of prosecution by
the authorities. Thus we find the instinctive wisdom of the reasoning
animal criticising the very measure for which it itself was responsible.
And it was right in its criticism, for prohibiting the use of European
tools by no means meant eliminating European influences.

We might borrow Labriola's expression and say that in this instance the
Dayaks adopted a measure which was unsuitable and disproportionate to
their situation. We would be perfectly right. And we might add to
Labriola's remark that people very often devise measures that are
disproportionate and unsuitable to their situation. But what follows?
Only that we must try to discover whether some sort of dependence does
not exist between this kind of mistake and the character or degree of
development of man's social relations. Such a dependence undoubtedly
does exist. Labriola says that ignorance may be explained in its turn.
We say: not only can it be explained, but it should be explained, if
social science is capable of becoming a strict science at all. If
"ignorance" may be attributed to social causes, then there is no point
in citing it, there is no point in saying that it explains the enigma
why history proceeded thus and not otherwise. The answer lies not there,
but in the social causes that gave rise to it and lent it one form
rather than another, one character rather than another. Why restrict
your investigation by simply talking about ignorance, which explains
nothing?

Where a scientific conception of history is concerned, for the
investigator to talk of ignorance only testifies to his own ignorance.

#### X

All positive law is a defence of some definite interest. How do these
interests arise? Are they a product of human will and human
consciousness? No, they are created by man's economic relations. Once
they have arisen, interests are reflected in one way or another in man's
consciousness. In order to defend an interest, there must be
consciousness of it. Hence every system of positive law may and should
be regarded as a product of consciousness. It is not man's consciousness
that calls into being the interests that the law protects, and,
consequently, it is not man's consciousness that determines the content
of law; but the state of social consciousness (social psychology) in the
given era does determine the form which the reflection of the given
interest takes in the mind of man. Unless we take the state of the
social consciousness into account we shall be absolutely unable to
explain the history of law.

In this history, it is always essential to draw a careful distinction
between form and content. in its formal aspect, law, like every
ideology, is subject to the influence of all, or at least of some of,
the other ideologies: religious beliefs, philosophical concepts, and so
on. This in itself hinders to some extent -- and sometimes to a very
large extent -- the disclosure of the dependence between men's legal
concepts and their mutual relations in the social process of production.
But that is only half the trouble.

The real trouble is that at different stages of social development a
given ideology is subject to the influences of other ideologies in very
unequal degrees. For example, ancient Egyptian, and partly Roman, law
was under the sway of religion; in more recent history law has developed
(we repeat, and request it to be noted, that we are here speaking of the
formal aspect) under the strong influence of philosophy. Philosophy had
to put up a big fight before it succeeded in eliminating the influence
of religion on law and substituting its own influence. This fight was
nothing but a reflection in the realm of ideas of the social struggle
between the third estate and the clergy, but, nevertheless it greatly
hampered the formation of a correct view of the origin of legal
institutions, for, thanks to it, these institutions seemed to be the
obvious and indubitable product of a struggle between abstract ideas. It
goes without saying that, generally speaking, Labriola perfectly
realises what kind of actual relations are concealed behind such a
conflict of concepts. But when he comes to particulars, he lays down his
materialist weapons in the face of the difficulties of the problem and
considers it possible, as we have seen, to confine oneself to adducing
ignorance or the power of tradition as an explanation. What is more, he
speaks of "symbolism" as the final cause of many customs.

It is true that symbolism has been a factor of no little importance in
the history of certain ideologies. But as the final cause of customs it
will not do at all. Let us take an example like the following. Among the
Ishavs of the Caucasus it is the custom for a woman to cut off her braid
of hair on the death of a brother, but not on the death of her husband.
This is a symbolical act; it is a substitution for the older custom of
self-immolation on the grave of the dead man. But why does the woman
perform this symbolical act on the grave of a brother and not on the
grave of her husband? Mr. Kovalevsky says that this feature "can only be
regarded as a survival from those remote times when the chief of the
clan -- which was united by its real or imaginary descent from a woman,
the foremother of the clan -- was the oldest descendant on the mother's
side, the nearest cognate." It therefore follows that symbolical acts
are comprehensible only when we understand the meaning and origin of the
relations they symbolise. How do these relations arise? The answer to
this question must not be sought, of course, in symbolical acts,
although they may sometimes furnish useful clues. The origin of the
symbolical custom by which a woman cuts off her braid on the grave of a
brother is to be explained by the history of the family; and the
explanation of the history of the family is to be sought in the history
of economic development.

In the case with which we are concerned -- when the woman cuts off her
braid on the grave of a brother -- this rite has survived the form of
kinship to which it owed its origin. There you have an example of that
influence of tradition of which Labriola speaks. But tradition can only
preserve what already exists. It not only fails to explain the origin of
the given rite or of the given form in general, but even fails to
explain its preservation. Force of tradition is a force of inertia. When
examining the history of ideologies we are often constrained to ask
ourselves why a particular rite or custom should have survived when not
only the relations to which it owed its origin, but other cognate
customs or rites which originated in the same relations, disappeared.
That is equivalent to asking why the destructive effect of the new
relations spared just this particular rite or custom while eliminating
others. To answer this question by talking about the force of tradition
is nothing more than reiterating the question in an affirmative form.
How are we to get out of the difficulty? By turning to social
psychology.

Old customs begin to disappear and old rites to break down when men
enter into new reciprocal relations. The conflict of social interests
finds expression in a conflict between the new customs and rites and the
old. No symbolical rite or custom, taken by itself, can influence the
development of the new relations either positively or negatively. If the
conservatives passionately uphold the old customs, it is because in
their minds the idea of an advantageous, precious and customary social
system is firmly associated with the idea of these customs. If the
innovators detest and scoff at these customs, it is because in their
minds the idea of these customs is associated with the idea of
restrictive, disadvantageous and objectionable social relations.
Consequently, the whole point lies in an association of ideas. When we
find that a particular rite has survived not only the relations which
gave rise to it, but also cognate rites that arose from these same
relations, we have to conclude that in the minds of the innovators it
was not so strongly associated with the idea of the old, detested order
as other customs were. Why so? To answer this question is sometimes
easy, but at others it is quite impossible for lack of the necessary
psychological data. But even when we are constrained to admit that the
question is unanswerable -- at least, in the existing state of our
knowledge -- we must nevertheless remember that the point does not lie
in the force of tradition, but in definite associations of ideas
produced by definite actual relations of men in society.

The history of ideologies is to a large extent to be explained by the
rise, modification and breakdown of associations of ideas under the
influence of the rise, modification and breakdown of definite
combinations of social forces. Labriola has not given this side of the
question all the attention it deserves. This is clearly shown in his
view of philosophy.

#### XI

According to Labriola, in its historical development, philosophy partly
merges with theology and partly represents the development of human
thought in relation to the objects which come within the field of our
experience. In so far as it is distinct from theology, it is occupied
with the same problems as scientific investigation, in the proper sense
of the term. In doing so, it either strives to anticipate science, by
offering its own conjectural solutions, or simply summarises and submits
to further logical elaboration the solutions already found by science.
That, of course, is true. But it is not the whole truth. Take modern
philosophy. Descartes and Bacon held that it was one of the most
important functions of philosophy to multiply our scientific knowledge
in order to increase man's power over nature. We accordingly find that
in their time philosophy was occupied with the same problems as formed
the theme of the natural silences. It might, therefore, be thought that
the solutions it furnished were determined by the state of natural
science. But that is not quite the case. Descartes' attitude to certain
philosophical questions, as, for example, the question of the soul,
cannot be explained by the state of the natural sciences in those days;
but this attitude can be well explained by the social state of France at
the time.

Descartes made a strict distinction between the sphere of faith and the
sphere of reason. His philosophy did not contradict Catholicism; on the
contrary, it endeavoured to confirm some of its dogmas by new arguments.
In this respect it was a good reflection of the sentiments of Frenchmen
at that period. After the prolonged and sanguinary conflicts of the
sixteenth century, a universal desire for peace and order arose in
France. In the realm of politics, this desire was expressed in a
sympathy for the absolute monarchy; in the realm of thought, it was
expressed in a certain religious tolerance and an anxiety to avoid all
controversial questions that might recall the recent civil war. These
were religious questions. So that they might be avoided, a line of
demarcation had to be drawn between the realm of faith and the realm of
reason. That, as we have said, was what Descartes did. But this
demarcation was not enough. social peace demanded that philosophy
solemnly admit the truth of religious dogma. And through Descartes this,
too, was done. That is why the system of this thinker, although at least
three-quarters materialistic, was sympathetically greeted by many
ecclesiastics.

A logical sequel to the philosophy of Descartes was the materialism of
La Mettrie. But idealistic conclusions might have been drawn from it
just as readily. And if the French did not do so, there was a very
definite social reason for it, namely the hostility of the third estate
to the clergy of eighteenth-century France. Whereas the philosophy of
Descartes sprang from a desire for social peace, the materialism of the
eighteenth century was the herald of new social upheavals.

It will be seen from this alone that the development of philosophical
thought in France is to be explained not only by the development of
natural science, but also by the direct influence of developing social
relations. This is revealed even more clearly when the history of French
philosophy is carefully examined from another angle.

Descartes, as we already know, held that the chief purpose of philosophy
was to increase man's power over nature. The French materialists of the
eighteenth century held that their prime duty was to replace certain old
concepts by new ones, on which normal social relations might be erected.
The French materialists made practically no mention of increasing the
social forces of production. That is a highly important difference. What
was it due to?

The development of productive forces in France in the eighteenth century
was being severely hampered by the antiquated social relations of
production, by archaic social institutions. The abolition of these
institutions was absolutely essential for the further development of the
productive forces. And it was in their abolition that the whole meaning
of the social movement in France of that period lay. In philosophy, the
necessity for this abolition found expression in a struggle against
antiquated abstract concepts which had sprung from the antiquated
relations of production.

In the time of Descartes these relations were still by no means
antiquated; like the social institutions which had sprung from them,
they were not hindering but facilitating the development of productive
forces. Hence it never occurred to anybody to abolish them. That is why
philosophy set itself the direct task of increasing productive forces,
this being the prime practical task of the nascent bourgeois society.

We say this in objection to Labriola. But it may be that our objection
is superfluous, that he merely expressed himself inaccurately, while at
bottom being in agreement with us. We should be very glad if it were so;
it is pleasant to have intelligent people agree with you.

And if he did not agree with us, we would regretfully repeat that this
intelligent man is mistaken. In doing so we might be furnishing our
subjectivist old gentlemen with an excuse for one more jibe to the
effect that it is difficult to distinguish the "authentic" adherents of
the materialist conception of history from the "unauthentic." But our
reply to the subjectivist old gentlemen would be: "they are jeering at
themselves." Anybody who has properly grasped the meaning of a
philosophical system can easily distinguish its true adherents from the
false. If our friends the subjectivists had taken the trouble to ponder
over the materialist explanation of history, they would have known
themselves who are the authentic "disciples," and who are the impostors
that take the great name in vain. But since they have not taken that
trouble and never will, they must of necessity remain in perplexity.
That is the common fate of all who fall behind and drop out of the
marching army of progress.

Incidentally, a word about progress. Do you recall, dear reader, the
days when the "metaphysicians" were abused, when the textbooks of
philosophy were "Lewes" and partly Mr. Spasovich's "manual of criminal
law," and when, for the benefit of "progressive" readers, special
"formulas" were invented, so simple that even a child of tender age
might understand them? What glorious days those were! But they are gone,
they have vanished like smoke. " Metaphysics " is again beginning to
attract Russian minds, "Lewes" is going out of use, and the celebrated
formulas of progress are being universally forgotten. Today it is very
rare even for the subjectivist sociologists themselves -- now grown so
"venerable " and "hoary" -- to recall these formulas. It is noteworthy,
for instance, that nobody recalled them even when there was apparently a
most urgent need for them, namely when the argument was raging whether
we could turn from the path of capitalism to the path of utopia.

Our utopians used to hide behind the skirts of a man who, while
advocating his fantastic "popular industry," at the same time claimed to
be an adherent of modern dialectical materialism. Dialectical
materialism, turned into a sophistry, thus proved to be the only weapon
in the hands of the utopians worthy of any attention. In view of this,
it would be very useful to discuss how "progress" is regarded by the
adherents of the materialist conception of history. To be sure, this
question has been repeatedly discussed in our press. But, firstly, the
modern materialist view of progress is still not clear to many, and,
secondly, in Labriola's book it is illustrated by some very happy
examples and explained by some very correct arguments, although,
unfortunately, ft is not expounded systematically and fully. Labriola's
arguments should be supplemented. We hope to do so at a more convenient
opportunity. Meanwhile it is time to draw to a close.

But before laying down our pen, we would once more request the reader to
remember that what is known as economic materialism, against which the
objections -- and very unconvincing ones at that -- of our friends the
Narodniks and subjectivists are directed, has very little in common with
the modern materialist conception of history. From the standpoint of the
theory of factors, human society is a heavy load which various "forces"
-- morality, law, economics, etc -- drag each in its own way along the
path of history. From the standpoint of the modern materialist
conception of history, the whole thing assumes a different aspect. It
turns out that the historical "factors" are mere abstractions, and when
the mist surrounding them is dispelled, it becomes clear that men do not
make several distinct histories -- the history of law, the history of
morals, the history of philosophy, etc. -- but only one history, the
history of their own social relations, which are determined by the state
of the productive forces in each particular period. What is known as the
ideologies is nothing but a multiform reflection in the minds of men of
this single and indivisible history.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 4.12.2008
