---
layout: default
title: 
---
Nikolai Bukharin 1922

### Economic Organization in Soviet Russia

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[First Published]{.info}: *Die Rote Fahne*, March 8, 1922;\
[Source]{.info}: *The Living Age*, July-September 1922;\
[CopyLeft]{.info}: [Creative
Commons](../../../../admin/legal/cc/by-sa.htm) (Attribute & ShareAlike)
marxists.org 2006;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Brian Reid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PEOPLE usually call the economic system now evolving in Russia 'state
capitalism'. Our economic relations, however, are so complex that they
cannot be embraced in a single concept. The idea, state capitalism,
moreover, does not have the same meaning in the literature of political
economy that it has recently assumed in Russia. I propose to describe,
therefore, the different economic forms that are now developing in our
country.

*Enterprises of the Proletarian Government.* -- These embrace the
enterprises nationalized by the Proletarian Government. They are a state
monopoly. However, they are not state capitalist monopolies, since, in
case of the latter, the bourgeoisie, as controllers of the government,
would be the true owners of the enterprise. In our case, the working
classes are the owners of nationalized undertakings. Since forms of
production are characterized by ownership, it is perfectly clear that we
cannot designate enterprises belonging to a laboring man's government as
state capitalist undertakings. On the other side, these enterprises are
not Socialist units of production in the strict sense of the word; for a
Socialist economy, it goes without saying, assumes a complete and
harmonious system of production and distribution. In Russia, however,
especially under the conditions amid which we are now working, a
systematic and harmonious plan of production, accommodated to the
consumptive demands of the country, is of minor significance. The
circumstances that our undertakings copy the methods of capitalist
enterprises, pay wages, and sell their products in the market, do not
make them capitalist so far as ownership is concerned.

*Mixed enterprises.* -- These include undertakings partly owned by the
Proletarian Government and partly by private capitalists. In these
so-called mixed enterprises part of the shares belong to the Government;
the other part may belong to foreign or Russian owners. It is perfectly
clear that such mixed enterprises are neither state industries nor
purely capitalist industries. Both capitalists and the Workers'
Government own stock in them. The Workers' Government receives part of
the profits, the private investors receive the remainder. In the course
of the future history of such undertakings, there will be a constant
struggle between the Government and the private owners to control them.
As the proletariat becomes more competent to administer industry, the
importance of private ownership will decline. If we make no blunders,
the Government will acquire a growing share in these undertakings, in
the same way in which, in a capitalist country, great banks and trusts
control a vast number of smaller undertakings.

*Concessions and leased enterprises.* -- As a rule, enterprises of this
class belong to the Workers' Government. However, this is not
necessarily the case, for the owners of concessions and leaseholders may
import machinery, erect new buildings, and otherwise add to and extend
their plants, and thus become owners of a part of them. However, in a
majority of cases the new capital will be furnished by the Workers'
Government. In this instance, also, the profits will be divided into two
parts: the fluctuations of the class-struggle will be recorded in the
relative shares of the Workers' Government and of the private investors
in this profit.

*Private enterprises regulated by the Proletarian Government.* -- These
are private enterprises in the strict sense of the word -- enterprises
whose only owner is a capitalist or a group of capitalists. The growth
of such enterprises will be regulated more or less by the national bank,
the national credit system, the national currency, and by direct
legislation of the Proletarian Government.

*Small private shops and groups of such shops.* -- These include little
economic units, small producers, mechanics' shops, and peasant industry,
which are the subsoil from which private capital springs. These business
units contain all the elements of the pre-capitalist period. This is
particularly true of those in our Eastern border-territory. Naturally
freedom of trade, assuming the presence of a relatively large number of
small independent producers, will inevitably lead to an extension of
capitalist production and the gradual formation of important groups of
capitalists, which will be in a position to compete with purely state
enterprises and enterprises of the mixed type mentioned above.

These are roughly all the forms of production at present existing in the
territory of the Soviet Government.

I cannot leave the subject here without referring to a question of
immense importance. Russia's whole economic structure, viewed as a unit,
faces in the world-market great capitalist systems. This creates the
following situation. Conditions in the world-market may cause part of
the excess value created in Russia, that created by strictly government
enterprises, to flow into the pockets of the foreign bourgeoisie.
Payments that we have to make to foreign Governments, and the losses
that we must incur, in consequence of the weakness of our whole social
organization when we deal with other countries, will take this form.
Apparently, therefore, even enterprises that are exclusively in the
hands of the working people will have to yield part of their profits to
others. This situation, due to Russia's temporarily weak position in
world-economy, is absolutely no proof that our government industry has a
capitalist character. It merely proves that our processes of economic
evolution are also steps forward in the class-struggle. In Russia, this
battle has taken the form of competition for more liberal concessions
and leases, of a struggle to increase production and to obtain a share
of real control that private owners have in undertakings of the mixed
type.

Abroad, however, this struggle manifests itself as a contest for
advantageous commercial treaties, tariffs, loan conditions, and bargains
between individual firms and state enterprises in Russia and private
firms abroad.

However, the share the Workers' Government will take of the excess value
produced by the industries: of Soviet Russia is bound to grow. But in
case we are defeated in the class-struggle, capitalists at home and
abroad will reduce the share of the workingman to nothing.

The economic literature of Western Europe conceives state capitalism as
the higher form of capitalism in the hands of a bourgeois government; as
the most complete and powerful organization conceivable of the
capitalistic classes.

Naturally our state capitalism is diametrically *opposite to* this. But
naturally, too, the kind of state capitalism we have in Russia can
easily be converted into the kind of state capitalism conceived under a
bourgeois government in case the laboring classes lose power in Russia.
We are confident, however, that this will not occur.

If the proletariat wins in this long and arduous battle, the most
capable groups of capitalists will have served during the period of
incubation of the new economic system as capitalist experts and thus,
against their will, they will have labored for the benefit of the
working classes.

The great diversity of enterprises in the Soviet Republic is
characteristic of our economic life at present and must be constantly
kept in mind.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Nikolai Bukharin Archive](../../index.htm)
