---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Compositors and the Linotype

### (30 September 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Workers' Republic**, 30 September 1899.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.17 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have ere now pointed out in the columns of the **Workers' Republic**
that the ordinary capitalist press can find time and space in its pages
to chronicle anything and everything, except those matters which are of
the most importance to the wealth producers. In considering this
phenomenon we are often at a loss to determine whether such neglect of
matters affecting the social welfare of the vast majority of the race is
malice aforethought, is the product of a desire to please the capitalist
paymaster to whom the journalist has sold his pen -- and his conscience,
or is only the offspring of a real, though disgraceful, ignorance upon
all such matters. We might be inclined to attribute this boycott of the
graver issues of life to the latter cause, ignorance, rather than to the
former, deliberate malice, were we not deterred from taking this
charitable view by remembering the fact that the journalists in question
can always be depended upon to gravely undertake to act as
instructors-general to the working class, during every crisis in our
history, be the crisis political or industrial. As the assumption of the
functions of instructor precludes the possibility of taking shelter
behind the plea of ignorance we feel constrained to regard capitalist
journalism as an effective weapon in the hands of a well-informed, but
utterly unscrupulous, enemy, rather than merely as an unbiassed, but
ill-informed, recorder of passing events.

Those reflections are suggested to us by a consideration of the absence
from the columns of our Irish newspapers of all reference to the present
state of the printing trade, and especially to that branch of it
represented by the caseroom, viz., the compositors. This once
flourishing and all-powerful trade is now practically ruined. In Dublin
alone, we are informed, there are something like 140 members on the
books as unemployed [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}, and a like state of affairs is
also reported, not only from every other centre of the trade in Ireland,
but from Great Britain and America. In fact, in the last named countries
the outlook for compositors is even blacker than at home, as the
introduction of linotype machines has set in longer, and is therefore at
the present time much more general than in Ireland. But a perusal of the
advertising columns of our daily papers will show that scarcely a week
passes without some fresh printing office adopting the machine and
discharging its hand compositors, so that we may fairly expect that in a
very short time, as far at least as newspaper work is concerned,
hand-setting of type will only be a memory. The effects of such a change
will be far-reaching and, for the men, disastrous. No trade union can
long stand the strain on its resources of such a large proportion of its
members as are now being thrown upon the out-of-work funds of the
Typographical Society. Interested officials, or optimistic members in
employment, may shut their eyes to the danger or question the
inevitableness of the coming crash, but the most far-seeing and wisest
of the craft readily recognise the gravity of the approaching crisis,
and readily recognise also that no power within the scope of trade union
action can avert it.

We have said that the near future will possibly see the entire
displacement of hand-setting for newspaper work, and the members of the
Typographical readily concede the point, but what they do not so readily
concede is that hand-setting for jobbing work is equally threatened with
ruin. Their failure to perceive this is due to their inability to
conceive how the intricate, and at times almost artistic, work involved
in display advertisements and certain kinds of book work, etc. could be
satisfactorily performed by the machine. We readily grant that in its
present state the linotype could not perform such work, but we see no
reason why the perfectioning of the machine to the point where it could
perform such work should be considered impossible when we bear in mind
the wonderful fact of the machine itself. Even as some optimistic
compositors now say that a machine can never perform jobbing work, so a
few years ago most compositors thought, and asserted, that a machine
could never satisfactorily perform compositor work of any description.
We have seen the one dream rudely shattered, may we not also see the
other as ruthlessly dispelled? But, apart altogether from the danger
involved in a further development of the powers of the linotype, there
is another danger arising out of the wholesale displacement of news
hands which directly affects the prospects of the whole trade. It lies:
First, in the exhaustion of the funds of the Trade Union, and consequent
weakening of its power of resistance to the encroachments of the
employers: Second, in the competition for work on the part of the
cleverer of the news hands, who could, in a few months at most, adapt
themselves to the requirements of jobbing work: Third, all apprentices
to the trade will henceforth betake themselves to the acquirement of the
technical knowledge necessary for the practice of the more intricate
forms of the typographical art: Fourth, that because of all the
foregoing reasons there will soon be a practically unlimited supply of
labour seeking employment at the one branch of the trade not yet touched
by the linotype, and in face of such a congestion of the labour market
no trade union can possibly keep up wages against the downward pressure
of capitalist greed.

We are now speaking of the crisis as if it belonged to the future, but
in a very real sense it is already with us. Some of the most important
printing firms of Dublin have already utilised the linotype to enable
them to completely discard their trade union employees -- Messrs Healy
and Co. furnish a notable instance, other and smaller firms have been
encouraged by their success to follow their example without the aid of
the linotype, and the daily and weekly newspapers have reduced their
staff of hand compositors to such small dimensions that the statement
that these journals are produced by "trade union labour" has no longer
any serious meaning.

In view of this grave state of matters in the printing trade we would
ask our friends of the Typographical what do they mean to do? They must
see that all the miseries that are come upon them are the result of a
logical adherence to the rules of business prescribed by capitalism;
that the master class in all they have done have only acted as their
class interests impelled them, and finally that non-political trade
unionism has no remedy for this intolerable evil. For, what is the evil?
It is the displacement of labour by machinery, the performing by a
machine of work hitherto done by human beings. It is not the machine,
nor its inventor that is at fault. The fault lies in the system which
permits private individuals to own the machine, and use it to destroy
the happiness of the workers, instead of making it the public property
of society, to be used to lessen the labour whilst increasing the
comforts of all. In other words, the machine itself might be a blessing,
but the private ownership of the machine has made it an unmitigated
curse. Thus when the compositor thinks of the linotype let him remember
that it is only as an instrument in the hands of the master class it is
to be execrated; as an instrument in the hands of emancipated Labour it
would be hailed as a glorious achievement for lightening toil and
increasing pleasure.

And remembering this, let them rally to the support of the Socialist
Republican Party, the only party in Ireland which stands for the
interests of the working class, seeking to capture the political power
necessary to make the instruments of Labour the property, not of a
class, but of a free people in a free social order, the Socialist
Republic.

 

### Note

[1.](#f1){#n1} That is, members of the Typographical Society claiming
unemployment benefit from the union.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
