Dialectics of Nature. Frederick Engels (1883)

[]{#001}

# 1. INTRODUCTION

[]{#002}

MODERN natural science, which alone has achieved an all-round systematic
and scientific development, as contrasted with the brilliant
natural-philosophical intuitions of antiquity and the extremely
important but sporadic discoveries of the Arabs, which for the most part
vanished without results -- this modern natural science dates, like all
more recent history, from that mighty epoch which we Germans term the
Reformation, from the national misfortune that overtook us at that time,
and which the French term the Renaissance and the Italians the
Cinquecento, although it is not fully expressed by any of these names.
It is the epoch which had its rise in the last half of the fifteenth
century. Royalty, with the support of the burghers of the towns, broke
the power of the feudal nobility and established the great monarchies,
based essentially on nationality, within which the modern European
nations and modern bourgeois society came to development. And while the
burghers and nobles were still fighting one another, the peasant war in
Germany pointed prophetically to future class struggles, not only by
bringing on to the stage the peasants in revolt -- that was no longer
anything new -- but behind them the beginnings of the modern
proletariat, with the red flag in their hands and the demand for common
ownership of goods on their lips. In the manuscripts saved from the fall
of Byzantium, in the antique statues dug out of the ruins of Rome, a new
world was revealed to the astonished West, that of ancient Greece: the
ghosts of the Middle Ages vanished before its shining forms; Italy rose
to an undreamt-of flowering of art, which seemed like a reflection of
classical antiquity and was never attained again. In Italy, France, and
Germany a new literature arose, the first, modern literature; shortly
afterwards came the classical epochs of English and Spanish literature.
The bounds of the old *orbis terrarum* were pierced. Only now for the
first time was the world really discovered and the basis laid for
subsequent world trade and the transition from handicraft to
manufacture, which in its turn formed the starting-point for modern
large scale industry. The dictatorship of the Church over men\'s minds
was shattered; it was directly cast off by the majority of the Germanic
peoples, who adopted Protestantism, while among the Latins a cheerful
spirit of free thought, taken over from the Arabs and nourished by the
newly-discovered Greek philosophy, took root more and more and prepared
the way for the materialism of the eighteenth century.

[]{#003}

It was the greatest progressive revolution that mankind has so far
experienced, a time which called for giants and produced giants --
giants in power of thought, passion, and character, in universality and
learning. The men who founded the modern rule of the bourgeoisie had
anything but bourgeois limitations. On the contrary, the adventurous
character of the time inspired them to a greater or less degree. There
was hardly any man of importance then living who had not travelled
extensively, who did not command four or five languages, who did not
shine in a number of fields. Leonardo da Vinci was not only a great
painter but also a great mathematician, mechanician, and engineer, to
whom the most diverse branches of physics are indebted for important
discoveries. Albrecht Dürer was painter, engraver, sculptor, and
architect, and in addition invented a system of fortification embodying
many of the ideas that much later were again taken up by Montalembert
and the modern German science of fortification. Machiavelli was
statesman, historian, poet, and at the same time the first notable
military author of modern times. Luther not only cleaned the Augean
stable of the Church but also that of the German language; he created
modern German prose and composed the text and melody of that triumphal
hymn which became the Marseillaise of the sixteenth century. The heroes
of that time had not yet come under the servitude of the division of
labour, the restricting effects of which, with its production of
onesidedness, we so often notice in their successors. But what is
especially characteristic of them is that they almost all pursue their
lives and activities in the midst of the contemporary movements, in the
practical struggle; they take sides and join in the fight, one by
speaking and writing, another with the sword, many with both. Hence the
fullness and force of character that makes them complete men. Men of the
study are the exception -- either persons of second or third rank or
cautious philistines who do not want to burn their fingers.

[]{#004}

At that time natural science also developed in the midst of the general
revolution and was itself thoroughly revolutionary; it had to win in
struggle its right of existence. Side by side with the great Italians
from whom modern philosophy dates, it provided its martyrs for the stake
and the prisons of the Inquisition. And it is characteristic that
Protestants outdid Catholics in persecuting the free investigation of
nature. Calvin had Servetus burnt at the stake when the latter was on
the point of discovering the circulation of the blood, and indeed he
kept him roasting alive during two hours; for the Inquisition at least
it sufficed to have Giordano Bruno simply burnt alive.

[]{#005}

The revolutionary act by which natural science declared its independence
and, as it were, repeated Luther\'s burning of the Papal Bull was the
publication of the immortal work by which Copernicus, though timidly
and, so to speak, only from his deathbed, threw down the gauntlet to
ecclesiastical authority in the affairs of nature. The emancipation of
natural science from theology dates from this act, although the fighting
out of the particular antagonistic claims has dragged out up to our day
and in many minds is still far from completion. Thenceforward, however,
the development of the sciences proceeded with giant strides, and, it
might be said, gained in force in proportion to the square of the
distance (in time) from its point of departure. It was as if the world
were to be shown that henceforth the reciprocal law of motion would be
as valid for the highest product of organic matter, the human mind, as
for inorganic substance.

[]{#006}

The main work in the first period of natural science that now opened lay
in mastering the material immediately at hand. In most fields a start
had to be made from the very beginning. Antiquity had bequeathed Euclid
and the Ptolemaic solar system; the Arabs had left behind the decimal
notation, the beginnings of algebra, the modern numerals, and alchemy;
the Christian Middle Ages nothing at all. Of necessity, in this
situation the most fundamental natural science, the mechanics of
terrestrial and heavenly bodies, occupied first place, and alongside of
it, as handmaiden to it, the discovery and perfecting of mathematical
methods. Great work was achieved here. At the end of the period
characterised by Newton and Linnaeus we find these branches of science
brought to a certain perfection. The basic features of the most
essential mathematical methods were established; analytical geometry by
Descartes especially, logarithms by Napier, and the differential and
integral calculus by Leibniz and perhaps Newton. The same holds good of
the mechanics of rigid bodies, the main laws of which were made clear
once for all. Finally in the astronomy of the solar system Kepler
discovered the laws of planetary movement and Newton formulated them
from the point of view of the general laws of motion of matter. The
other branches of natural science were far removed even from this
preliminary perfection. Only towards the end of the period did the
mechanics of fluid and gaseous bodies receive further treatment. Physics
proper had still not gone beyond its first beginnings, with the
exception of optics, the exceptional progress of which was due to the
practical needs of astronomy. By the phlogistic theory, chemistry for
the first time emancipated itself from alchemy. Geology had not yet gone
beyond the embryonic stage of mineralogy; hence paleontology could not
yet exist at all. Finally, in the field of biology the essential
preoccupation was still with the collection and first sifting of the
immense material, not only botanical and zoological but also anatomical
and even physiological. There could as yet be hardly any talk of the
comparison of the various forms of life, of the investigation of their
geographical distribution and their climatic, etc., living conditions.
Here only botany and zoology arrived at an approximate completion owing
to Linnaeus.

[]{#007}

But what especially characterises this period is the elaboration of a
peculiar general outlook, in which the central point is the view of the
*absolute immutability of nature*. In whatever way nature itself might
have come into being, once present it remained as it was as long as it
continued to exist. The planets and their satellites, once set in motion
by the mysterious \"first impulse\", circled on and on in their
predestined ellipses for all eternity, or at any rate until the end of
all things. The stars remained for ever fixed and immovable in their
places, keeping one another therein by \"universal gravitation\". The
earth had persisted without alteration from all eternity, or,
alternatively, from the first day of its creation. The \"five
continents\" of the present day had always existed, and they had always
had the same mountains, valleys, and rivers, the same climate, and the
same flora and fauna, except in so far as change or cultivation had
taken place at the hand of man. The species of plants and animals had
been established once for all when they came into existence; like
continually produced like, and it was already a good deal for Linnaeus
to have conceded that possibly here and there new species could have
arisen by crossing. In contrast to the history of mankind, which
develops in time, there was ascribed to the history of nature only an
unfolding in space. All change, all development in nature, was denied.
Natural science, so revolutionary at the outset, suddenly found itself
confronted by an out-and-out conservative nature in which even to-day
everything was as it had been at the beginning and in which -- to the
end of the world or for all eternity -- everything would remain as it
had been since the beginning.

[]{#008}

High as the natural science of the first half of the eighteenth century
stood above Greek antiquity in knowledge and even in the sifting of its
material, it stood just as deeply below Greek antiquity in the
theoretical mastery of this material, in the general outlook on nature.
For the Greek philosophers the world was essentially something that had
emerged from chaos, something that had developed, that had come into
being. For the natural scientists of the period that we are dealing with
it was something ossified, something immutable, and for most of them
something that had been created at one stroke. Science was still deeply
enmeshed in theology. Everywhere it sought and found its ultimate resort
in an impulse from outside that was not to be explained from nature
itself. Even if attraction, by Newton pompously baptised as \"universal
gravitation\", was conceived as an essential property of matter, whence
comes the unexplained tangential force which first gives rise to the
orbits of the planets? How did the innumerable varieties of animals and
plants arise? And how, above all, did man arise, since after all it was
certain that he was not present from all eternity? To such questions
natural science only too frequently answered by making the creator of
all things responsible. Copernicus, at the beginning of the period,
writes a letter renouncing theology; Newton closes the period with the
postulate of a divine first impulse. The highest general idea to which
this natural science attained was that of the purposiveness of the
arrangements of nature, the shallow teleology of Wolff, according to
which cats were created to eat mice, mice to he eaten by cats, and the
whole of nature to testify to the wisdom of the creator. It is to the
highest credit of the philosophy of the time that it did not let itself
be led astray by the restricted state of contemporary natural knowledge,
and that -- from Spinoza right to the great French materialists -- it
insisted on explaining the world from the world itself and left the
justification in detail to the natural science of the future.

[]{#009}

I include the materialists of the eighteenth century in this period
because no natural scientific material was available to them other than
that above described. Kant\'s epoch-making work remained a secret to
them, and Laplace came long after them. We should not forget that this
obsolete outlook on nature, although riddled through and through by the
progress of science, dominated the entire first half of the nineteenth
century, and in substance is even now still taught in all schools.
^[1](#p1){#n1}^

[]{#010}

The first breach in this petrified outlook on nature was made not by a
natural scientist but by a philosopher. In 1755 appeared *Kant\'s
Allgemeine Naturgesehichte und Theorie des Himmels \[General Natural
History and Theory of the Heavens\]*. The question of the first impulse
was abolished; the earth and the whole solar system appeared as
something that had come into being in the course of time. If the great
majority of the natural scientists had had a little less of the
repugnance to thinking that Newton expressed in the warning: \"Physics,
beware of metaphysics!\", they would have been compelled from this
single brilliant discovery of Kant\'s to draw conclusions that would
have spared them endless deviations and immeasurable amounts of time and
labour wasted in false directions. For Kant\'s discovery contained the
point of departure for all further progress. If the earth were something
that had come into being, then its present geological, geographical, and
climatic state, and its plants and animals likewise, must be something
that had come into being; it must have had a history not only of
co-existence in space but also of succession in time. If at once further
investigations had been resolutely pursued in this direction, natural
science would now be considerably further advanced than it is. But what
good could come of philosophy? Kant\'s work remained without immediate
results, until many years later Laplace and Herschel expounded its
contents and gave them a deeper foundation, thereby gradually bringing
the \"nebular hypothesis\" into favour. Further discoveries finally
brought it victory; the most important of these were: the proper motion
of the fixed stars, the demonstration of a resistant medium in universal
space, the proof furnished by spectral analysis of the chemical identity
of the matter of the universe and the existence of such glowing nebular
masses as Kant had postulated.

[]{#011}

It is, however, permissible to doubt whether the majority of natural
scientists would so soon have become conscious of the contradiction of a
changing earth that bore immutable organisms, had not the dawning
conception that nature does not just *exist*, but *comes into being and
passes away*, derived support from another quarter. Geology arose and
pointed out, not only the terrestrial strata formed one after another
and deposited one upon another, but also the shells and skeletons of
extinct animals and the trunks, leaves, and fruits of no longer existing
plants contained in these strata. It had finally to be acknowledged that
not only the earth as a whole but also its present surface and the
plants and animals living on it possessed a history in time. At first
the acknowledgement occurred reluctantly enough. Cuvier\'s theory of the
revolutions of the earth was revolutionary in phrase and reactionary in
substance. In place of a single divine creation, he put a whole series
of repeated acts of creation, making the miracle an essential natural
agent. Lyell first brought sense into geology by substituting for the
sudden revolutions due to the moods of the creator the gradual effects
of a slow transformation of the earth. ^[2](#p2){#n2}^

[]{#012}

Lyell\'s theory was even more incompatible than any of its predecessors
with the assumption of constant organic species. Gradual transformation
of the earth\'s surface and of all conditions of life led directly to
gradual transformation of the organisms and their adaptation to the
changing environment, to the mutability of species. But tradition is a
power not only in the Catholic Church but also in natural science. For
years, Lyell himself did not see the contradiction, and his pupils still
less. This is only to be explained by the division of labour that had
meanwhile become dominant in natural science, which more or less
restricted each person to his special sphere, there being only a few
whom it did not rob of a comprehensive view. Meanwhile physics had made
mighty advances, the results of which were summed up almost
simultaneously by three different persons in the year 1842, an
epoch-making year for this branch of natural investigation. Mayer in
Heilbronn and Joule in Manchester demonstrated the transformation of
heat into mechanical energy and of mechanical energy into heat. The
determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat put this result
beyond question. Simultaneously, by simply working up the separate
physical results already arrived at, Grove - not a natural scientist by
profession, but an English lawyer -- proved that all so-called physical
energy, mechanical energy, heat, light, electricity magnetism, indeed
even so-called chemical energy, become transformed into one another
under definite conditions without any loss of energy occurring, and so
proved *post factum* along physical lines Descartes\' principle that the
quantity of motion present in the world is constant. With that the
special physical energies, the as it were immutable \"species\" of
physics, were resolved into variously differentiated forms of the motion
of matter, convertible into one another according to definite laws. The
fortuitousness of the existence of a number of physical energies was
abolished from science by the proof of their interconnections and
transitions. Physics, like astronomy before it, had arrived at a result
that necessarily pointed to the eternal cycle of matter in motion as the
ultimate reality.

[]{#013}

The wonderfully rapid development of chemistry, since Lavoisier, and
especially since Dalton, attacked the old ideas of nature from another
aspect. The preparation by inorganic means of compounds that hitherto
had been produced only in the living organism proved that the laws of
chemistry have the same validity for organic as for inorganic bodies,
and to a large extent bridged the gulf between inorganic and organic
nature, a gulf that even Kant regarded as for ever impassable.

[]{#014}

Finally, in the sphere of biological research also the scientific
journeys and expeditions that had been systematically organised since
the middle of the previous century, the more thorough exploration of the
European colonies in all parts of the world by specialists living there,
and further the progress of paleontology, anatomy, and physiology in
general, particularly since the systematic use of the microscope and the
discovery of the cell, had accumulated so much material that the
application of the comparative method became possible and at the same
time indispensable. On the one hand the conditions of life of the
various floras and faunas were determined by means of comparative
physical geography; on the other hand the various organisms were
compared with one another according to their homologous organs, and this
not only in the adult condition but at all stages of development. The
more deeply and exactly this research was carried on, the more did the
rigid system of an ![Amphioxus (Sheepshead
Lamprey)](amphioxus.gif){align="right" width="280" height="160"
hspace="10"} immutable, fixed organic nature crumble away at its touch.
Not only did the separate species of plants and animals become more and
more inextricably intermingled, but animals turned up, such as
*Amphioxus* and *Lepidosiren*, that made a mockery of all previous
classification, and finally organisms were encountered of which it was
not possible to say whether they belonged to the plant or animal
kingdom. More and more the gaps in the ![Lepidosiren (South American
Lungfish)](lungface.jpg){align="left" width="150" height="115"
hspace="10"} paleontological record were filled up, compelling even the
most reluctant to acknowledge the striking parallelism between the
evolutionary history of the organic world as a whole and that of the
individual organism, the Ariadne\'s thread that was to lead the way out
of the labyrinth in which botany and zoology appeared to have become
more and more deeply lost. It was characteristic that, almost
simultaneously with Kant\'s attack on the eternity of the solar system,
C. F. Wolff in 1759 launched the first attack on the fixity of species
and proclaimed the theory of descent. But what in his case was still
only a brilliant anticipation took firm shape in the hands of Oken,
Lamarck, Baer, and was victoriously carried through by Darwin in 1859,
exactly a hundred years later. Almost simultaneously it was established
that protoplasm and the cell, which had already been shown to be the
ultimate morphological constituents of all organisms, occurred
independently as the lowest forms of organic life. This not only reduced
the gulf between inorganic and organic nature to a minimum but removed
one of the most essential difficulties that had previously stood in the
way of the theory of descent of organisms. The new conception of nature
was complete in its main features; all rigidity was dissolved, all
fixity dissipated, all particularity that had been regarded as eternal
became transient, the whole of nature shown as moving in eternal flux
and cyclical course.

[]{#015}

Thus we have once again returned to the point of view of the great
founders of Greek philosophy, the view that the whole of nature, from
the smallest element to the greatest, ![Member of Protista
(Vorticella)](vorticella.jpg){align="right" width="276" height="216"
hspace="10"} from grains of sand to suns, from protista to men, has its
existence in eternal coming into being and passing away, in ceaseless
flux, in un-resting motion and change, only with the essential
difference that what for the Greeks was a brilliant intuition, is in our
case the result of strictly scientific research in accordance with
experience, and hence also it emerges in a much more definite and clear
form. It is true that the empirical proof of this motion is not wholly
free from gaps, but these are insignificant in comparison with what has
already been firmly established, and with each year they become more and
more filled up. And how could the proof in detail be otherwise than
defective when one bears in mind that the most essential branches of
science ---trans-planetary astronomy, chemistry, geology--- have a
scientific existence of barely a hundred years, and the comparative
method in physiology one of barely fifty years, and that the basic form
of almost all organic development, the cell, is a discovery not yet
forty years old?

[]{#016}

The innumerable suns and solar systems of our island universe, bounded
by the outermost stellar rings of the Milky Way, developed from
swirling, glowing masses of vapour, the laws of motion of which will
perhaps be disclosed after the observations of some centuries have given
us an insight into the proper motion of the stars. Obviously, this
development did not proceed everywhere at the same rate. Recognition of.
the existence of dark bodies, not merely planetary in nature, hence
extinct suns in our stellar system, more and more forces itself on
astronomy (Mädler); on the other hand (according to Secchi) a part of
the vaporous nebular patches belong to our stellar system as suns not
yet fully formed, whereby it is not excluded that other nebulae, as
Mädler maintains, are distant independent island universes, the relative
stage of development of which must be determined by the spectroscope.

[]{#017}

How a solar system develops from an individual nebular mass has been
shown in detail by Laplace in a manner still unsurpassed; subsequent
science has more and more confirmed him.

[]{#018}

On the separate bodies so formed -- suns as well as planets and
satellites -- the form of motion of matter at first prevailing is that
which we call heat. There can be no question of chemical compounds of
the elements even at a temperature like that still possessed by the sun;
the extent to which heat is transformed into electricity or magnetism
under such conditions, continued solar observations will show; it is
already as good as proved that the mechanical motion taking place in the
sun arises solely from the conflict of heat with gravity.

[]{#019}

The smaller the individual bodies, the quicker they cool down, the
satellites, asteroids, and meteors first of all, just as our moon has
long been extinct. The planets cool more slowly, the central body
slowest of all.

[]{#020}

With progressive cooling the interplay of the physical forms of motion
which become transformed into one another comes more and more to the
forefront until finally a point is reached from when on chemical
affinity begins to make itself felt, the previously chemically
indifferent elements become differentiated chemically one after another,
obtain chemical properties, and enter into combination with one another.
These compounds change continually with the decreasing temperature,
which affects differently not only each element but also each separate
compound of the elements, changing also with the consequent passage of
part of the gaseous matter first to the liquid and then the solid state,
and with the new conditions thus created.

[]{#021}

The period when the planet has a firm shell and accumulations of water
on its surface coincides with that when its intrinsic heat diminishes
more and more in comparison to the heat emitted to it from the central
body. Its atmosphere becomes the arena of meteorological phenomena in
the sense in which we now understand the word; its surface becomes the
arena of geological changes in which the deposits resulting from
atmospheric precipitation become of ever greater importance in
comparison to the slowly decreasing external effects of the hot fluid
interior.

[]{#022}

If, finally, the temperature becomes so far equalised that over a
considerable portion of the surface at least it does not exceed the
limits within which protein is capable of life, then, if other chemical
conditions are favourable, living protoplasm is formed. What these
conditions are, we do not yet know, which is not to be wondered at since
so far not even the chemical formula of protein has been established --
we do not even know how many chemically different protein bodies there
are -- and since it is only about ten years ago that the fact became
known that completely structureless protein exercises all the essential
functions of life, digestion, excretion, movement, contraction, reaction
to stimuli, and reproduction.

[]{#023}

Thousands of years may have passed before the conditions arose in which
the next advance could take place and this formless protein produce the
first cell by formation of nucleus and cell membrane. Rut this first
cell also provided the foundation for the morphological development of
the whole organic world; the first to develop, as it is permissible to
assume from the whole analogy of the palæontological record, were
innumerable species of non-cellular and cellular protista, of which
*Eozoon canadense* alone has come down to us, and of which some were
gradually differentiated into the first plants and others into the first
animals. And from the first animals were developed, essentially by
further differentiation, the numerous classes, orders, families, genera,
and species of animals; and finally mammals, the form in which the
nervous system attains its fullest development; and among these again
finally that mammal in which nature attains consciousness of itself --
man.

[]{#024}

Man too arises by differentiation. Not only individually, by
differentiation from a single egg cell to the most complicated organism
that nature produces - no, also historically. When after thousands of
years of struggle the differentiation of hand from foot, and erect gait,
were finally established, man became distinct from the monkey and the
basis was laid for the development of articulate speech and the mighty
development of the brain that has since made the gulf between man and
monkey an unbridgeable one. The specialisation of the hand -- this
implies the tool, and the tool implies specific human activity, the
transforming reaction of man on nature, production. Animals in the
narrower sense also have tools, but only as limbs of their bodies: the
ant, the bee, the beaver; animals also produce, but their productive
effect on surrounding nature in relation to the latter amounts to
nothing at all. Man alone has succeeded in impressing his stamp on
nature, not only by shifting the plant and animal world from one place
to another, but also by so altering the aspect and climate of his
dwelling place, and even the plants and animals themselves, that the
consequences of his activity can disappear only with the general
extinction of the terrestrial globe. And he has accomplished this
primarily and essentially by means of the hand. Even the steam engine,
so far his most powerful tool for the transformation of nature, depends,
because it is a tool, in the last resort on *the hand*. But step by step
with the development of the hand went that of the brain; first of all
consciousness of the conditions for separate practically useful actions,
and later, among the more favoured peoples and arising from the
preceding, insight into the natural laws governing them. And with the
rapidly growing knowledge of the laws of nature the means for reacting
on nature also grew; the hand alone would never have achieved the steam
engine if the brain of man had not attained a correlative development
with it, and parallel to it, and partly owing to it.

[]{#025}

With men we enter *history*. Animals also have a history, that of their
derivation and gradual evolution to their present position. This
history, however, is made for them, and in so far as they themselves
take part in it, this occurs without their knowledge or desire. On the
other hand, the more that human beings become removed from animals in
the narrower sense of the word, the more they make their own history
consciously, the less becomes the influence of unforeseen effects and
uncontrolled forces of this history, and the more accurately does the
historical result correspond to the aim laid down in advance. If,
however, we apply this measure to human history, to that of even the
most developed peoples of the present day, we find that there still
exists here a colossal disproportion between the proposed aims and the
results arrived at, that unforeseen effects predominate, and that the
uncontrolled forces are far more powerful than those set into motion
according to plan. And this cannot be otherwise as long as the most
essential historical activity of men, the one which has raised them from
bestiality to humanity and which forms the material foundation of all
their other activities, namely the production of their requirements of
life, that is to-day social production, is above all subject to the
interplay of unintended effects from uncontrolled forces and achieves
its desired end only by way of exception and, much more frequently, the
exact opposite. In the most advanced industrial countries we have
subdued the forces of nature and pressed them into the service of
mankind; we have thereby infinitely multiplied production, so that a
child now produces more than a hundred adults previously did. And what
is the result? Increasing overwork and increasing misery of the masses,
and every ten years a great collapse. Darwin did not know what a bitter
satire he wrote on mankind, and especially on his countrymen, when he
showed that free competition, the struggle for existence, which the
economists celebrate as the highest historical achievement, is the
normal state of the *animal kingdom*. Only conscious organisation of
social production, in which production and distribution are carried on
in a planned way, can lift mankind above the rest of the animal world as
regards the social aspect, in the same way that production in general
has done this for men in their aspect as species. Historical evolution
makes such an organisation daily more indispensable, but also with every
day more possible. From it will date a new epoch of history, in which
mankind itself, and with mankind all branches of its activity, and
especially natural science, will experience an advance that will put
everything preceding it in the deepest shade.

[]{#026}

Nevertheless, \"all that comes into being deserves to perish\". Millions
of years may elapse, hundreds of thousands of generations be born and
die, but inexorably the time will come when the declining warmth of the
sun will no longer suffice to melt the ice thrusting itself forward from
the poles; when the human race, crowding more and more about the
equator, will finally no longer find even there enough heat for life;
when gradually even the last trace of organic life will vanish; and the
earth, an extinct frozen globe like the moon, will circle in deepest
darkness and in an ever narrower orbit about the equally extinct sun,
and at last fall into it. Other planets will have preceded it, others
will follow it; instead of the bright, warm solar system with its
harmonious arrangement of members, only a cold, dead sphere will still
pursue its lonely path through universal space. And what will happen to
our solar system will happen sooner or later to all the other systems of
our island universe; it will happen to all the other innumerable island
universes, even to those the light of which will never reach the earth
while there is a living human eye to receive it.

[]{#027}

And when such a solar system has completed its life history and succumbs
to the fate of all that is finite, death, what then? Will the sun\'s
corpse roll on for all eternity through infinite space, and all the once
infinitely diverse, differentiated natural forces pass for ever into one
single form of motion, attraction ? \"Or\" -- as Secchi asks -- \"do
forces exist in nature which can re-convert the dead system into its
original state of an incandescent nebula and re-awake it to new life? We
do not know\".

[]{#028}

At all events we do not know in the sense that we know that 2 × 2 = 4,
or that the attraction of matter increases and decreases according to
the square of the distance. In theoretical natural science, however,
which as far as possible builds up its view of nature into a harmonious
whole, and without which nowadays even the most thoughtless empiricist
cannot get anywhere, we have very often to reckon with incompletely
known magnitudes; and logical consistency of thought must at all times
help to get over defective knowledge. Modern natural science has had to
take over from philosophy the principle of the indestructibility of
motion; it cannot any longer exist without this principle. But the
motion of matter is not merely crude mechanical motion, mere change of
place, it is heat and light, electric and magnetic stress, chemical
combination and dissociation, life and, finally, consciousness. To say
that matter during the whole unlimited time of its existence has only
once, and for what is an infinitesimally short period in comparison to
its eternity, found itself able to differentiate its motion and thereby
to unfold the whole wealth of this motion, and that before and a.fter
this remains restricted for eternity to mere change of place - this is
equivalent to maintaining that matter is mortal and motion transitory.
The indestructibility of motion cannot be merely quantitative, it must
also be conceived qualitatively; matter whose purely mechanical change
of place includes indeed the possibility under favourable conditions of
being transformed into heat, electricity, chemical action, or life, but
which is not capable of producing these conditions from out of itself,
such matter has *forfeited motion;* motion which has lost the capacity
of being transformed into the various forms appropriate to it may indeed
still have *dynamis* but no longer *energeia*, and so has become
partially destroyed. Both, however, are unthinkable.

[]{#029}

This much is certain: there was a time when the matter of our island
universe had *transformed* a quantity of motion -- of what kind we do
not yet know -- into heat, such that there could be developed from it
the solar systems appertaining to (according to Mädler) at least twenty
million stars, the gradual extinction of which is likewise certain. How
did this transformation take place? We know just as little as Father
Secchi knows whether the future *caput mortuum* of our solar system will
once again be converted into the raw material of a new solar system. But
here either we must have recourse to a creator, or we are forced to the
conclusion that the incandescent raw material for the solar system of
our universe was produced in a natural way by transformations of motion
which are *by nature inherent* in moving matter, and the conditions of
which therefore also must be reproduced by matter, even if only after
millions and millions of years and more or less by chance but with the
necessity that is also inherent in chance.

[]{#030}

The possibility of such a transformation is more and more being
conceded. The view is being arrived at that the heavenly bodies are
ultimately destined to fall into one another, and one even calculates
the amount of heat which must be developed on such collisions. The
sudden flaring up of new stars, and the equally sudden increase in
brightness of familiar ones, of which we are informed by astronomy, is
most easily explained by such collisions. Not only does our group of
planets move about the sun, and our sun within our island universe, but
our whole island universe also moves in space in temporary, relative
equilibrium with the other island universes, for even the relative
equilibrium of freely moving bodies can only exist where the motion is
reciprocally determined; and it is assumed by many that the temperature
in space is not everywhere the same. Finally, we know that, with the
exception of an infinitesimal portion, the heat of the innumerable suns
of our island universe vanishes into space and fails to raise the
temperature of space even by a millionth of a degree centigrade. What
becomes of all this enormous quantity of heat? Is it for ever dissipated
in the attempt to heat universal space, has it ceased to exist
practically, and does it only continue to exist theoretically, in the
fact that universal space has become warmer by a decimal fraction of a
degree beginning with ten or more noughts? The indestructibility of
motion forbids such an assumption, but it allows the possibility that by
the successive falling into one another of the bodies of the universe
all existing mechanical motion will be converted into heat and the
latter radiated into space, so that in spite of all \"indestructibility
of force\" all motion in general would have ceased. (Incidentally it is
seen here how inaccurate is the term \"indestructibility of force\"
instead of \"indestructibility of motion\".) Hence we arrive at the
conclusion that in some way, which it will later be the task of
scientific research to demonstrate, the heat radiated into space must be
able to become transformed into another form of motion, in which it can
once more be stored up and rendered active. Thereby the chief difficulty
in the way of the reconversion of extinct suns into incandescent vapour
disappears.

[]{#031}

For the rest, the eternally repeated succession of worlds in infinite
time is only the logical complement to the co-existence of innumerable
worlds in infinite space -- a principle the necessity of which has
forced itself even on the anti-theoretical Yankee brain of Draper.
^[3](#p3){#n3}^

[]{#032}

It is an eternal cycle in which matter moves, a cycle that certainly
only completes its orbit in periods of time for which our terrestrial
year is no adequate measure, a cycle in which the time of highest
development, the time of organic life and still more that of the life of
beings conscious of nature and of themselves, is just as narrowly
restricted as the space in which life and self-consciousness come into
operation; a cycle in which every finite mode of existence of matter,
whether it be sun or nebular vapour, single animal or genus of animals,
chemical combination or dissociation, is equally transient, and wherein
nothing is eternal but eternally changing, eternally moving matter and
the laws according to which it moves and changes. But however often, and
however relentlessly, this cycle is completed in time and space, however
many millions of suns and earths may arise and pass away, however long
it may last before the conditions for organic life develop, however
innumerable the organic beings that have to arise and to pass away
before animals with a brain capable of thought are developed from their
midst, and for a short span of time find conditions suitable for life,
only to be exterminated later without mercy, we have the certainty that
matter remains eternally the same in all its transformations, that none
of its attributes can ever be lost, and therefore, also, that with the
same iron necessity that it will exterminate on the earth its highest
creation, the thinking mind, it must somewhere else and at another time
again produce it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#033}

### Notes

[]{#034}

[]{#p1}[1.](#n1) How tenaciously even in 1861 this view could be held by
a man whose scientific achievements had provided highly important
material for abolishing it is shown by the following classic words: 𔄙All
the arraignments of our solar system, so far as we are capable of
comprehending them, aim st preservation of what exists and at unchanging
continuance. Just as since the most ancient times no animal and no plant
on the earth has become more perfect or in any way different, just as we
find in all organisms only stages alongside of one another and not
following one another, just as our own race has always remained the same
in corporeal respects -- so even the greatest diversity in the
co-existing heavenly bodies does not justify us in assuming that these
forms are merely different stages of development; it is rather that
everything created is equally perfect in itself." (Mädler, *Popular
Astronomy* Berlin, 1861, 5th edition, p. 316.)

[]{#035}

[]{#p2}[2.](#n2) The defect of Lyell\'s view -- at least in its first
form -- lay in conceiving the forces at work on the earth as constant,
both in quality and quantity. The cooling of the earth does not exist
for him; the earth does not develop in a definite direction but merely
changes in an inconsequent fortuitous manner.

[]{#036}

[]{#p3}[3.](#n3) \"The multiplicity of worlds in infinite space leads to
the conception of a succession of worlds in infinite time.\" J. W.
Draper, *History of the Intellectual Development of Europe*, 1864. Vol.
2, p. 325.

[]{#037}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](index.htm) \| [next section](ch02.htm) \| [Marx Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
