Engels\' Dialectics of Nature

# II. Dialectics

##### (The general nature of dialectics to be developed as the science of interconnections, in contrast to metaphysics.)

[]{#001}

It is, therefore, from the history of nature and human society that the
laws of dialectics are abstracted. For they are nothing but the most
general laws of these two aspects of historical development, as well as
of thought itself. And indeed they can be reduced in the main to three:

[]{#002}

The law of the transformation of quantity into quality and *vice
versa*;\
[]{#003} The law of the interpenetration of opposites;\
[]{#004} The law of the negation of the negation.

[]{#005}

All three are developed by Hegel in his idealist fashion as mere laws of
*thought*: the first, in the first part of his *Logic*, in the *Doctrine
of Being*; the second fills the whole of the second and by far the most
important part of his *Logic,* the *Doctrine of Essence*; finally the
third figures as the fundamental law for the construction of the whole
system. The mistake lies in the fact that these laws are foisted on
nature and history as laws of thought, and not deduced from them. This
is the source of the whole forced and often outrageous treatment; the
universe, willy-nilly, is made out to be arranged in accordance with a
system of thought which itself is only the product of a definite stage
of evolution of human thought. If we turn the thing round, then
everything becomes simple, and the dialectical laws that look so
extremely mysterious in idealist philosophy at once become simple and
clear as noonday.

[]{#006}

Moreover, anyone who is even only slightly acquainted with his Hegel
will be aware that in hundreds of passages Hegel is capable of giving
the most striking individual illustrations from nature and history of
the dialectical laws.

[]{#007}

We are not concerned here with writing a handbook of dialectics, but
only with showing that the dialectical laws are really laws of
development of nature, and therefore are valid also for theoretical
natural science. Hence we cannot go into the inner interconnection of
these laws with one another.

[]{#008}

[1.]{.term} The law of the transformation of quantity into quality and
*vice versa*. For our purpose, we could express this by saying that in
nature, in a manner exactly fixed for each individual case, qualitative
changes can only occur by the quantitative addition or subtraction of
matter or motion (so-called energy).

[]{#009}

All qualitative differences in nature rest on differences of chemical
composition or on different quantities or forms of motion (energy) or,
as is almost always the case, on both. Hence it is impossible to alter
the quality of a body without addition or subtraction of matter or
motion, i.e. without quantitative alteration of the body concerned. In
this form, therefore, Hegel\'s mysterious principle appears not only
quite rational but even rather obvious.

[]{#010}

It is surely hardly necessary to point out that the various allotropic
and aggregational states of bodies, because they depend on various
groupings of the molecules, depend on greater or lesser quantities of
motion communicated to the bodies.

[]{#011}

But what is the position in regard to change of form of motion, or
so-called energy? If we change heat into mechanical motion or *vice
versa*, is not the quality altered while the quantity remains the same?
Quite correct. But it is with change of form of motion as with Heine\'s
vices; anyone can be virtuous by himself, for vices two are always
necessary. Change of form of motion is always a process that takes place
between at least two bodies, of which one loses a definite quantity of
motion of one quality (e.g. heat), while the other gains a corresponding
quantity of motion of another quality (mechanical motion, electricity,
chemical decomposition). Here, therefore, quantity and quality mutually
correspond to each other. So far it has not been found possible to
convert motion from one form to another inside a single isolated body.

[]{#012}

We are concerned here in the first place with nonliving bodies; the same
law holds for living bodies, but it operates under very complex
conditions and at present quantitative measurement is still often
impossible for us.

[]{#013}

If we imagine any non-living body cut up into smaller and smaller
portions, at first no qualitative change occurs. But this has a limit:
if we succeed, as by evaporation, in obtaining the separate molecules in
the free state, then it is true that we can usually divide these still
further, yet only with a complete change of quality. The molecule is
decomposed into its separate atoms, which have quite different
properties from those of the molecule. In the case of molecules composed
of various chemical elements, atoms or molecules of these elements
themselves make their appearance in the place of the compound molecule;
in the case of molecules of elements, the free atoms appear, which exert
quite distinct qualitative effects: the free atoms of nascent oxygen are
easily able to effect what the atoms of atmospheric oxygen, bound
together in the molecule, can never achieve.

[]{#014}

But the molecule is also qualitatively different from the mass of the
body to which it belongs. It can carry out movements independently of
this mass and while the latter remains apparently at rest, e.g. heat
oscillations; by means of a change of position and of connection with
neighbouring molecules it can change the body into an allotrope or a
different state of aggregation.

[]{#015}

Thus we see that the purely quantitative operation of division has a
limit at which it becomes transformed into a qualitative difference: the
mass consists solely of molecules, but it is something essentially
different from the molecule, just as the latter is different from the
atom. It is this difference that is the basis for the separation of
mechanics, as the science of heavenly and terrestrial masses, from
physics, as the mechanics of the molecule, and from chemistry, as the
physics of the atom.

[]{#016}

In mechanics, no qualities occur; at most, states such as equilibrium,
motion, potential energy, which all depend on measurable transference of
motion and are themselves capable of quantitative expression. Hence, in
so far as qualitative change takes place here, it is determined by a
corresponding quantitative change.

[]{#017}

In physics, bodies are treated as chemically unalterable or indifferent;
we have to do with changes of their molecular states and with the change
of form of the motion which in all cases, at least on one of the two
sides, brings the molecule into play. Here every change is a
transformation of quantity into quality, a consequence of the
quantitative change of the quantity of motion of one form or another
that is inherent in the body or communicated to it. \"Thus, for
instance, the temperature of water is first of all indifferent in
relation to its state as a liquid; but by increasing or decreasing the
temperature of liquid water a point is reached at which this state of
cohesion alters and the water becomes transformed on the one side into
steam and on the other into ice.\" (Hegel, *Encyclopedia*, Collected
Works, VI, p. 217.) Similarly, a definite minimum current strength is
required to cause the platinum wire of an electric incandescent lamp to
glow; and every metal has its temperature of incandescence and fusion,
every liquid its definite freezing and boiling point at a given
pressure - in so far as our means allow us to produce the temperature
required; finally also every gas has its critical point at which it can
be liquefied by pressure and cooling. In short, the so-called physical
constants are for the most part nothing but designations of the nodal
points at which quantitative addition or subtraction of motion produces
qualitative alteration in the state of the body concerned, at which,
therefore, quantity is transformed into quality.

[]{#018}

The sphere, however, in which the law of nature discovered by Hegel
celebrates its most important triumphs is that of chemistry. Chemistry
can be termed the science of the qualitative changes of bodies as a
result of changed quantitative composition. That was already known to
Hegel himself (*Logic*, Collected Works, III, p. 488). As in the case of
oxygen: if three atoms unite into a molecule, instead of the usual two,
we get ozone, a body which is very considerably different from ordinary
oxygen in its odour and reactions. Again, one can take the various
proportions in which oxygen combines with nitrogen or sulphur, each of
which produces a substance qualitatively different from any of the
others! How different laughing gas (nitrogen monoxide N~2~O) is from
nitric anhydride (nitrogen pentoxide, N~2~O~5~) ! The first is a gas,
the second at ordinary temperatures a solid crystalline substance. And
yet the whole difference in composition is that the second contains five
times as much oxygen as the first, and between the two of them are three
more oxides of nitrogen (N0, N~2~O~3~, NO~2~), each of which is
qualitatively different from the first two and from each other.

[]{#019}

This is seen still more strikingly in the homologous series of carbon
compounds, especially in the simpler hydrocarbons. Of the normal
paraffins, the lowest is methane, CH~4~; here the four linkages of the
carbon atom are saturated by four atoms of hydrogen. The second, ethane,
C~2~H~6~, has two atoms of carbon joined together and the six free
linkages are saturated by six atoms of hydrogen. And so it goes on, with
C~3~H~8~, C~4~H~10~, etc., according to the algebraic formula
C~n~H~2n+2~, so that by each addition of CH~2~ a body is formed that is
qualitatively distinct from the preceding one. The three lowest members
of the series are gases, the highest known, hexadecane, C~16~H~34~, is a
solid body with a boiling point of 270ยบ C. Exactly the same holds good
for the series of primary alcohols with formula C~n~H~2n+20~, derived
(theoretically) from the paraffins, and the series of monobasic fatty
acids (formula C~n~H~2n~O~2~). What qualitative difference can be caused
by the quantitative addition of C~3~H~6~ is taught by experience if we
consume ethyl alcohol, C~2~H~12~O, in any drinkable form without
addition of other alcohols, and on another occasion take the same ethyl
alcohol but with a slight addition of amyl alcohol, C~5~H~12~O, which
forms the main constituent of the notorious fusel oil. One\'s head will
certainly be aware of it the next morning, much to its detriment; so
that one could even say that the intoxication, and subsequent \"morning
after\" feeling, is also quantity transformed into quality, on the one
hand of ethyl alcohol and on the other hand of this added C~3~H~6~.

[]{#020}

In these series we encounter the Hegelian law in yet another form. The
lower members permit only of a single mutual arrangement of the atoms.
If, however, the number of atoms united into a molecule attains a size
definitely fixed for each series, the grouping of the atoms in the
molecule can take place in more than one way; so that two or more
isomeric substances can be formed, having equal numbers of C, H, and 0
atoms in the molecule but nevertheless qualitatively distinct from one
another. We can even calculate how many such isomers are possible for
each member of the series. Thus, in the paraffin series, for C~4~H~10~
there are two, for C~6~H~12~ there are three; among the higher members
the number of possible isomers mounts very rapidly. Hence once again it
is the quantitative number of atoms in the molecule that determines the
possibility and, in so far as it has been proved, also the actual
existence of such qualitatively distinct isomers.

[]{#021}

Still more. From the analogy of the substances with which we are
acquainted in each of these series, we can draw conclusions as to the
physical properties of the still unknown members of the series and, at
least for the members immediately following the known ones, predict
their properties, boiling point, etc., with fair certainty.

[]{#022}

Finally, the Hegelian law is valid not only for compound substances but
also for the chemical elements themselves. We now know that \"the
chemical properties of the elements are a periodic function of their
atomic weights\" (Roscoe-Schorlemmer, *Complete Text-Book of Chemistry*,
II, p. 823), and that, therefore, their quality is determined by the
quantity of their atomic weight. And the test of this has been
brilliantly carried out. Mendeleyev proved that various gaps occur in
the series of related elements arranged according to atomic weights
indicating that here new elements remain to be discovered. He described
in advance the general chemical properties of one of these unknown
elements, which he termed eka-aluminium, because it follows after
aluminium in the series beginning with the latter, and he predicted its
approximate specific and atomic weight as well as its atomic volume. A
few years later, Lecoq de Boisbaudran actually discovered this element,
and Mendeleyev\'s predictions fitted with only very slight
discrepancies. Eka-aluminium was realised in gallium (ibid., p. 828). By
means of the - unconscious - application of Hegel\'s law of the
transformation of quantity into quality, Mendeleyev achieved a
scientific feat which it is not too bold to put on a par with that of
Leverrier in calculating the orbit of the still unknown planet Neptune.

[]{#023}

In biology, as in the history of human society, the same law holds good
at every step, but we prefer to dwell here on examples from the exact
sciences, since here the quantities are accurately measurable and
traceable.

[]{#024}

Probably the same gentlemen who up to now have decried the
transformation of quantity into quality as mysticism and
incomprehensible transcendentalism will now declare that it is indeed
something quite self-evident, trivial, and commonplace, which they have
long employed, and so they have been taught nothing new.

[]{#025}

But to have formulated for the first time in its universally valid form
a general law of development of nature, society, and thought, will
always remain an act of historic importance. And if these gentlemen have
for years caused quantity and quality to be transformed into one
another, without knowing what they did, then they will have to console
themselves with Moliere\'s Monsieur Jourdain who had spoken prose all
his life without having the slightest inkling of it.

ย

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](index.htm) \| [next section](ch03.htm) \| [Marx Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
