Works of Frederick Engels 1877

# Karl Marx

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} mid-June 1877;\
[First published:]{.info} in *Volks-Kalender,* Brunswick, 1878;\
[Source:]{.info} *On Marx*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} Foreign Languages Press, Peking (1975).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Karl Marx, the man who was first to give socialism, and thereby the
whole labour movement of our day, a scientific foundation, was born at
Trier in 1818. He studied in Bonn and Berlin, at first taking up law,
but he soon devoted himsslf exclusively to the study of history and
philosophy, and in 1842 was on the point of establishing himself as an
assistant professor in philosophy when the political movement which had
arisen since the death of Frederick William III directed his life into a
different channel. With his collaboration, the leaders of the Rhenish
liberal bourgeoisie, the Camphausens, Hansemanns, etc., had founded the
*Rheinische Zeitung* in Cologne, and in the autumn of 1842, Marx, whose
criticism of the proceedings of the Rhenish *Landtag* (or Provincial
Diet) had excited very great attention, was put at the head of the
paper. The *Rheinische Zeitung* naturally appeared under censorship, but
the censorship could not cope with it. [\[The first censor of the
*Rheinische Zeitung* was Police Councillor Dolleschall, the same man who
once struck out an advertisement in the *Kölnische Zeittung* of the
translation of Dante\'s *Divine Comedy* by *Philalethes* (later King
John of Saxony) with the remark: "One must not make a comedy of divine
affairs." \[Note by Engels\]]{.context} The *Rheinische Zeitung* almost
always got the articles which mattered through; the censor was first
supplied with insignificant fodder for him to strike out, until he
either gave way of himself or was compelled to give way by the threat
that then the paper would not appear the next day. Ten newspapers with
the same courage as the *Rheinische Zeitung* and whose publishers would
have allowed a few hundred thalers extra to be expended on type setting
--- and the censorship would have been made impossible in Germany as
early as 1843. But the German newspaper-owners were petty-minded, timid
philistines and the *Rheinische Zeitung* carried on the struggle alone.
It wore out one censor after another; finally it came under a double
censorship; after the first censorship the *Regierungspräsident* had
once more, and finally, to censor it. That also was of no avail. In the
beginning of 1843, the government declared that it was impossible to
keep this newspaper in check and suppressed it without more ado.

Marx, who in the meanwhile had married the sister of von Westphalen,
later a reactionary minister, removed to Paris, and there, in
conjunction with A. Ruge, published the *Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher*, in which he opened the series of his socialist writings
with a *Criticism of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right* ; and then,
together with F. Engels, *The Holy Family. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.*,
a satirical criticism of one of the latest forms blunderingly assumed by
the German philosophical idealism of that time.

The study of political economy and of the history of the Great French
Revolution still allowed Marx time enough for occasional attacks on the
Prussian Government; the latter revenged itself in the spring of 1845 by
securing from the Guizot ministry --- Herr Alexander von Humboldt is
said to have acted as intermediary --- his expulsion from France. Marx
shifted his domicile to Brussels and published there in French in 1847
*The Poverty of Philosophy*, a criticism of Proudhon\'s *Philosophy of
Poverty*, and, in 1848, *Discourse on Free Trade.* At the same time he
made use of the opportunity to found a German workers' society in
Brussels and so commenced practical agitation. The latter became still
more important for him when he and his political friends in 1847 joined
the secret Communist League, which had already been in existence for a
number of years. Its whole structure was now radically changed; this
association, which previously was more or less conspiratorial, was
transformed into a simple organization for communist propaganda, which
was only secret because necessity compelled it to be so, the *first*
organization of the German Social-Democratic Party. The League existed
wherever German workers' societies were to be found; in almost all of
these societies in England, Belgium, France and Switzerland, and in very
many of the societies in Germany, the leading members belonged to the
League and the share of the League in the incipient German labour
movement was very considerable. Moreover, our League was the first which
emphasized the international character of the whole labour movement and
realized it in practice, which had Englishmen, Belgians, Hungarians,
Poles, etc., as members and which organized international labour
meetings, especially in London.

The transformation of the League took place at two congresses held in
1847, the second of which resolved on the elaboration and publication of
the fundamental principles of the Party in a manifesto to be drawn up by
Marx and Engels. Thus arose the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*,
which first appeared in 1848, shortly before the February Revolution,
and has since been translated into almost all European languages.

The *Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung*, in which Marx participated and which
mercilessly exposed the blessings of the police regime of the
Fatherland, caused the Prussian Government to try to effect Marx\'s
expulsion once more, but in vain. When, however, the February Revolution
resulted in popular movements in Brussels, too, and a radical change
appeared to be imminent in Belgium, the Belgian Government arrested Marx
without ceremony and deported him. In the meanwhile, the French
Provisional Government had sent him an invitation through Flocon to
return to Paris, and he accepted this call.

In Paris he came out especially against the swindle, widespread among
the Germans there, of wanting to form the German workers in France into
armed legions in order to carry the revolution and the republic into
Germany. On the one hand, Germany had to make her revolution herself,
and, on the other hand, every revolutionary foreign legion formed in
France was betrayed in advance by the Lamartines of the Provisional
Government to the government which was to be overthrown, as occurred in
Belgium and Baden.

After the March Revolution, Marx went to Cologne and founded there the
*Neue Rheinische Zeitung*, which was in existence from June 1, 1848 to
May 19, 1849 --- the only paper which represented the standpoint of the
proletariat within the democratic movement of the time, as shown in its
unreserved championship of the Paris June insurgents of 1848, which cost
the paper the defection of almost all its shareholders. In vain the
*Kreuz-Zeitung* pointed to the "Chimborazo impudence" with which the
*Neue Rheinische Zeitung* attacked everything sacred, from the king and
vice-regent of the realm down to the gendarme, and that, too, in a
Prussian fortress with a garrison of 8,000 at the time. In vain was the
rage of the Rhenish liberal philistines, who had suddenly become
reactionary. In vain was the paper suspended by martial law in Cologne
for a lengthy period in the autumn of 1848. In vain the Reich Ministry
of Justice in Frankfort denounced article after article to the Cologne
Public Prosecutor in order that judicial proceedings should be taken.
Under the very eyes of the police the paper calmly went on being edited
and printed, and its distribution and reputation increased with the
vehemence of its attacks on the government and the bourgeoisie. When the
Prussian *coup d\'etat* took place in November 1848, the *Neue
Rheinische Zeitung* called upon the people, at the head of each issue,
to refuse to pay taxes and to meet violence with violence. In the spring
of 1849, both on this account and because of another article, it was
made to face a jury, but on both occasions was acquitted. Finally, when
the May risings of 1849 in Dresden and the Rhine Province had been
suppressed, and the Prussian campaign against the Baden-Palatinate
rising had been inaugurated by the concentration and mobilization of
considerable masses of troops, the government believed itself strong
enough to suppress the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* by force. The last
number --- printed in red ink --- appeared on May 19.

An attempt to continue issuing the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in the form
of a review (in Hamburg, 1850) had to be given up after a while in view
of the ever-increasing violence of the reaction. Immediately after the
*coup d\'etat* in France in December 1851, Marx published *The
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte* (New York, 1852; second edition,
Hamburg, 1869, shortly before the war). In 1853 he wrote *Revelations
About the Cologne Communist Trial* (first printed in Basle, later in
Boston, and again recently in Leipzig).

After the conviction of the members of the Communist League in Cologne,
Marx withdrew from political agitation and for ten years devoted
himself, on the one hand, to the study of the rich treasures offered by
the library of the British Museum in the sphere of political economy,
and, on the other hand, to writing for the *New York Tribune*, which up
to the outbreak of the American Civil War published not only
contributions signed by him but also numerous leading articles from his
pen on conditions in Europe and Asia. His attacks on Lord Palmerston,
based on an exhaustive study of British official documents, were
reprinted in London in pamphlet form.

As the first fruit of his many years of study of economics, there
appeared in 1859 *A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*,
Part I (Berlin, Duncker). This work contains the first coherent
exposition of the Marxian theory of value, including the doctrine of
money. During the Italian War Marx, in the German newspaper *Das Volk*,
appearing in London, attacked Bonapartism, which at that time posed as
liberal and playing the part of liberator of the oppressed
nationalities, and also the Prussian policy of the day, which under the
cover of neutrality was seeking to fish in troubled waters. In this
connection it was necessary to attack also Herr Karl Vogt, who at that
time, on the commission of Prince Napoleon (Plon Plon) and in the pay of
Louis Napoleon, was carrying on agitation for the neutrality, and indeed
the sympathy, of Germany. When Vogt heaped upon him the most abominable
and deliberately false calumnies, Marx answered with *Herr Vogt*
(London, 1860), in which Vogt and the other gentlemen of the imperialist
sham-democratic gang were exposed, and Vogt himself on the basis of both
external and internal evidence was proved guilty of taking bribes from
the December empire. The confirmation came just ten years later: in the
list of the Bonaparte hirelings, found in the Tuileries in 1870 and
published by the September government, there was the following entry
under the letter V: "Vogt --- in August 1859 there were remitted to him
--- Frs. 40,000.\"

Finally, in 1861 there appeared in Hamburg *Capital, a Critical Analysis
of Capitalist Production*, Volume I, Marx\'s chief work, which expounds
the foundations of his economlc socialist conceptions and the main
features of his criticism of existing society, the capitalist mode of
production and its consequences. The second edition of this epoch-making
work appeared in 1872; the author is engaged in the elaboration of the
second volume.

Meanwhile the labour movement in various countries of Europe had so far
regained strength that Marx could entertain the idea of realizing a
long-cherished wish: the foundation of a Workers' Association embracing
the most advanced countries of Europe and America, which would
demonstrate bodily, so to speak, the international character of the
socialist movement both to the workers themselves and to the bourgeois
and the governments --- for the encouragement and strengthening of the
proletariat, for striking fear into the hearts of its enemies. A mass
meeting in favour of Poland, which had just then again been crushed by
Russia, held on September 28, 1864 in St. Martin\'s Hall in London,
provided the occasion for bringing forward the matter, which was
enthusiastically taken up. The *International Working Men\'s
Association* was founded; a Provisional General Council, with its seat
in London, was elected at the meeting, and Marx was the soul of this as
of all subsequent General Councils up to the Hague Congress. He drafted
almost every one of the documents issued by the General Council of the
International, from the *Inaugural Address*, 1864, to the *Address on
the Civil War in France*, 1871. To describe Marx\'s activity in the
International is to write the history of this Association, which in any
case still lives in the memory of the European workers.

The fall of the Paris Commune put the International in an impossible
position. It was thrust into the forefront of European history at a
moment when it had everywhere been deprived of all possibility of
successful practical action. The events which raised it to the position
of the seventh Great Power simultaneously forbade it to mobilize its
fighting forces and employ them in action, on pain of inevitable defeat
and the setting back of the labour movement for decades. In addition,
from various sides elements were pushing themselves forward that sought
to exploit the suddenly enhanced fame of the Association for the purpose
of gratifying personal vanity or personal ambition, without
understanding the real position of the International or without regard
for it. A heroic decision had to be taken, and it was again Marx who
took it and who carried it through at the Hague Congress. In a solemn
resolution, the International disclaimed all responsibility for the
doings of the Bakuninists, who formed the centre of those unreasonable
and unsavoury elements. Then, in view of the impossibility of meeting,
in the face of the general reaction, the increased demands which were
being imposed upon it, and of maintaining its complete efficacy other
than by a series of sacrifices which would have drained the labour
movement of its life-blood --- in view of this situation, the
International withdrew from the stage for the time being by transferring
the General Council to America. The results have proved how correct was
this decision --- which was at the time, and has been since, so often
censured. On the one hand, it put a stop then and since to all attempts
to make useless *putsches* in the name of the International, while, on
the other hand, the continuing close intercourse between the socialist
workers' parties of the various countries proved that the consciousness
of the identity of interests and of the solidarity of the proletariat of
all countries evoked by the International is able to assert itself even
without the bond of a formal international association, which for the
moment had become a fetter.

After the Hague Congress, Marx at last found peace and leisure again for
resuming his theoretical work, and it is to be hoped he will be able
before long to have the second volume of *Capital* ready for the press.

Of the many important discoveries through which Marx has inscribed his
name in the annals of science, we can here dwell on only two.

The first is the revolution brought about by him in the whole conception
of world history. The whole previous view of history was based on the
conception that the ultimate causes of all historical changes are to be
looked for in the changing ideas of human beings, and that of all
historical changes political changes are the most important and dominate
the whole of history. But the question was not asked as to whence the
ideas come into men\'s minds and what the driving causes of the
political changes are. Only upon the newer school of French, and partly
also of English, historians had the conviction forced itself that, since
the Middle Ages at least, the driving force in European history was the
struggle of the developing bourgeoisie with the feudal aristocracy for
social and political domination. Now Marx has proved that the whole of
previous history is a history of class struggles, that in all the
manifold and complicated political struggles the only thing at issue has
been the social and political rule of social classes, the maintenance of
domination by older classes and the conquest of domination by newly
arising classes. To what, however, do these classes owe their origin and
their continued existence? They owe it to the particular material,
physically sensible conditions in which society at a given period
produces and exchanges its means of subsistence. The feudal rule of the
Middle Ages rested on the self-sufficient economy of small peasant
communities, which themselves produced almost all their requirements, in
which there was almost no exchange and to which the arms-bearing
nobility lent protection from without and national or at least political
cohesion. When the towns arose and with them a separate handicraft
industry and commercial intercourse, at first internal and later
international, the urban bourgeoisie developed, and already during the
Middle Ages achieved, in struggle with the nobility, its inclusion in
the feudal order as likewise a privileged estate. But with the discovery
of the extra-European world, from the middle of the fifteenth century
onwards, this bourgeoisie acquired a far more extensive sphere of trade
and therewith a new spur for its industry; in the most important
branches handicrafts were supplanted by manufacture, now on a factory
scale, and this again was supplanted by large-scale industry, which had
become possible owing to the discoveries of the previous century,
especially that of the steam-engine. Large-scale industry, in its turn,
reacted on trade by driving out the old manual labour in backward
countries, and creating the present-day new means of communication:
steam-engines, railways, electric telegraphy, in the more developed
ones. Thus the bourgeoisie came more and more to combine social wealth
and social power in its hands, while it still for a long period remained
excluded from political power, which was in the hands of the nobility
and the monarchy supported by the nobility. But at a certain stage ---
in France since the Great Revolution --- it also conquered political
power, and now in turn became the ruling class over the proletariat and
small peasants. From this point of view all historical phenomena are
explicable in the simplest possible way --- with sufficient knowledge of
the particular economic condition of society, which it is true is
totally lacking in our professional historians, and in the same way the
conceptions and ideas of each historical period are most simply to be
explained from the economic conditions of life and from the social and
political relations of the period, which are in turn determined by these
economic conditions. History was for the first time placed on its real
basis; the palpable but previously totally overlooked fact that men must
first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, and therefore must
*work*, before they can fight for domination, pursue politics, religion,
philosophy and so on --- this palpable fact at last came into its
historical rights.

This new conception of history, however, was of supreme significance for
the socialist outlook. It showed that all previous history had moved in
class antagonisms and class struggles, that there have always existed
ruling and ruled, exploiting and exploited classes, and that the great
majority of mankind has always been condemned to arduous labour and
little enjoyment. Why is this? Simply because in all earlier stages of
development of mankind production was so little developed that the
historical development could proceed only in this antagonistic form,
that historical progress as a whole was assigned to the activity of a
small privileged minority, while the great mass remained condemned to
producing by their labour their own meagre means of subsistence and also
the increasingly rich means of the privileged. But the same
investigation of history, which in this way provides a natural and
reasonable explanation of the previous class rule, otherwise only
explicable by the wickedness of man, also leads to the realization that,
in consequence of the tremendously increased productive forces of the
present time, even the last pretext has vanished for a division of
mankind into ruIers and ruled, exploiters and exploited, at least in the
most advanced countries; that the ruling big bourgeoisie has fulfilled
its historic mission, that it is no longer capable of the leadership of
society and has even become a hindrance to the development of
production, as the trade crises, and especially the last great collapse,
and the depressed condition of industry in all countries have proved;
that historical leadership has passed to the proletariat, a class which,
owing to its whole position in society, can only free itself by
abolishing altogether all class rule, all servitude and all
exploitation; and that the social productive forces, which have outgrown
the control of the bourgeoisie, are only waiting for the associated
proletariat to take possession of them in order to bring about a state
of things in which every member of society will be enabled to
participate not only in production but also in the distribution and
administration of social wealth, and which so increases the social
productive forces and their yield by planned operation of the whole of
production that the satisfaction of all reasonable needs will be assured
to everyone in an ever-increasing measure.

The second important discovery of Marx is the final elucidation of the
relation between capital and labour, in other words, the demonstration
how, within present society and under the existing capitalist mode of
production, the exploitation of the worker by the capitalist takes
place. Ever since political economy put forward the proposition that
labour is the source of all wealth and of all value, the question has
become inevitable: How is this, then, to be reconciled with the fact
that the wage-worker does not receive the whole sum of value created by
his labour but has to surrender a part of it to the capitalist? Both the
bourgeois economists and the socialists exerted themselves to give a
scientifically valid answer to this question, but in vain, until at last
Marx came forward with the solution. This solution is as follows: The
present day capitalist mode of production presupposes the existence of
two social classes --- on the one hand, that of the capitalists, who are
in possession of the means of production and subsistence, and, on the
other hand, that of the proletarians, who, being excluded from this
possession, have only a single commodity for sale, their labour power,
and who therefore have to sell this labour power of theirs in order to
obtain possession of means of subsistence. The value of a commodity is,
however, determined by the socially necessary quantity of labour
embodied in its production, and, therefore, also in its reproduction;
the value of the labour power of an average human being during a day,
month or year is determined, therefore, by the quantity of labour
embodied in the quantity of means of subsistence necessary for the
maintenance of this labour power during a day, month or year. Let us
assume that the means of subsistence of a worker for one day require six
hours of labour for their production, or, what is the same thing, that
the labour contained in them represents a quantity of labour of six
hours; then the value of labour power for one day will be expressed in a
sum of money which also embodies six hours of labour. Let us assume
further that the capitalist who employs our worker pays him this sum in
return, pays him, therefore, the full value of his labour power. If now
the worker works six hours of the day for the capitalist, he has
completely replaced the latter\'s outlay --- six hours' labour for six
hours' labour. But then there would be nothing in it for the capitalist,
and the latter therefore looks at the matter quite differently. He says:
I have bought the labour power of this worker not for six hours but for
a whole day, and accordingly he makes the worker work 8, 10, 12, 14 or
more hours, according to circumstances, so that the product of the
seventh, eighth and following hours is a product of unpaid labour and
wanders, to begin with, into the pocket of the capitalist. Thus the
worker in the service of the capitalist not only reproduces the value of
his labour power, for which he receives pay, but over and above that he
also produces a *surplus value* which, appropriated in the first place
by the capitalist, is in its further course divided according to
definite economic laws among the whole capitalist class and forms the
basic stock from which arise ground rent, profit, accumulation of
capital, in short, all the wealth consumed or accumulated by the
non-labouring classes. This, however, proved that the acquisition of
riches by the present-day capitalists consists just as much in the
appropriation of the unpaid labour of others as that of the slave-owner
or the feudal lord exploiting serf labour, and that all these forms of
exploitation are only to be distinguished by the difference in manner
and method by which the unpaid labour is appropriated. This, however,
also removed the last justification for all the hypocritical phrases of
the possessing classes to the effect that in the present social order
right and justice, equality of rights and duties and a general harmony
of interests prevail, and exposed present-day bourgeois society, no less
than its predecessors, as a grandiose institution for the exploitation
of the huge majority of the people by a small, ever-diminishing
minority.

Modern, scientific socialism is based on these two important facts. In
the second volume of *Capital* these and other hardly less important
scientific discoveries concerning the capitalist system of society will
be further developed, and thereby those aspects of political economy not
touched upon in the first volume will also undergo revolutionization.
May it be vouchsafed to Marx to be able soon to have it ready for the
press.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Biographies](../../../bio/index.htm) \| [1877 Works](../index.htm) \|
[Marx Engels Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
