---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1908

### On Franz Lütgenau's Book

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 284-93.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov's review of F Lütgenau's book was
published in the journal *Sovremenny Mir*, no 5, 1908. *Sovremenny Mir*
(*Contemporary World*) -- a literary, scientific and political monthly
published in St Petersburg from 1906 to 1918.'

MIA Note: Franz Lütgenau (1857-1931) studied philosophy, philology and
theology. He joined the German Social Democratic Party in the 1880s, and
represented the SPD in the Reichstag as the deputy for Hörde in the Ruhr
from 1895 until 1898. He was removed from party responsibilities in 1898
and was expelled from the SPD in 1899. He withdrew from public life and
became a teacher and freelance journalist with specific interests in
education, culture and the arts. He rejoined the SPD during the years of
the Weimar Republic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Franz Lütgenau, *Natural and Social Religion: The Theory of Religion
from the Materialist Point of View* (St Petersburg, 1908)

It is not consciousness that determines being, but being that determines
consciousness. When applied to the development of mankind, this means
that it is not the social man's 'psyche' that determines his way of
life, but his way of life that determines his 'psyche'. That is very
well known to us at the present time. But this still does not mean that
in each particular case we know the process leading to the formation of
the particular psyche on the basis of the particular form of social
being. Not by a long way. Very, very many aspects of this multiform
process are *only as yet becoming subjects of scientific investigation*.
The materialist explanation of history is *only a method* leading to the
comprehension of truth in the field of social phenomena, and is in no
way a conglomerate of ready-made, final conclusions. He who wishes to
prove himself a worthy follower of this method cannot be content with a
simple repetition that it is not consciousness that determines being but
being that determines consciousness. On the contrary, he must try to
find out for himself how in fact this determination of consciousness by
being comes about. And there is no other way of doing this than by
studying facts and discovering their causal connection.

As far as the particular question of *religion* is concerned, here too,
naturally, there can also be no doubt that being is not determined by
consciousness; but here too the process of the determination of
consciousness by being is still obscure to us in very many respects.
Hence every serious attempt to explain this process should be welcomed.
In its time, Franz Lütgenau's book, which appeared in German nearly
fourteen years ago, undoubtedly deserved great attention from everyone
interested in historical materialism. Yet even then it was possible to
indicate many real shortcomings in the book. Today, apart from having
these many shortcomings, the book is pretty well *out of date*. Had we
been asked by Mme Velichkina, whom we know to be a serious and
conscientious translator, whether this work was worth translating, we
should at first have found difficulty in answering, but on reflection,
we should perhaps have said no.

However, among the blind the one-eyed is king. Mr Lütgenau's book is
practically unique in the Russian language. So in spite of all, we
recommend it to the Russian reader. And for the same reason we cannot
but regret that Mme Velichkina has not translated the book as well as
she once translated von Polenz. Her latest translation is ponderous and,
in places, unsatisfactory. In addition, it is distorted by numerous
regrettable misprints. This is all the more inconvenient to readers as
they are less informed on the subject, that is, the more in need of
intelligible guidance.

But let us now proceed to the content of the book. A philologist by
education, Mr Lütgenau set himself the praiseworthy task of discussing
the problem of the origin and development of religion from the point of
view of historical materialism. Unfortunately, he was not well enough
equipped to fulfil his task satisfactorily. He was not even quite clear
as to what exactly is known as historical materialism. Many philistine
prejudices still marred his views on the subject. He says:

Marx and Engels proved the erroneousness of idealism and founded the
dialectical-materialist world-outlook, according to which we now see in
economic conditions the foundation of legal and political institutions
as well as moral and religious concepts. (p 249)

But how is that? Is men's *world-outlook*, that is to say, their views
*on the whole system of the world*, really exhausted by their views *on
the relation of 'economic conditions*' *to legal institutions and moral
and religious concepts?* In other words: is *historical* materialism a
whole *world-outlook?* Of course not. It is only *one part* of a
world-outlook. Of what kind of world-outlook? Well, it is clear -- the
*materialist* world-outlook. Engels said that he and Marx applied
materialism to the interpretation of history. Exactly. But Mr Lütgenau
does not want to hear about materialism, which for some reason he calls
'*cognitive-theoretical*' ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ and concerning which he talks a
whole lot of indigestible nonsense on pages 249, 250 (footnote), 252,
253 and several others. All of which shows that he has not the least
notion of 'cognitive-theoretical' materialism, and that in speaking of
it he uses the words of those same theologians -- or the words of the
philosophers influenced by those theologians -- whose views he himself,
of course, repudiates in so far as they affect the historical field
proper and touch upon the religious question. This does him very grave
harm even when, as we might say, he is on his home ground -- discussing
religion. He thinks, for instance, that 'religion begins on the borders
of cognition or experience' and that 'the wider the field of knowledge
becomes, the narrower is the field of religious belief' (p 247). This
might be acceptable with a very big reservation. The fact is that when
the field of religious belief becomes considerably contracted under the
impact of experience, to the succour of religion comes that philosophy
which teaches that science and religion lie in completely different
planes, since religion has to do with the other world, whereas science,
experience, has to do only with phenomena, and that, therefore, the
widening of the field of experience *cannot* narrow the field of
religion. To the *extent* that the preaching of this philosophy
influences men's minds, the field of religious belief ceases to contract
under the impact of experience. It is true that philosophy of this kind
can arise and exert influence only in a particular social situation,
only at a certain stage in the development of *class* society. But this
does not alter matters. On the contrary, an analysis of the influence of
this philosophy and its relationship to religion would have furnished Mr
Lütgenau with the opportunity to shed a much clearer light on the
connection between social development (cause) and the historical fate of
religious beliefs (effect). Mr Lütgenau did not avail himself of this
opportunity. He *could not* do so for the simple reason that he was
incapable of adopting a critical attitude to the -- supposedly critical
-- philosophy we are speaking about here. And he was incapable of this
because he *himself* had fallen under the influence of that philosophy.
Its effect on him is to be seen in the undiluted nonsense he has poured
forth in his book concerning 'cognitive-theoretical' materialism. But,
having piled up this undiluted nonsense, he himself goes over to the
materialist viewpoint in his attitude to religion. That might of course
have been to the good if the nonsense he had talked had not clouded his
vision, and hindered him from making this change-over consciously and
without sinning against logic.

If he had done so consciously, the proposition we have just cited, viz,
that experience brings about the contraction of the field of religious
beliefs, would have assumed in his writings a much more correct form. It
would have read that the accumulation of knowledge removes the ground
from under religious beliefs, but only in the measure that the
prevailing social order does not prevent the dissemination of knowledge
and its utilisation for the criticism of views inherited from earlier
times. This is exactly what contemporary *materialism* says, and it is
partly accepted by our author as *historical* materialism, and partly
rejected by him under the name of *cognitive-theoretical* materialism.

And it is rejected by him, one might say, in blithe ignorance. Thus, for
example, in discussing Hegel, he writes:

For Hegel, things and their development were still only the materialised
reflections of 'ideas' existing somewhere, before the world, and not the
results of his own thinking, the more or less absolute reflections of
real things and processes. (p 249)

We do not know what is meant by '*absolute*' reflection, and in general
we find this whole passage very clumsily written. One thing is clear: Mr
Lütgenau does not agree with Hegel, and believes that things and their
development are essentially 'reflections of real things and processes'.
But surely this is nothing else than the 'cognitive-theoretical
materialism' which is not to his liking. What a mess! After that, just
try, if you please, to discuss materialism with Mr Lütgenau. Why, he
himself does not know what it is.

It might not have been necessary to go into all this, but for the
following interesting circumstance. At one time, Mr Lütgenau belonged to
the German Social-Democratic Party. His book, written in German, was
published, if my memory serves me right, in 1894, that is, not long
before the so-called '*revision of Marx*' began. His statements
regarding the relationship of *historical* materialism to
'*cognitive-theoretical* materialism' showed that he was under the
influence of the philosophical ideas which then prevailed, and still
prevail, among the ideologists of the German bourgeoisie. But we have no
recollection of any one of the theoreticians of the party to which
Lütgenau then belonged paying even the slightest attention to his
statements. Apparently, to them it was a matter of little importance,
or, perhaps, something perfectly natural. But when the 'revision' of
Marx began, the gentlemen who took on the job (the 'revisionists') based
themselves, by the way, on those very philosophical ideas which infected
Mr Lütgenau, and, of course, other people too. This is evidence of how
revisionism was *prepared*, how it was finding its way into the minds of
members of the party at a time when Mr Bernstein did not as yet express
any doubts about the correctness of Marx's teaching. It would repay our
Russian Marxists to reflect upon this; there are quite a few people
among them today who are engaged in trafficking the philosophical
contraband which at one time was smuggled into the minds of the German
Social-Democrats by Mr Lütgenau and other inconsistent thinkers like
him. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ It goes without saying that there is only one guard
capable of doing anything in the struggle against this contraband --
*logic*. But *this* guard, in any case, is never redundant, and he in
particular must keep wide awake.

In passing on to the examination of Mr Lütgenau's views on the origin
and development of religious beliefs, we have to recognise that even
here our author has only partly coped with his truly very difficult task
of providing a materialist explanation of that origin and development.
If in philosophy, Mr Lütgenau was ready to supplement Marx and Engels
with *Kant*, now on the question of religion he is supplementing them
with *Max Müller*. And, just as in the first instance, he thereby only
spoils it all.

He says: 'The myth originates simply from language.' (p 12) He then
explains this idea of his (or that of his authority -- Max Müller) by
quoting the latter's words:

We know that Eos (in Greek, the dawn) corresponds to the Sanskrit Ushas,
and we know that Ushas is derived from the root Uas, which means shines.
So Eos meant originally 'shining-it', or 'shining-he', or 'shining-she'.
But who was he, or she, or it? Here you have at once the inevitable
birth of what we call a myth. What our senses perceive and what we are
able to name is only an effect, it is the specific illumination of the
sky, the brightness of the coming morning, or, as we now would say, the
reflection of the rays of the sun on the clouds of the sky. But that was
not what the ancient people thought. Having formed a word such as Eos
which meant shining, or light, they would go on to say Eos has returned,
Eos has fled, Eos will come again, Eos rises out of the sea, Eos is the
daughter of the sky, Eos is followed by the sun, Eos is loved by the
sun, Eos is killed by the sun, and so on. What does all this mean? You
may say that it is language, it is of course a myth, and an inevitable
myth at that. (p 13)

Mr Lütgenau adds to this discourse of Müller's by saying:

The question as to the essence of the myth may, consequently, be
answered thus: it is a natural and necessary stage in the development of
language and thought. But this of course is a far from adequate
definition. (p 13)

It is, indeed, quite 'inadequate'. But the main point is that even this
inadequate definition could have suggested to Mr Lütgenau a certain
pertinent question. He could have -- in fact, he should have -- asked
himself: is it not possible to *condense* this definition, and simply
say: the myth is a necessary stage in the development of thinking?

If he had thought about this question without prejudice he would have
seen that that was in fact possible. Like our very, very remote
ancestors, we say nowadays: the sun sets, the moon has risen, the wind
has died down, and so on. But when we express ourselves in this fashion,
we do not think, as those very, very remote ancestors did, that the sun,
the moon, the wind, etc, are really living beings endowed with
consciousness and will. The expressions are similar, but the notions
connected with them have become quite different. Formerly, the nature of
these notions and thinking in general *facilitated* the development of
myths; now that nature is completely *unfavourable* to the promotion of
myths, which means that the origin of myths is to be found in the nature
of primitive man's thinking. There is no reason to repeat what exactly
was the nature of primitive thinking: we have said already that
primitive man *animated* the world surrounding him. The whole question
now is only to ascertain why this was so. Why is such thinking peculiar
to primitive man? The question is not a difficult one to answer. In the
final analysis, the nature of thinking is determined by the store of
experience at man's disposal. With primitive man, this store was quite
insignificant. But in so far as it existed, it was related principally
*to an animal world*; primitive man became a *hunter* and a *fisherman*
at a very early stage. Of course, even at that very early stage of its
existence mankind had also dealings with 'inanimate' nature; at that
time too, man experienced on himself the effect of heat, moisture,
light, etc. But in experiencing this action on himself and endeavouring
to *understand* and *explain* it, man had of necessity *to judge the
unknown by the known*. And to him the known, as has been stated, was
primarily the animal world of so-called *animated* objects; it is not
surprising that primitive man regarded all the rest of the much lesser
known part of nature as being animated. The less he knew of this side of
nature, which by necessity he already conceived of as animated, the more
scope there was for the exercise of his imagination. His imagination
created a whole series of tales explaining great natural phenomena by
the activity of this or that animated creature.

It is of these tales that what we know as *mythology* consists. However,
it must be remarked that Mr Lütgenau errs greatly in averring that
primitive man always spoke of *gods* as of *people* (p 17). He is no
less mistaken when he adds that 'we' know *why* natural phenomena
deified by men were represented in the form of human beings (p 17).
*This* cannot be known, since *this never happened*. In explaining great
natural phenomena by the action of living creatures, the savage, for the
most part, envisaged these creatures in the form of *animals*, and not
at all as *human beings*. This is such a well-known truth, it would
seem, that it is downright surprising how Mr Lütgenau could not know
about it, or could lose sight of it. Let us assume that as a
*philologist* he has, in general, no inclination to *ethnology*; indeed
he says so himself in his book; but surely there is a limit to all
things. To say that the great phenomena and forces of nature were
conceived of by primitive man only in the form of people is to close the
door to the understanding, for example, even of what was by no means a
primitive religion -- the Egyptian religion at the time of the Pharaohs.

Max Müller was of little help to Mr Lütgenau in his attempt at a
materialist explanation of religion. On the contrary, *philology* rather
prevented our author from paying the proper attention to *technology*,
that is to say, to how mythology is modified by the growth of the
productive forces and by man's increasing power over nature. We strongly
advise those who intend to read Lütgenau's book not to forget this gap
in it. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^

Another of the book's defects is the unnecessary *schematism* of the
presentation. Mr Lütgenau portrays the course of development of
religious beliefs in such a way that it appears as though 'natural'
religion -- 'the reflection of man's dependence on nature' -- could be
separated by a sharply defined boundary from 'social' religion, which is
a reflection of the same dependence 'on social forces, the essence and
character of whose action is unknown to him' (that is, to man -- GP).
But there is no such boundary. This may be easily proved by means of the
very observations and definitions advanced by Mr Lütgenau. Thus, for
example, he is quite correct in saying that the sphere of *religion* is
much narrower than that of *mythology*. 'Not all mythology is religion',
he writes, 'and only those objects that are capable of influencing man's
moral character have the right to be called religious.' (p 38) Here an
idea which in itself is correct is stated very badly; religion in the
broad and, of course, much more exact sense of the word really arises
when social man begins to seek sanction for his morality, or in general
for his actions and institutions, from a god or gods. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ But
morality is a *social* phenomenon. Therefore in sanctifying the rules of
morality, and in general the existing social relations of men, religion
thereby acquires a *social character*. Mr Lütgenau himself is conscious
of this. He says:

From the very beginning already there is the inevitable social element
of religion in the analogy between the human and the divine way of life,
between the relationship of the father to his child and that of God to
man, etc. (p 133)

Precisely. And since this is the case, 'natural' religion *cannot* be
portrayed as though it were a separate phase of religious evolution. It
*may*, if you wish, be so portrayed, but only, for example, by Tylor, in
whose opinion religion (in its *minimal* variant) existed *even where*
myths had not yet begun to sanctify moral instruction. As for Mr
Lütgenau, to whom religion exists *only where* the unification of
mythology and morality has already been accomplished, he should have
tried from the very first pages of his exposition to discover the link
between men's *social relationships* on the one hand, and the forms of
their *religious* beliefs on the other. The discovery of such a
connection would have been useful to him also to elucidate what might be
described as the role of the religious 'factor' in the history of
mankind. But Lütgenau did not see the need to elucidate this connection
thoroughly either for the reader's benefit or for his own. Therefore,
and despite his own opinion, 'natural religion', in his exposition, is
apparently independent of the 'social' form. The same must be said of
'anthropological' as well as 'psychological' religion. These 'religions'
too are presented by our author as something quite separate and
independent. In the interests of analysis, he breaks the living, mutual
connection of phenomena, and then forgets to *restore* it in the
interests of *synthesis*. Not surprisingly, his exposition proves to be
almost devoid of any inner connection. His book represents, in its
individual chapters, a collection of more or less valuable data for the
materialist explanation of 'the religious phenomenon' (as it is now
called by French investigators in this field) but we find no *systematic
explanation* of the 'phenomenon'.

However, we repeat, among the blind the one-eyed is king. There is such
a poor selection of literature on this subject available to the Russian
reader unacquainted with foreign languages that even Mr Lütgenau's book
will make a useful addition to it. In any case, it will do no harm to
read it.

A couple of words more. In the chapter 'Religion and Ethics', Mr
Lütgenau makes some very apt objections against the idea that morality
must always be founded on religion. He says -- as Diderot, incidentally,
did long before him -- that the use brought by religion to man is like
that of a crutch: 'He who does not need a crutch is better off.' (pp
240-41) Very true. But the truth of Diderot's brilliant remark would
have become even more evident if Mr Lütgenau had buttressed it with the
incontestable fact that, in the history of the development of mankind,
morality appeared *before* man had begun to sanctify its principles by
reference to the will of supernatural beings. Mr Lütgenau, of course,
was well aware of this, but it has not received the proper treatment in
his book and consequently cannot throw its full light on the question of
the relation of morality to religion.

Commenting on the well-known proposition that 'religion is a private
matter', Mr Lütgenau says:

To be a member of the party, it is sufficient for a person to be
convinced that he shares the views and demands laid down in the party
programme. Thus, in the Reichstag elections of 1893, a Christian
theologian could have stood as an official Party candidate. (p 289)

That, of course, is true. But it should nevertheless be noted that the
party programme is based upon the totality of those principles to which
the members of the party attach serious scientific importance. Every
member of the party is morally obliged, according to his powers and
opportunities, to engage in *propaganda* of these principles. The
question arises: what should he do if in his propaganda work he clashes
with the system of views which, with the aid of 'social' religion,
offers an explanation of what he himself cannot explain clearly other
than by means of scientific socialism? Should he *speak against* his own
convictions? That would be hypocrisy. Should he say *nothing* about some
part of his views? That would be semi-hypocrisy, that is, essentially
the same hypocrisy. The alternative is to *speak the truth*, but to do
so without rubbing the audience the wrong way unnecessarily, by
approaching them tactfully, perhaps even in the manner of a teacher, but
all the same to speak the truth. Again we have to make the same
reservation which we have had to make more than once in this review: Mr
Lütgenau agrees with us: he says so himself. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ But he
mentions it only in passing; and when he has to formulate his opinion
conclusively, he seems inclined to take the opposite view. Thus, on
pages 274-75, he writes:

The most effective agitation here too is: *speak of what is*. The
natural origin of religion; the subsequently appearing dependence of
religious concepts on the economic structure of society; the facts of
church history; the scientific investigation of the essence of
phenomena, failure to understand which gave rise to religious
interpretations -- all these are truths, certainties, which do away with
every doubt and every fantasy stemming from uncertainty.

Very well said. But the author proceeds to argue in such a way that
agitation appears to be unnecessary, and this for the reason that the
'fantasy' in question is rooted in our contemporary economic reality and
will disappear with it. But it is a very bad argument indeed. It is
reminiscent of the arguments used by the anarchists and the
syndicalists: *since* political institutions are founded on relations of
production, *then*, so long as these relations exist, the political
struggle is either quite useless or even harmful to the working class.
Actually, the very course of *economic* development of present-day
society furnishes the necessary fulcrum for fruitful *political*
activity by the proletariat. It would be sheer extravagance not to
utilise this fulcrum, indeed it would be simply nonsensical; and the
same must be said about 'fantasies'.

The following example will make this idea more intelligible. Some years
ago in the French party there was a Negro named Legitimus, a deputy from
the island of Martinique. The malicious tongues of his enemies spread
the story that during the election campaign Legitimus not only spoke at
meetings, but resorted to *sorcery* to ensure his victory at the polls.
This, we repeat, was nothing more than a malicious invention. But assume
for a moment that it was true. In that event, what attitude should the
French party have taken towards this comrade? Expel him from the party?
But that would have been an exhibition of harmful, impermissible and, in
addition, ridiculous intolerance, because belief in sorcery must also be
recognised as a private matter. We hope no one will raise objection to
this. On the other hand, which of the white comrades of this coloured
deputy would not have considered himself morally bound to inform him of
a more correct view of the real causes of political victories and
failures? Which of them would not have tried to help extricate him from
his gross delusions? Only ill-intentioned or frivolous people would have
refused to help him. Yet belief in sorcery also undoubtedly has its
materialist interpretation! That is just the point: to find a
materialist explanation for a particular historical phenomenon does not
at all mean that one has to become reconciled to that phenomenon, or to
maintain that it cannot be removed by the conscious activity of men. It
is not consciousness that determines being; but being that determines
consciousness. That is correct; it is historical materialism, but it is
not the whole of historical materialism. To this must be added that,
having arisen on the basis of being, consciousness for its part promotes
the further development of being. Marx was fully aware of this when he
expressed his well-known view on the great importance of 'criticism of
religion'. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. My italics.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Someone like Mr Yushkevich or Mr Valentinov, who, as
they say, are *no worse* than Mr Lütgenau.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. This gap is in no way bridged by what our author has
said, for example, on the influence of *exchange* on religious notions.
We are speaking now not about *economy*, but about the *technique* of
production. The influence of the latter on primitive *mythology* was
probably no less strong than its influence on primitive *art*. This
particular aspect of the matter is hardly touched upon in Lütgenau's
book, and we can blame this primarily on the author's contemptuous
attitude to the materials collected by contemporary ethnology.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. By religion *in its narrow sense* we understand what
Tylor calls the *minimum of religion*, that is to say, a general belief
in the existence of spirits. Originally, such a belief had no influence
whatever on man's actions, and at the time had absolutely no
significance as a 'factor' of social development. Therefore it could be
termed religion only with a very substantial reservation.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. That is to say, he agreed and said so while he was a
member of the party; but what he thinks now, nobody knows.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 'Contribution to the
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law, Introduction', *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 175 -- Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
