---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE "INTELLECTUAL"

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
March 19, 1905\

E verywhere, the serious Socialists in the world are engaged in the
effort to extricate the Movement from the meshes of the "Intellectual,"
and to set up barriers against his approach, or at least dams against
his pernicious influence. Nowhere, however, are conditions so favorable
as in America for the detection of the microbe. American conditions
furnish an easy test to tell the "Intellectual" by. The test is his
attitude on the Trades Union, meaning thereby the economic organization
of the Working Class.

The general feature of the "Intellectual" is superficiality, coupled, of
course, with the usual accompaniment of vanity and conceit---the
features that the sage had in mind when he declared that "a little
learning puffeth up." Unschooled in the prime requirement for
knowledge - the art of thinking---the "Intellectual" equips himself with
scraps of learning, and, decked with these ill-fitting feathers, he
forthwith sets himself up as a perambulating lump of wisdom. Of course,
he is twisted on every important practical question and revels only in
abstractions; of course, he bumps up at every step against facts that,
"Intellectual" though be calls himself, he lacks the intellect to
comprehend; and, as a natural consequence of all this, he slowly
acquires an instinctive, if not involuntary aversion for whatever
requires exact knowledge, and a malignant hatred for those before whom,
being of superior calibre than himself, his "genius" feels rebuked.

The general principles of Socialism are so obvious that the
"Intellectual" is fascinated by them. He drifts into the Socialist
Movement as straws drift into a vortex. He comes there to shine,
generally also to gather coppers; and he flutters his loose-hanging
feathers. As a rule he considers himself a God-ordained Editor, and
forthwith proceeds to throw upon others the blame for his utter failure,
being wholly unable to detect the cause in his own short-comings, and
thus to improve. The "Intellectual," named so in mockery, is incapable
of learning; and, seeing that he joins the Movement, not for the
Movement's sake, but for his own, at all critical moments he is found
utterly oblivious of the Movement's interests, ready to sacrifice these
interests to his own crossed malevolence. Words and sound being the
"Intellectual's" realm, he is ever found an adept in the tricks of the
juggling fiends who palter with words in a double sense. He will say
anything; he will sign anything; and, just as soon as the maggot bites
him, wriggle out of it.

Of course, the "Intellectual" is found out, eventually---if not later.
There is the rub! His meretricious glitter often deceives the expertest
eyes and ears. Often he has done incalculable harm before he is "got
onto."

Now, then, everywhere, outside of America, and the English-speaking
world in general, the microbe of the "Intellectual" must be given time
to develop before it is dealt with and stamped out. In America it is not
necessary to give the evil rope before checking it. The conditions in
the English-speaking world, in America especially, where capitalism is
fullest-orbed, furnish the test by which the nuisance can be immediately
detected, and, withal, furnish the means to abate it instantly.

Socialism, it has been well said, can spring only out of the lap of
capitalism. But capitalism, together with all its necessary
appurtenances, is not equally in evidence in all countries. Prominent
among these appurtenances, and important in connection with the subject
under consideration, are three circumstances:

First---The total absence of the last vestige of feudalism, including
therein the sense of honor in the ruling class;

Second---As an immediate consequence of the first, a corrupt and
elaborate electoral machinery through which none but capitalist
principles will be allowed to filter to triumph; and

Third---As a consequence of the second, the sense of the unquestioned
necessity of a bona fide and powerful economic organization of the
Working Class.

It follows from this sequence that here in America, the Union, the
economic organization of Labor, leaps to the transcendent importance
that Marx's genius dimly descried in the distance, and that it has or
can have nowhere outside of the English-speaking world. The proper
economic organization of Labor, the Union, in short, is indispensable in
America for the emancipation of the Working Class. No Union, no
Socialist Republic. The political arm of the Movement will be worn away
useless without the economic arm is ready to second, to supplement, and,
at the critical moment, to substitute it. Nay, it may happen worse.
Without the regiments of the class-conscious Union step close upon the
heels of their vanguard, of the political wedge, the "carefully
selected" Socialists whom the electoral machinery of the capitalist
class may allow to filter through to "victory," will ten to one lose
whatever honor they had: they will become what we have seen the
so-called Socialist, alias Social Democratic, alias Public Ownership
party's successful Candidates, without exception, become-fakers, that
is, traitors in disguise; and what that means to the Movement it is
needless to explain.

Accordingly, the Union that is a "Brotherhood of Capital and Labor\"
concern is a capitalist brigade; accordingly, only the class-conscious
Union stands within the pale of the Labor Movement; accordingly, the
question of Unionism is of prime importance to the Socialist Movement;
and, finally, and capping the climax of sequences, the Socialist, whose
opportunities for education raise him in letters above the rank and file
of the wage-slave, but who considers the Union a "passing affair,\" who
does not give it as much thought as he does to the political movement,
and who sees in it only a quarry for votes---such a Socialist lacks the
grasp of the Movement, he can be safely put down from the start as an
"Intellectual," and looked out for. It is an unerring test. Needless to
wait until he betray the Cause later: he is betraying it now.

Every cause has its effect, and every effect re-acts back upon its
cause, and, in turn, itself turns into cause. It was the Socialist Labor
Party, a political and not an economic organization, that flashed across
the path of the American Labor Movement the needed light upon Unionism.
The education that the Party spread about called forth from the ranks of
fully 15,000 workingmen, the initial membership of the Socialist Trade
and Labor Alliance---the demand for the organization of that body. What
it meant was speedily recognized by kindred spirits of evil. The
Gomperses, whose occupation would be gone, and the "Intellectuals,"
whose heels felt gibed in advance by the prospect of an economic body
that would compel them to walk straight, struck hands. With slander and
other such means they fought the new body. But all their efforts were of
no avail. The Truth, that they were periodically pronouncing "dead,"
kept them hopping; and, today, the event in the Labor Movement of
America is the call that proceeded last January from a conference in
Chicago, of which, in his report published in The People, Frank Bohn
said that its members "were practically unanimous in unqualified
ratification of class-conscious, Industrial Unionism as advocated by the
S.T. and L.A." The call summons the Working Class of America to a
convention to place the Economic Movement of the land upon a plane that
befits the country. The applause with which the call has been received
justifies the expectation that a new, large and class-conscious Union
will be born in June. Thus the expectation is justified that what was at
first effect, will now be powerful enough to re-act back upon the
cause---that the economic movement will take, and be powerful enough to
enforce a stand, which, among other virtues, will have the virtue of
smoking the "Intellectuals" out of their last haven of refuge the
so-called Socialist party, whither they fled out of the S.L.P. when the
S.T. and L.A. was established---and thus purge and solidify the
political Movement of the American Working Class.

The "Intellectual" can not grasp the importance of Unionism. It is a
case of material interests and moral and mental make-up combining. For
bona fide Unionism the "Intellectual" has the feeling that a scalded cat
has for water; to bogus Unionism he takes like a duck does to a
mill-pond;---in short, the question of Unionism is a test that assays
the "Intellectual" and proves him dross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
