---
layout: default
title: 
---
# A MISSION OF THE TRADES UNION

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
March 4, 1905\

The discussion now going on upon the Trades Union is bringing to the
surface one point after another of vital importance to the Socialist
Movement.

The revelation of these various points is turning the light upon two
facts of deep interest---first, that the Trades Union is the point upon
which the Socialist Movement must revolve, and, secondly, that the "pure
and simple" style of Unionism has wandered into the wilderness, far away
from its real mission.

While almost all the points coming to the surface, whether they proceed
from friendly or unfriendly sources, tend to prove the latter fact,
there is one not yet touched upon that illustrates stronger than any the
degeneration of "pure and simpledom," and at the same time has the merit
of aiding in the understanding of events that are casting their shadows
before them.

A mission of the Trades Union is to drill the membership of the Working
Class in the habit of self-imposed discipline.

The mission of capitalism, the Socialist knows, is so to organize the
mechanism of production that wealth can be so abundantly produced as to
free mankind from want and the fear of want, from the brute's necessity
of a life of arduous toil in the production of the brute's mere
necessaries of life. Socialist philosophy has made this clear.

American conditions, however---the conditions possible only on an area
of vast dimensions and where capitalism has been able to develop
untrammelled and reach its highest economic and political expression -
American conditions, accordingly, have revealed a subsidiary mission of
capitalism, to wit, the mission of KEEPING ORDER, while the
revolutionary class, the Working Class, is gathering the needed
qualities for itself to assume control. This mission of capitalism is
one that all previous ruling classes have also had to fulfill towards
the class below. With capitalism, however, the mission assumed
infinitely graver importance.

The Working Class, a propertyless class, and in this respect unique in
the succession of revolutionary classes, lacks an element that is a
drilling force in itself---property. The defect must be substituted from
another source.

Thorough education in its own class interests is valuable, is
indispensable, but it is not all-sufficient. The habit of self-enforced
discipline is an essential accompaniment of class-consciousness. The
latter, without the former, leads to magnificent but fruitless displays
of heroism--- the Paris Commune. The former, without the latter, leads
adown to the plane of mercenary bands--- the cohorts of Imperial Rome of
old. Combined, however, the two will blast the rule of capitalism, smite
the shackles off the limbs of Labor, and rear the Socialist Republic.

That "pure and simpledom" neglects the drilling in class-consciousness,
aye, prevents it, has been amply shown. "Pure and simpledom," however,
also interferes with and undermines the habit of self-imposed
discipline.

As that division of the Labor or Socialist Movement that will have to
give the final and decisive blow to capitalist rule, the Trades Union
must necessarily illustrate in its makeup the fullest development of all
that is implied in that product of civilized man known as
"Organization"---Unity.

In the vocabulary of the bona fide Trades Union, "anarchy" is a term of
derision, "autonomy" a burlesque, "fusion" buffoonery, "broadness" a
mockery, "tolerance" a trick, and despotism an impossibility.

As that division of the Labor or Socialist Movement in which none
belongs but the wage slave, the facilities enjoyed by the Trades Union
as an Academy for drilling its membership in the two essentials for the
emancipation of their class-discipline and class-consciousness-are
matchless. "Pure and simpledom" prevents the latter and lets slip the
opportunity for the former.

Being partly an organization built by the grace of the employer, often
entirely so, the "pure and simple" Union is essentially a compulsory
affair. From this circumstance a number of others flow. The most
important one of all for the subject under consideration is that the
membership in innumerable instances are held to the Union only by the
bond of "paying dues." This being about all that is demanded of them,
they either put in an appearance at the meetings only to pay the
blackmail, and then go away again, or they never come; they are spared
even that trouble; an officer goes around where they work and collects
the money. As a consequence, the educational powers of the Union are
lost. The discussions at its meetings are vapid, if not harmful---and as
to discipline, it becomes a monstrous caricature, the abjectness of men
tyrannized by the labor lieutenants of the Capitalist Class.

How far astray "pure and simpledom" has wandered from the mission to
drill in discipline, and to what extent it has poisoned the mind of the
Working Class, was three years ago pathetically illustrated by the
American Labor Union.

This body was struggling to free itself from the trammels of "pure and
simple" superstition. Its constituent bodies had attested incipient
clear-sightedness by tearing themselves loose from the American
Federation of Labor. They had seen glimmerings of the truth that the
Labor Movement is essentially a political Movement. They were shaking
off the baneful superstition that fetters the workers to political
scabbery as a "glorious act of freedom."

In short, the American Labor Union was groping its way out of "pure and
simpledom."

What was the reasonable expectation under such circumstances?

The expectation under such circumstances was natural that such an
economic organization would simultaneously realize its disciplinary
mission, and act accordingly. The Trades Union that has matured to the
point of deserving the name, manifests its sense of the importance of
discipline, not only by its action within, but also by its action
without. Its vocabulary will attach the proper contempt to "anarchy,"
"autonomy," "fusion," "broadness," "tolerance," etc.; and doing so it
will have nothing but contempt, especially for an organization that,
pretending to be a political party of Socialism---pretending,
accordingly, to be no less important a division of the Labor Movement
than its vanguard---disregards the essentials for discipline.

The American Labor Union did not.

So powerful was the mental domination of "pure and simpledom," that the
American Labor Union endorsed the so-called Socialist, alias Social
Democratic party---a body which, being a genuine breath of American
Federation "pure and simpledom", throws discipline to the dogs as
"narrow," preaches different tenets in different latitudes and
longitudes as "autonomy," fuses with capitalist parties as an evidence
of its "tolerance", and tolerates an irresponsible privately-owned press
as a proof of its "freedom."

The sight was pathetic.

Trying to escape "pure and simpledom" by one door, the American Labor
Union's disregard of the disciplinary mission of bona fide Unionism on
the field of Labor caused it virtually to tumble back into the same
quagmire by another door.

The signs are that this blunder will soon be rectified.

So long as the Working Class has not disciplined itself into fitness, so
long will the only remaining mission of the Capitalist Class demand the
latter's continuance in power.

Capitalism has fulfilled its economic mission: the country's mechanism
of production is ready for Socialism.

But the Working Class is not yet ready for the Spirit of the Age to
entrust it with the charge of society. The Working Class still is a
tumultuous mob. NO REVOLUTIONARY CLASS IS EVER RIPE FOR SUCCESS BEFORE
IT HAS ITSELF WELL IN HAND. Until the Working Class of America shall
have taken itself in hand, the Capitalist Class has a mission to
perform---to KEEP ORDER, and it is doing so with a rod of scorpions.

It is one of the missions of the Trades Union to drill its class into
the discipline that civilization demands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
