---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE CHICAGO CONVENTION

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
June 27, 1905\

*(Note: This article refers to the 1905 industrial unionists' convention
which established the Industrial Workers of the World. \-- Also, the
phrase "the Krag-Jorgensen policy of settling the Labor question" refers
to the use of military force to suppress the workers. The Krag-Jorgensen
was a rifle that was used by the U.S. Army and National Guard." M.L.)*

Frederick Engels, next to Karl Marx the greatest Socialist philosopher,
reiterates in his great work, "Socialism, Utopian and Scientific," the
old Greek philosophy first clearly enunciated by Heraclitus, who said,
"Everything is and yet is not, for everything flows, is in constant
motion, is in constant process of formation and dissolution." In other
words, life is not a fixed but an ever changing and growing phenomenon.
In no phase of life is this philosophy so applicable in its general
features as in the economic and social spheres of man. There integration
and disintegration are constant and incessant.

Today, a great portion of the working class of this country is turning
its gaze in the direction of Chicago. In the Great Lakes city of the
West there opens today a convention of workingmen, which, judging from
the manifesto calling it, is destined to mark an important change in the
history of labor in this country. This convention promises to launch an
economic organization of the working class on the lines of the
conflicting interests of capital and labor, in direct contradistinction
to the prevailing organization, that is based on the principle of the
mutual interests of capital and labor. Such an organization necessarily
demands integration and disintegration. It necessarily ignores those who
regard the present form of trade unionism as fixed and stable, and
proceeds to build up in conformity with sound principles, philosophical
as well as economic.

That such promises as those of the Chicago manifesto have been held out
before and have ended in comparative failure---that the Socialist Trade
and Labor Alliance and the American Labor Union, for instance, have
attempted the same thing with a measure of success less than that
confidently expected---is no valid reason for discrediting such
promises, or not aiding in the work that would fulfill them -
integration and disintegration are processes that must often be
accompanied by failure and experimentation in order to be finally
successful. The fact that the efforts to launch a classconscious
organization of labor are attaining a certain cumulative force, despite
their comparative failures, argues well for their final triumph.

Another fact, worthy of consideration, is the more favorable condition
of affairs in which the new organization will be launched.

First, it is backed by a large number of weekly and monthly papers, free
from the throttling influences of capitalist trade unionism that ever
supported such a movement before. Headed by the DAILY and WEEKLY PEOPLE,
and the Swedish, Jewish, German, Hungarian and Italian organs of the
Socialist Labor Party, it has a press that wields a wide influence and
can do much constructive as well as destructive, much defensive as well
as offensive, work in its behalf. Again, the growth of Socialist
sentiment and revolutionary Socialism are factors that cannot be
ignored. They possess a power for good in combating the fallacious and
treacherous workings of capitalist unionism, that was not so
conspicuously present in the past attempts of the kind promised by the
Chicago manifesto. With them present, capitalist reasoning and calumny
no longer possess the field undisturbed, but are confronted by opponents
whose increasing strength threatens them with overwhelming disaster.

Finally, the new movement has the existing disgust against the treachery
and futility of Gompersism, combined with its disintegrating tendencies,
to aid it. The working class look from Frisco to Fall River. They note
mutual scabbery, bribery and defeat everywhere. They note the National
Civic Federation and its malignant influence in their affairs, as
exemplified in the subway strike. They are, accordingly, alive to
Gompersism's impotency and treachery. Moreover, and above all, they note
the organic changes in the system of capitalism itself, and the
corresponding fallacy of the Gompers unionism. Hence, they are leaving
the latter and are turning toward classconscious unionism, with all that
implies. When were the promises of such unionism ever more favorable and
worthy of support? Never before in the history of the American labor
movement.

It is to be hoped that the Chicago convention is alive to these facts,
and will improve upon them. A step backward from the manifesto would be
deplorable, while conditions justify many steps forward. The mere
declaration of Industrial Unionism will not suffice without the
determination to make classconsciousness the essence of the new
movement.

Some sapient "Socialists" proclaim the International Typographical Union
an Industrial Union, because it includes in its ranks many branches of
the printing industry. The fact that these are the better paid branches,
who use the inferior branches to raise their own salaries exclusively, a
was done in the Brooklyn Eagle strike, doesn't affect the thinking
apparatus of these wiseacres any. Nor does the International
Typographical Union's endorsement of the Krag-Jorgensen policy of
settling the Labor question, have the slightest impression upon their
"wisdom." They, now as always, are pleased with the form, for the
essence is beyond them. Save us from such "industrial unionism." It is
the old poisonous adulteration with a new label!

If the Chicago convention measures up to its duty and answers labor's
prayer for relief, it will progress as it deserves. Otherwise
retrogression will be its lot, while integration and disintegration will
continue in the world of labor as of yore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
