---
layout: default
title: 
---
# MORGAN AND THE "FEDERALIST"

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Sept. 6, 1905\

N o student of the Labor Movement should miss a line of the stenographic
report of the recent Chicago Industrialists' convention, now being
published in the Daily People.

Important as were all the other episodes of the convention, none is
comparable with the episode concerning what may be termed the
constituencies of the future parliament of the Socialist Republic.

The debate on Section 2 of Article I is of prime value, and valuable in
more ways than one. It is valuable for the facts that it brings into
light in the matter of the present development of production; it is
valuable for the resultant conflict of opinion as to what the
development portends; it is valuable in that it illustrates the
governmental revolution that is impending; finally, it is valuable in
that it heralds a new cycle in the affairs of man---a cycle no less
leading than was the transition from the Gens into the State form of
society.

He who would profit by all these features of the debate had better brush
up both on the "Federalist" and on Lewis H. Morgan's great work on
"Ancient Society."

When this country freed itself from England, a magazine, named the
"Federalist," sprang into existence. The master minds of the day were
contributors. The articles were not written to sell. They dealt with the
form of government that the recently emancipated colonies should adopt
they dug deep into other systems, established comparisons and contrasts,
and drew conclusions for immediate guidance. Opinions frequently
differed widely. Today, reading those debates---because debates they
were in substance---by the light of the torch lighted by Morgan, they
assume invaluable importance. Understanding them, they will be seen to
be preparatory for the debate on Section 2 of Article I. Understanding
both them and Morgan, the seeming confusion and seemingly irreconcilable
views expressed at the Chicago convention become luminous.

The Gens social system was built upon men; territory was reached only
through men. The Gens period was the period of the early communism of
the human race. Out of the Gens grew the present political State; it is
built upon territory; in it, men are reached only through territory.

The political State marks the culmination of the march of the human race
from primitive communism to capitalism. In its spiral march the human
race is now headed, not backward, but upward to higher communism. The
break up of capitalism means a reversal to Gens conditions, only upon
the higher plane that capitalism makes possible. The form of government
that the Gens system required had to make way for the form of government
required by capitalism; inevitably, therefore, the form of government of
capitalism must and will be supplanted by another, which shall be the
true shadow and reflex of the changed material conditions that mark this
third revolution.

In the transition of society from the Gens form to that of Capitalism,
there was much confusion and conflict of opinion as to the method of
administration; no less confusion and conflict is noticeable at the
various stages in the formation of the capitalist State; similar
confusion and conflict inevitably manifests itself today in the Labor
Movement touching the form of the administration of the oncoming
Socialist Republic. The confusion and conflict of thought on this
subject was focussed in the Chicago convention. By the light of Morgan
and the "Federalist" the confusion becomes intelligent, and the conflict
instructive.

There may be said to have been three groups, or tendencies, at Chicago,
each of which marked the decree to which it had emancipated itself from
capitalist governmental habits of thought, and the degree to which it
was conscious of whither the social drift led.

The lowest of these groups may be said to have been typified by
Fairgrieve of Montana. Fairgrieve's group realized the necessity of the
Industrial or Socialist form of government, but its mind was still
clogged with capitalist habits of governmental thought. As a
consequence, the Fairgrieve group proposed Industrialism based upon
State boundaries. But, now, Industrialism partakes of the Gens feature
in which, not territory, but men (industries wherever located,
regardless of political demarcations of the capitalist State) are the
constituencies; the State, on the contrary, implies the capitalist
thought of territory as the basis for government. The plan of the
Fairgrieve group was a mongrel concept; by taking a bit of each it got
wholly out of touch with both.

The next higher group was the group represented by Coates. Coates would
probably consider it a joke upon him to say that what he represented was
the extremist's application of Industrialism---Industrialism run riot.
The Socialist governmental constituency is the Industry. Coates' mind
was correctly swayed by that idea. But the constituency that he wanted
was not the broad constituency of the Industrialist, it was the narrow
fractional constituency of the craft---a fragment of the egg-shell of
pure and simpledom out of which he was hatched, and which clung to his
back. His plan was as irrationally industrialist, as the capitalist
governmental plan would be irrationally capitalist that proposed
counties for the constituencies of Federal Senators. Whatever
administration a social system sets up, it must be workable. The Coates
plan was not workable; it was a caricature of Industrialism.

He represented an element that always accompanies great movements: the
element that is wide-awake enough to realize that the bottom has dropped
out of the ship on which they are embarked and seek to save some slight,
little bit of property before they leap overboard.

There were, no doubt, elements corresponding to the Coates group when
the Gens system broke up. Indeed, Morgan tells of them, and the study of
them is of no little interest.

The third group is the group that prevailed. It was the group
represented by Sherman, Trautmann, De Leon, Hall, Hagerty, Haywood,
Riordan, etc. It was the group that understood the meaning of the
revolutionary period that we are approaching, the safety of which
depends upon avoiding both mongrelism and caricatureism; it was the
group that recognized the only basis upon which the administration of
the Socialist Republic can be reared---Industrial constituencies to the
total exclusion of political constituencies.

The "Federalist" and Morgan's great work is a reading that all should
buckle down to, who realize that the work done at Chicago was but the
beginning of a work that has yet to be perfected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
