---
layout: default
title: 
---
![title](../thepeople.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VOL. VI, NO. 10    NEW YORK, SUNDAY, JUNE 7, 1896     PRICE 3 CENTS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Daniel De Leon

# Our Political Equinoctial Storms

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} *The People,* June 7, 1898.\
[Provided by:]{.info} The Socialist Labor Party of America's Daniel De
Leon Library.\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [Robert
Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org) of the [The Socialist Labor Party of
America](http://slp.org), Editor of [*The
People*](http://slp.org/tp_new.htm) & [David
Walters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm)\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive (DDLIA)
presents this work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of
America. For more information on reproducing these works, please contact
the [SLP](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[B]{.cap}y the time the astronomical equinoctial storms strike us,
stripping our trees of their foliage and leaving them bare to blasts of
the winter, the political equinoctial storm---the real and first one
ever experienced in our country---will have struck the forest of our
political movements and parties, carrying off the illusions that have
hitherto clung to them, and forcing their bare trunks to face the rude
reality of facts.

Phrases, sentiment, declamation---of such was hitherto the foliage of
the political parties that strove for masterhood. The many were caught
with the show; with it the scheming few sought to hide the trunk and
branches and stem to which indeed they clung, and which alone they cared
for. But the guiddy1 summer weather of our political life is rolling by;
the fall is at hand; already the field is strewn with the leaves of
several politico-patriotic illusions, and before November the soil will
be matted with them.

The Prohibition party started first. It shed in Pittsburgh last week its
outward show. The material needs of its middle class rank and file
asserted themselves, and off flew the pretences of "alcoholism" being
THE issue. The bolt at Pittsburgh was the party; what is now left of it
is but a sorry skeleton, that will look all the sorrier in November.

The Democratic party is about to follow suit in the shedding of its
foliage of phraseology. "Jeffersonianism," "Jacksonianism," etc., are
all about to be carried off by the blast. The needs of a bankrupt
Southern Shoddiocracy and of a bankrupt Western small farmer class, are
recking little what maxims the "party's founders" adhered to. A 50-cent
dollar is the ragged sheet needed by the modern "Democrats" to pay off
their debts and reduce the wages of their wage slaves.

Such, likewise, is the predicament of the Republican party. All the
prattle with which its foliage used to rustle about "Lincoln,"
"Emancipation," "America for Americans," is about to be hushed by the
approaching storm. The plutocracy, sublimated capitalism, that controls
the party, is determined, is driven by the needs of its class, to carry
out its programme to its logical conclusion: reduce America to a
province of International Capitalism, and our people to the level of the
poorest paid wage slave.

And the People's party, that loud rustling tree of elegant foliage? The
class interests that constitute its body and branches is ready to drop
its prettiest phrases, forget its wildest denunciations of the old
parties, and openly coalesce with that one of them that demands the
cheap money which the expiring middle class imagines will regalvanize it
into vigor.

In this forest stands but one tree, yet a sapling, but of promiseful
growth, and fated to overshadow all---the Socialist Labor party. It from
the start condemned false appearances. Its trunk and form were from the
start deliberately exposed to view. No phrases, no clap-trap did it seek
to hide behind. The class interests of the Proletariat, of the wage
slave, is the only interest it pretended to represent. All its vigor
went into the formation of its fibre, none was lost in gay deckings of
gay foliage. And now, when at last the season of relentless storm
approaches, it alone is truly in condition to weather the storm.

The day is nigh, when all the other political trees in our national
political forest will lie prone, beaten down by the gale of a people's
needs, while the mammoth tree of Socialism will remain the sole
mistress, affording under its ample branches and rich foliage the
protection long needed by a long-suffering people.

1 \[Guiddy. Presumably from the Scotch word guid, meaning good.-R.B.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Transcribed and edited by Robert Bills for the official Web site of the Socialist Labor Party of America. Uploaded June 26, 2003

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
