---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## Georgi Plekhanov

# Cant Against Kant [or Herr Bernstein's Will and Testament]{.small}

### (August 1901)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Georgi Plekhanov, **Selected Philosophical Works**, Vol. II, Moscow
1976, pp. 352--378.\
Originally published in Russian in **Zarya**, No. 2--3.\
Translated by Julius Katzer.\
Scan & OCR by [\@At
Leninist.Biz](http://www.leninist.biz){target="new"}.\
Proofreading & mark-up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### (E. Bernstein, *Historical Materialism* Translated by L. Kantsel Second Edition. St. Petersburg, 1901)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Dead is my boy, dead and gone,    |
|                                   | dear Kasyanovna \...\             |
|                                   | *Nekrasov* [\[1\*\]](#na){#fa}    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Die Todten reiten schnell.\       |
|                                   | *G.A. Bürger* [\[2\*\]](#nb){#fb} |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Herr Bernstein has ceased to exist for the school of Marx, to which he
once belonged. He no longer provides any grounds for irritation: after
all one cannot feel irritation against the dead. It is now quite useless
to feel regret over him: regret can change nothing. Yet, we should pay
our last respects to the departed, so we shall devote several pages to
his book, which has created so much ado in socialist circles all over
the civilised world, and lias been translated into Russian, in which
language it has now come out in a second edition in St. Petersburg.

It is common knowledge that, in this book, Herr Bernstein has subjected
the theory of Marx and Engels to a "critical revision". For our part, we
shall make some critical remarks concerning the results of that
"revision".

#### \* \* \*

### I

Herr Bernstein has remarked that "the most important element of the
basis of Marxism, i.e., its fundamental law, one that runs through its
entire system, is its specific historical theory, which bears the name
of historical materialism". That is wrong. Indeed, the materialist
explanation of history is one of the main distinctive features of
Marxism, but that explanation comprises merely a *part of the
materialist world-outlook of Marx and Engels*. That is why critical
research into their system should begin with a critique of the general
*philosophical* foundations of that worldoutlook. And since its method
is indubitably the soul of any philosophical system, any critique of the
*dialectical method* of Marx and Engels should naturally precede a
"revision" of their historical theory.

True to his erroneous view of the "fundamental law" of Marxism, Herr
Bernstein begins with a criticism of the materialist understanding of
history and it is only in the second chapter of his book that he goes
over to an appraisal of the dialectical method. For our part, we shall
remain faithful to our view concerning the decisive importance of method
in any serious system, and shall begin with *dialectics*.

What has Herr Bernstein to say about dialectics?

He does not refuse to recognise that it has some merits. Moreover, he
acknowledges that it lias had a useful influence on historical science.
In his words. F.A. Lange was quite right when he said in his **Labour
Question** that Hegelian historical philosophy and its fundamental
proposition -- development through opposites and their reconciliation --
may be called an almost anthropological discovery. (p. 39) However,
together with that selfsame Lange. he thinks that "both in the life of
the individual and in history, development through opposites does not
take place with such ease and so radically, with such precision and
symmetry, as in speculative constructions" (same page). Marx and Engels
failed to realise that, which is why dialectics exerted a deleterious
influence on their social-political views. True, the founders of
scientific socialism felt averse to contemplative constructions.
Convinced materialists, they tried "to turn that dialectics right side
up again", which, with Hegel, "stood on its head", i.e.. *upside down*.
But Herr Bernstein thinks that solving such a problem is not so easy:
"as always happens in reality, as soon as we abandon the ground of
empirically established facts and begin to think by by-passing them, we
find ourselves in the world of derived ideas; if, in that case, we
follow the laws of dialectics as established by Hegel, we shall find
ourselves, before even being aware of that, again in the clutches of the
'selfdevelopment of notions'. Herein lies the great scientific danger to
the Hegelian logic of contradictions" (This should read: *the danger of
the logic of contradictions*. We say: Mme. Kantsel has translated Herr
Bernstein very poorly) (p.37). Failing to see that danger, Marx and
Engels were unable to avoid it, and were therefore often led into error
by their own method. Thus, for instance, in the **Manifesto of the
Communist Party** they voiced the idea that, in Germany, the bourgeois
revolution could be an immediate prologue to the workers' revolution.
[\[3\*\]](#nc){#fc} This supposition ("*could* be") proved groundless:
the bourgeois revolution of 1848 did not serve as an immediate prologue
to the workers' revolution. Why was it that Marx and Engels were
mistaken? *Because they adhered to dialectics*. That, at least, is what
Herr Bernstein says. Another instance: since, in 1885, Engels, writing
on the occasion of a new edition of Marx's booklet **Enthüllungen über
den Kommunistenprozess**, and, in 1887, in the preface to his booklet
**Zur Wohnungsfrage**, expressed ideas which, in Bernstein's opinion,
are hard to reconcile with his violently negative attitude to the
well-known rebellion of the "young" in the German Social-Democracy, that
took place several years later [\[4\*\]](#nd){#fd}, *here again the
blame lies with dialectics*. If the reader has the least doubt of this
statement, he has only to read the following passage: "This ambiguity,
which is so little in keeping with Engels's character, ultimately sprang
from the dialectics borrowed from Hegel" (p.44). Regrettably enough,
this sentence does not contain the least trace of "ambiguity". If,
convinced of this, you will ask Herr Bernstein why it is that dialectics
is conducive to ambiguity, you will get the following explanation: "its
'yes is no, and no is yes', instead of 'yes is yes, and no is no'; its
mutual transition of opposition, and its conversion of quantity into
quality, and other dialectical pearls have always been an obstacle to a
clear-cut idea of the significance of recognised changes" (same page).

If "dialectical pearls" have *always* hampered any clear-cut idea of
changes that take place in reality, then the dialectical method; is
obviously erroneous in its very essence and should be utterly rejected
by all those who, holding the truth dear, aspire towards a correct
understanding of Nature and social life. The only question that remains
unsolved in this connection is: how have dialectical "pearls" which are
far removed from any beauty ledi Hegel and his philosophy of history to
what Herr Bernstein,, echoing Lange, has acknowledged to be an "almost
anthropological discovery"? The little word "*almost"*, which Herr
Bernstein stresses so heavily, explains nothing in this case and can
only serve as fresh confirmation of the old truth that *words* are in
place only where *notions* are absent. [\[5\*\]](#ne){#fe} Incidentally,
Herr Bernstein could be made a gift of this "*ambiguity*" if he made the
least attempt to *prove* the justice of his opinion regarding the harm
of " dialectical pearls". However, with him, proofs are conspicuously
absent: he has nowhere to get them from, *since he himself has not made
so bold as to assert that he has ever studied Hegel. If it came into his
head to claim to have done so, it would be very easy to show that he is*
\... *in error*. That is why Herr Bernstein has not even attempted to
prove his opinion, which he has simply *voiced*, believing, with good
reason, that naive readers will always be found who will not only take
his word but will even admire his profundity of thought.

#### \* \* \*

### II

*Habent sua fata libelli*, the Romans said. Writers, too, have their
fates, and at times most strange fates. Let us take Hegel as an example.
How *few* in number are those, who have gone to the trouble of studying
his philosophy; at the same time, how *numerous* are those "critics" who
permit themselves to pass helter-skelter judgement on it! The selfsame
frivolous people would be profoundly shocked if someone took upon
himself to condemn Herr Bernstein's book, without even reading it.
Whence such different yardsticks? Why is it that such frivolity is
permissible in respect of the great Hegel whereas it will be generally
considered impermissible in respect of the petty Herr Bernstein? "That
is the question." [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

If Herr Bernstein *knew* the subject he judges of so naively and so
clumsily, he would, of course, feel shame at his opinion of dialectics.
He thinks that the dialectical "yes is no, and no is yes", by hampering
a sober attitude towards reality, places us in the power of the
"self-development of notions". But just that, is the shortcoming in the
metaphysical thinking, whose devices Herr Bernstein characterises with
the formula "yes is yes, and no is no".

"Youth is wont to engage in abstractions," says Hegel, " whereas one who
has experience of life is not carried away by the abstract 'either \...
or', but adheres to concrete ground." These simple words can provide a
highly satisfactory characterisation of the difference between
dialectics, on the one hand, and thinking according to the following
formula, so dear to Herr Bernstein's heart: "yes is yes, and no is no",
on the other.

That formula is the selfsame "*abstract either* \... *or*", a proneness
to which, according to Hegel, is peculiar to youth. That the "*abstract
either* \... *or*" hampered, for a long time, the proper posing of
questions in social life and even in the natural sciences is something
that is now known to all and sundry. In our country, the distinctive
nature of a *dialectical* attitude to the object of study was revealed
very popularly and clearly by the late N.G. Chernyshevsky. From the
viewpoint of dialectics, "a definitive judgement can be made only in
respect of a definite fact after all the circumstances it depends on
have been examined \... For instance, is rain a blessing or an evil?
This is an abstract question which cannot be answered definitively: rain
is sometimes useful but sometimes, if more rarely, causes harm; one
should ask definitively: has rain been useful if it fell after the wheat
sowing has been completed, and it lasted for five hours? In this case a
definitive answer can be given: yes, it has been useful." It was from
the same angle that, according to Chernyshevsky's absolutely correct
explanation, Hegel's dialectical philosophy looked upon social
phenomena. Is war ruinous or beneficial? "In general one cannot reply
here in any decisive terms: one should know which war is in question
\... The Battle of Marathon was a most beneficial event in the history
of mankind." But examining phenomena from this angle means placing their
study on a *concrete ground*. That is why dialectical philosophy has
recognised, to quote from Chernyshevsky, that "the former general
phrases used to judge of good and evil, without any examination of the
causes that have given rise to a definite phenomenon -- these general
and abstract dicta are unsatisfactory. There is no abstract truth; truth
is always concrete".

At first glance, this might seem self-evident, but that is so only to
one *who* -- *consciously or unconsciously* -- *has taken up the stand
of dialectics* and does not consider the "*abstract either* \... *or*"
(in other words, the formula: "yes is yes and no is no") the most
important device in thinking. For instance, ask Count Leo Tolstoy
whether Chernyshevsky's words about war, which we have just quoted, are
correct or not. He will answer that they are quite wrong since war is an
*evil*, and evil can never be *goodness*. Count Tolstoy passes judgement
on all questions from the viewpoint of the "*abstract either* \...
*or"*, this stripping his conclusions of any serious significance.
Dialectics is entirely alien to him as a *thinker*, which, incidentally,
explains his instinctive revulsion for Marxism. It is regrettable that
Chernyshevsky himself often forgot that "truth is always concrete". In
his political economy, he was himself often prone towards the "*abstract
either* \... *or"*, but this indisputable fact presents no interest to
us at present. It is important for us here to remind our readers how
Chernyshevsky understood so well and explained so simply and tellingly
(in his **Essays on the Gogol Period in Russian Literature**) the
incompatibility of the dialectical view and abstract judgements.

Anarchists often ask Social-Democrats whether they recognise the freedom
of the individual, to which the latter reply that they do, but only
conventionally, because *absolute freedom* for one person means
*absolute slavery* for all those surrounding him, i.e., *converts
freedom into its opposite*. This kind of reply is not to the liking of
the anarchists, who seem sincerely to consider the Social-Democrats
*enemies of freedom* and, for their part, have proclaimed *unrestricted,
i.e., absolute freedom* of the individual. The conversion of freedom
into its opposite is seen by them as sheer sophistry or -- as some of
them might well put it after getting acquainted with Herr Bernstein's
terminology -- *one of the pearls of Hegelian dialectics*. The
anarchical doctrine of freedom is utterly imbued with the spirit of the
"*abstract either \... or*" (*either* freedom *or* despotism); it is
completely built on the formula, so favoured by Herr Bernstein: "*yes is
yes* and *no is no*", while the Social-Democrats regard the question of
freedom *from the concrete point of view*. They remember that *there is
no abstract truth*, and that *truth is concrete*. In this respect, they
are imbued with the *spirit of dialectics*.

Of course, Herr Bernstein will willingly condemn the anarchical doctrine
of freedom and will agree with the impossibility of abstract truth.
Inasmuch as he will express himself in this sense, he will himself go
over to the viewpoint of *dialectics*. However, he will do that
*unconsciously*, in consequence of which he will he unable to get out of
the muddle of notions he has fallen into. Molière's M. Jourdain could
speak in tolerable prose without even suspecting the existence of prose
speech. [\[6\*\]](#nf){#ff} But when dialectics comes up for discussion
by people capable only of an unconscious use of the dialectical method,
they will say nothing about it except sheer nonsense.

The search after concrete truth is a distinctive feature of dialectical
thinking. This very thought was expressed by Chernyshevsky when he said
that, since the times of Hegel, " explaining reality has become the
bounden duty of philosophical thinking" and that "hence the
extraordinary attention to reality, to which no thought had formerly
been given and which had been cruelly distorted to please one's own
one-sided prejudices".

If that is so -- and that is indeed so -- one can easily understand the
role played by dialectics in the *development of socialism from a utopia
into a science*.

The French Enlighteners of the eighteenth century looked upon social
life from the angle of the abstract oppositeness of good and evil, of
reason and stupidity. They were constantly "falling into abstractions".
Suffice it to recall their attitude towards *feudalism* which they saw
as an utter *absurdity*, and flatly refused to acknowledge that there
had been a time when it was, in its way, a *rational* system of social
relations. One can sometimes discern in the utopian socialists a
profound dissatisfaction with eighteenth-century abstract thinking.
Indeed, in their treatment *of history*, some of them sometimes abandon
the abstract formula "*yes is yes, and no is no*" in favour of the
dialectical point of view. However, this has been *only at times*, the
vast majority of them remaining satisfied, in the overwhelming majority
of cases, with the "*abstract either* \... *or*" in their disquisitions
*of social life*. All their systems are imbued with the spirit of that
"either \... or", and it is that "either \... or" that has given their
systems thoir *utopian nature*. To turn from a *utopia* into a
*science*, socialism had to outgrow this device in thinking, and rise to
the dialectical method. It was Marx and Engels who carried out this
necessary reform in socialism: however, they could do so *only because*
they had previously gone through the school of Hegelian philosophy. They
themselves freely acknowledged that they owed very much to the
dialectical method but it pleases Herr Bernstein that this should bo
otherwise. He has told us that the development of socialism from a
utopia into a sciencetook place *despite* dialectics, not *thanks to*
it. **\[**This of course, is very strong wording, but is just as lacking
in proof as the outstanding thought once voiced by Mr. L. Tikhomirov in
his booklet **Why I Stopped Being a Revolutionary**, namely, that
Russian literature developed *thanks to* the autocracy, not *despite*
it.**\]**

Herr Bernstein is firmly convinced that Hegel and his pupils looked down
on clear-cut notions, considering them *metaphysics*. The reader has
already learnt from Chernyshevsky's words what close attention to
reality was demanded by Hegel's dialectical philosophy. However, close
attention to reality is impossible without clear-cut notions, which is
why one has to assume that, in this case too, Herr Bernstein has failed
to understand the great thinker. Indeed, that is how the matter stands,
in proof of which it will suffice to read (and, of course, understand)
Paragraph 80 of Hegel's big **Encyklopädie**, which runs as follows:

#### [*Paragraph*]{.small}

"Thinking, as intelligence, stops short of clear-cut determinateness and
its distinction from any other determinateness; it regards such limited
abstraction as existing for itself and endowed with being."

#### [*Supplement to Paragraph*]{.small}

"Rational thinking should first and foremost be given its due, and in
the same way recognition should go to the service it has rendered
inasmuch as without rational thinking it is impossible to arrive at
anything firm and definite either in the area of theory or in practice.
Cognition begins with existing things being taken in their definite
distinctions. Thus, for instance, in a study of Nature, distinctions are
made between individual substances, forces, kinds, etc. and are denoted
in this isolation. Science's further success consists in a transition
from the viewpoint of the *ratio* to that of *reason* which studies each
of these phenomena -- as registered by the ratio as separated by a
precipice from all the others -- in the process of its transition into
another phenomenon, in the process of its inception and destruction."

Anyone capable of seeing, behind *words*, the *notions* linked with them
will agree -- unembarrassed by Hegel's terminology which sounds so
strange today -- that the road of investigation he has indicated is that
very road following which the science of today -- for instance, natural
science -- has arrived at its most outstanding theoretical achievements.

Far from ignoring the rights of the *ratio* (and consequently of
*clear-cut notions*) Hegel energetically defended its rights even in
areas which might seem very far removed from the "rational", i.e., in
philosophy, religion and art. He made the reiined remark that any
successful work of drama presupposes a number of clearcut characters. As
for philosophy, that, in his words, *calls first and foremost* for
precision (*Präzision*) of thought! [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}

But what does the real character of Hegelian philosophy matter to Herr
Bernstein? Of what concern to him is Hegel's **Encyklopädie** in
general, and any of its paragraphs in particular? He is well aware that
he will always find readers who will applaud him even if they notice his
errors. *He actually "criticises" Marx! He is attempting to destroy the
Marxist "dogma"*. That is quite enough today to win resounding fame. Of
course, it is also not a bad idea to make a study of what you are out to
criticise, but that can well be got along without \...

Herr Bernstein sets great store by his own common sense, but Engels was
quite right when he said that common sense is a good thing only as long
as it does not emerge from the confines of its own competence. The
lengths to which Herr Bernstein's words have taken him are shown by the
following consideration he has voiced, not, incidentally, in the book
under review but in an article he published in **Neue Zeit** after the
appearance of the book. [\[7\*\]](#ng){#fg}

In his well-known work on Ludwig Feuerbach, Engels says that the world
as seen by dialectics is a sum of *processes*, in which *things* and
their images in the mind, i.e., *notions*, do not remain immobile, but
are in a state of constant change. In principle ("*prinzipiell*"), Herr
Bernstein "of course" finds this proposition a correct one, but he is
unaware of the limits within which it remains correct, and of the way
the words "*constant change*" are to be understood. As he puts it, *the
changes the organism of any particular man is subject to are
nevertheless incapable of turning him into a creature of quite a
different kind*. Such profundity of thought might well have been envied
by Sancho Panza himself. Yet does Herr Bernstein really think Hegel and
the Hegelians were capable of losing sight, even for a single instant,
of so profound, longstanding and praiseworthy a truth? As though
foreseeing the appearance of "critics" *à la* Bernstein, Hegel drew the
attention of his listeners to the development of any given phenomenon
being able to make *actual* only that which is contained within it as a
*possibility* (*an sich*). He quoted *plants* as an example, saying that
though a plant does change, that takes place in accordance with the
nature of its embryo, so that the plant "is not simply lost in ils
infinite change". [\[3\]](#n3){#f3} After that, judge for yourselves
whether there was any need for Herr Bernstein's profound remark!

#### \* \* \*

### III

Herr Bernstein asserts that Marx exaggerated tlie rapidity of the
historical advance. This is true in respect of Marx's view regarding the
development of *capitalist* society. But *why* was Marx disposed towards
that exaggeration? Here too, J Lerr Bernstein puts the blame on
*dialectics*. Again, *this* aspect of the influence exerted by
dialectics is seen by him as most harmful and dangerous, and it is this
aspect that makes him steer clear of the "pearls of dialectics".
Unfortunately, however, that aspect, too exists only in his imagination.

According to Hegel, the *logical* process of negation takes place
*outside of time*. However, the *actual* processes of the negation of
one natural phenomenon by another, or of one social system by another
are determined, *in the rapidity of their course, by their own nature*,
and by the *concrete conditions* in which they take place. In ühis
polemic with Diihring and in his book **Ludwig Feuerbach**, Engels
refers to the development of the Universe as a dialectical process. *Did
he exaggerate the rapidity of this process*, which, in his own words,
called for extremely lengthy periods of time? We do not think so. Even
were he to have fallen into that error, if would have been the fault,
not of dialectics but of some other circumstances: an insufficient
knowledge of natural history, a lack of attention to the subject, or
something like that. The influence of dialectics on his judgement of the
speed of such processes would, in that case, have been just as
negligible as that of the complexion of the Empress of China.

Let us take another example, this time from the sphere of *history*.
Contraposing his dialectical method to Proudhon's abstract thinking,
Marx wrote in his **Misère de la Philosophie**: "It took the whole three
centuries in Germany to establish the first big division of labour, the
separation of the towns from the country." [\[8\*\]](#nh){#fh} Was the
speed of historical development, exaggerated here? There does not seem
to be any exaggeration here either, but even if there is, dialectics has
nothing at all to do with it.

Here is a third example, which hears upon *contemporary* social life. As
is common knowledge, Lassalle was a firm adherent of the dialectical
method, hut this firm adherent of the dialectical method thought it
would take from a hundred to two hundred years for the gradual
elimination of "landed and capitalist property" (*des Grund- und
Kapitaleigenthums*). To judge by Herr Bernstein's frame of mind today,
he may be expected to find even such a period too brief. He probably
thinks, like Rodhertus, that the elimination just mentioned will take at
least five hundred years. That, is his own affair, but Marx would have
probably said that Lassalle wanted more time than was necessary for the
radical reconstruction of society. Hence if follows that the Hegelians,
who were all agreed in recognising the, importance of the dialectical
method, could appraise in highly different ways the pace of contemporary
social development. Consequently if any particular adherent of
dialectics really exaggerates that speed, that should be ascribed to
something else but in no way to dialectics.

"We know," says Herr Bernstein, "that we think and know sufficiently
well in what way we think. But we shall never learn how that takes
place; in what manner consciousness arises from external impressions,
the excitation of the nerves, or from a change in the position and the
interaction of the atoms of the brain."

It is true that we shall never learn how consciousness arises in us, but
that is not the point; the question is whether our ignorance can serve
as an objection to *materialism*. "Critical" thinkers such as F.A.
Lange, and even physiologists such as Du Bois-Reymond thought that it
*could*; the present author is of the opinion that it *cannot*. We have
proved that by excerpts from the works of La Mettrie, cited in an
article directed against Herr Bernstein. [\[9\*\]](#ni){#fi} He has
taken offence at us for the article but, as the reader will now see, he
has understood absolutely none of our objections. "Attempts have been
made," Herr Bernstein continues, "to account for this by ascribing to
the atom a certain degree of capacity for consciousness, a degree of
animateness in the sense of the monad doctrine."

Indeed, *attempts have been made*. Among the authors of such attempts
was, as pointed out in our article, the *materialist* La Mettrie, though
a comparison of his doctrine with Leibnitz's doctrine of monads is
somewhat far-fetched, Herr Bernstein says nothing of La Mettrie himself,
though he thinks, in general, that "this" (the reference is to the
above-mentioned attempt) "is an image in the mind, an assumption forced
on us by our mode of thinking and our need of an integral
world-outlook."

If the reader has understood this we can only congratulate him most
sincerely because he has been more fortunate than the author of these
lines, or Herr Bernstein himself, who does not seem to understand what
he says. *This is nothing more than a surmise!* Of course, it is not! It
is something that llerr Bernstein got to understand only when he decided
to deny materialism, while nobody with any understanding of the matter
has passed that "this" off for something else.

But what *follows* from that "this" being a simple surmise? Is it that
materialism is a hollow doctrine? That is the question, to which (here
is no "*atom"* of reply either in Herr Bernstein's former "critical"
exercises or in the book under review.

Further: "An article in which I indicated this circumstance and remarked
that pure materialism is ultimately idealism has provided Mr. Plekhanov
with the desired pretext to attack me in **Neue Zeit** (Issue 44, 16th
year, II [\[10\*\]](#nj){#fj}), accusing me of ignorance in general,
and, in particular, of a complete absence of any understanding of
Engels's philosophical views. I say nothing of Mr. Plekhanov's having
arbitrarily made my words refer to things I did not touch upon; I state
only that his article ends with a statement to the effect that Engels,
in replying to a question from Mr. Plekhanov: 'So do you think old
Spinoza was right when he said that thought and extent are nothing but
two attributes of one and the same substance?' said, 'Of course, old
Spinoza was quite right.'"

The author of these lines was indeed greatly surprised when he saw how
poorly Engels's philosophy (and consequently Marx's as well), has been
understood by Herr Bernstein, who spent several years in close contact
with Engels. In reply to Herr Bernstein's call: "*Back to Kant"*, we
invited him to *return to a study of philosophy* (*zurück ins
Studierzimmer*). We did not seek any pretext for an attack on Herr
Bernstein. If our surprise found expression in a certain sharpness, that
acerbity can be explained by our former relations with Herr Bernstein.
Though to us he always seemed to be *narrow-minded* (this can be borne
out by many of our closest comrades), we yet considered him a member of
Marx's school, and were amazed by the truly puerile *trifles* he had
written about materialism. At the time, our sharply-worded opinion of
him might have been found somewhat unjust by some readers, but today
scarcely anyone with some claim to knowledge will be found who will make
so bold as to reproach us of exaggeration. *Herr Bernstein's
philosophical ignorance has now revealed itself in all its lustre*, so
that we shall not even invite him to return to his schoolbooks: *we can
see that schoolbooks have not been written for such as he is*.

Pure materialism is ultimately idealism! But in that case, is the
philosophy of Fichte and Hegel "ultimately" the philosophy of La Mettrie
or Holbach?! This can be asserted only by one who has no understanding
of materialism, idealism, Holbach, La Mettrie, Hegel or Fichte. Idealism
undoubtedly has a common feature with materialism: a striving towards a
*monist* explanation of phenomena. However, the mode in which this
striving is given effect to in *materialism* is the *diametrical
opposite* of the mode in which it is effected to in *idealism*, which is
why materialism "ultimately" *diverges radically* from idealism.

In his call "*back to Kant*", Herr Bernstein ought to have shown that
the road being followed by materialism is wrong in one respect or
another. Instead of that, he has limited himself to a "reduction" (and
what clumsy and naive reduction!) of materialism to idealism. What
amazing force and profundity of criticism!

And now about Spinoza. Mme. Kantsel has made a poor translation of the
relevant passage in Herr Bernstein's book. Herr Bernstein says that our
article, written on his "return to Kant" (whom he has never known, as is
acknowledged even by his fellow-thinker Mr. Struve), is *reducible* to
my conversation with Engels, which he has quoted. That is not true.

A German comrade, who is far more competent in matters of philosophy
than Herr Bernstein is, has expressed, in **Neue Zeit**, the thought
that materialism as grounded in natural science does not stand up to
criticism, and should not be linked with the theory of Marx and Engels,
which can be very easily linked with the far more valid philosophical
system of *Spinoza*. Since Herr Bernstein has incidentally referred to
the article by this comrade, we have found it necessary *to reply to it
as well*. We have shown that Marx and Engels never adhered to the
materialism which the Spinozist comrade has called that of natural
science, i.e., the materialism of Vogt and Moleschott. Further, on the
basis of the works of La Mettrie and Diderot, we have shown that French
eighteenth-century materialism was in essence *nothing more than a
modification of Spinozism*. We have shown the same in respect of
*Feuerbach* as well. It was only *after that*, when we went over to Marx
and Engels, the founders of scientific socialism, that we, in noting the
close affinity between their philosophical views and those of Feuerbach,
voiced our conviction that their materialism was also a variety of
Spinozism. Finally, as *one of the grounds* for that conviction, wo
referred to one of our conversations with Engels. With Herr Bernstein,
it appears that our article, *in its entirety*, can be reduced to that
conversation. What should these words be ascribed to: a lack of
truthfulness or of understanding?

"With Spinoza," Herr Bernstein continues, "God is the substance he
ascribes these two attributes to. At all events, Spinoza identifies God
with Nature, which is why Spinoza has long been denounced as a denier of
God, while his philosophy has been rejected as atheistic whereas,
formally speaking, it is a kind of pantheism \... Spinoza arrived at the
notion of 'God'as infinite substance with attributes already mentioned,
as well as others, this in a purely speculative way; for him,
law-governed thinking and being were identical. In this respect, he
resembled certain materialists but it would be an arbitrary
understanding of the word to call him a representative of philosophical
materialism \... If by the word 'materialism' one is in general to
understand something definite, then it can be only the doctrine of
matter as the ultimate and sole foundation of things. But Spinoza
expressly characterised his substance 'God' as non-corporeal \... Anyone
is, of course, free to be a Spinozist; only, in that case, he will no
longer be a materialist."

This is all that Herr Bernstein has been able to say in reply to our
historical note. It is not much. However, to this little one can apply,
in a certain sense, the Latin expression non multa, sed multum.

Spinoza resembles some materialists in his seeing law-governed thinking
and being as identical. Very good. Consequently there exist materialists
who acknowledge the identity of being and thinking. It appears that they
do. But that is balderdash, and if Herr Bernstein *understood* the
actual meaning of the words: *the identity of being and thinking*, he
would of course never have discovered that identity in any single
materialist. He would have seen that *recognition of the identity of
being and thinking is possible only in idealism*. And then -- a new and
also very considerable advantage of an understanding of the subject --
he would not have said that pure materialism is ultimately idealism.
However, he does not understand what he is speaking of and is therefore
as clumsy and helpless in his use of philosophical terminology, as the
"magician" (in Gleb Uspensky's story *Songs of Need*) was clumsy and
helpless in his use of the literary language, when he promised to
display to the ladies and gentlemen in the audience "the decapitation of
the head, nose and other parts of the body".

If Spinoza had recognised the identity of being and thinking, he would
have been a "*pure*" *idealist*, i.e., something he never was. His
single substance is *simultaneously both material and spiritual*.
[\[4\]](#n4){#f4} In Bernstein's words, however, Spinoza "*expressly
characterised*" it as non-corporeal. How well he has understood Spinoza!
Almost as well as he has understood Hegel!

All these blunders of Herr Bernstein's are most obvious and most
unpardonable; they testify to such total and absolute incompetence in
the field of philosophy that the reader may well ask whether it is
worthwhile dwelling on them? However, anyone who would be prone even for
a minute to give a *negative* reply to that question would be making a
big mistake.

#### \* \* \*

### IV

Overjoyed at Herr Bernstein's apostasy, the bourgeoisie are now lauding
this "critic" to the skies; his exploits as "critic" have been
proclaimed with such pomp from the housetops that a careful analysis of
his arguments can provide numerous and highly interesting psychological
"documents" to characterise our times. Besides, Herr Bernstein's
renunciation of materialism and his striving to "*return to Kant*"
[\[5\]](#n5){#f5} are not simple errors of a philosophical mind (if one
could only speak of Herr Bernstein's philosophical mind); no, they have
been a natural, inevitable and vivid expression of his present-day
socio-political leanings, which can be expressed in the words: a
*rapprochement with the advanced sections of the bourgeoisie*. "What is
called Ihe middle class," he says, "is a complex class consisting of
various sections with very heterogeneous and dissimilar interests. These
sections hold together as long as they are equally oppressed or as long
as they are equally threatened. In this particular case we can of course
speak only of the latter, i.e., that the bourgeoisie form a homogeneous
reactionary mass because all their elements are equally threatened by
the Social-Democrats -- some in their material interests and others in
their ideological interests, i.e., their religion, their patriotism, and
their desire to save the country from the horrors of violent revolution"
(pp. 248--49). This short quotation provides a key to an understanding
of the psychology in the "revision" of Marxism undertaken by Herr
Bernstein. To avoid a "threat" to the ideological interests of the
bourgeoisie -- and first and foremost to its *religion* -- Herr
Bernstein has "returned" to the viewpoint of "*critical*" *philosophy*,
which gets along very well with religion, while *materialism* is utterly
and irreconcilably *hostile* to it. [\[6\]](#n6){#f6} To avoid a
"threat" to bourgeois "*patriotism"*, he has set about refuting Marx's
proposition that the proletariat has no homeland, and speaking on German
foreign policy in the tone of a "statesman" of the "*Realpolitik*"
school; finally, to avoid the "threat" of the "*horrors of violent
revolution*" to the bourgeoisie, he has risen up against the
"*Zusammenbruchstheorie*" (which, incidentally, he himself fabricated
out of some words of Marx and Engels which he had partly misunderstood
and partly distorted) and attempted to prove that "class dictatorship is
a sign of a lower culture \... a step backwards, political atavism".
Anyone who wishes to understand Herr Bernstein should try to understand,
not so much his theoretical arguments, which contain nothing but
ignorance and muddled thinking, as his practical aspirations, which
account for all his mishaps in the realm of theory and his backsliding.
*What a man is, such is his philosophy*, Fichte said with much justice.

**\[**Religion "is the opium of the people," Marx wrote in the
**Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher**. [\[11\*\]](#nk){#fk} "To abolish
religion as the *illusory* happiness of the people is to demand their
*real happiness\...*. The criticism of religion is therefore \... the
criticism of the vale of tears." [\[12\*\]](#nl){#fl}

This kind of language could not, of course, be to the liking either of
the bourgeois philistines, who stand in need of the "opium" of religion
to ensure for themselves a little of *illusory happiness*, or of those
far more gifted and bold ideologists of the bourgeoisie who, after
shedding their own religious prejudices, yet regale the masses of the
people with *illusory happiness* exclusively to protect from those
masses the *real happiness* of the well-endowed classes. It goes without
saying that these are gentlemen that have risen up so violently against
materialism and so loudly condemn the "dogmatism" of those
revolutionaries who unmask the actual nature of their anti-materialist
propaganda \...**\]**

In an interesting booklet entitled **Reform oder Revolution**, C. von
Massow, Geheimer Regierungsrath, Mitglied der internationalen Kommission
für Schutzpflege u.s.w., in short, a most "*estimable*" gentleman,
voices his firm conviction that "if our development proceeds in the same
way as it has till now, then our Fatherland will be threatened in the
future by social revolution" (*Vorwort*, S. 1). What is needed, in his
opinion, to avoid that revolution is comprehensive reform (*eine
Gesammtreform auf staatlichem und sozialem Gebiet*), a demand his book
deals with. But his programme of comprehensive reform does not preclude
a struggle against the "revolutionary forces" (*die Mächte des
Umsturzes*). Before a revolutionary explosion takes place, those forces
should be fought against with the *spiritual* weapon (*mit geistigen
Waffen*), and in that struggle the efforts should be directed, first and
foremost, *against materialism*. However, Herr von Massow thinks that
the struggle against materialism will be best conducted by those
opponents of the "revolutionary forces" that will cleanse themselves of
the taint of materialism. "The enemy we must engage in the first place
is the materialism in our own midst," he preaches. "Social-Democracy is
utterly materialistic; it denies God and eternity" (*sic*). "But who has
that doctrine been borrowed from? Has it not come down from above? The
vast majority of the educated people of our times have turned away from
the faith of their fathers \..." "Part of the educated world are quite
atheistic." [\[7\]](#n7){#f7} And the social consequences of atheism are
horrifying. "If there is neither God, life beyond the grave, nor
eternity; if the soul ceases to exist together with the advent of death,
then any calamity, any poverty suffered by part of mankind, which
suffers while another part enjoys surfeit, becomes two arid three
hundred times as unjust. Why should nine-tenths of the people bear a
heavy burden of life while a minority remain free of any burden?"
[\[8\]](#n8){#f8}

This is a question the atheist can give no satisfactory answer to. But
it is therein that the *social* danger of atheism lies; it arouses and
encourages revolutionary sentiments in the toiling masses. That is why
our Geheimer Regierungsrath, etc., etc., preaches to the educated
bourgeoisie repentance and a struggle against materialism. Herr von
Massow is an intelligent man. He is far more intelligent than all those
"Marxists" who, while sincerely sympathising with the working class, no
less sincerely go in for "critical" philosophy. Such people adhere to a
materialist understanding of history, but they are greatly surprised
when they are told of the *social*, i.e., ultimately, the *economic*
causes of that negative attitude towards *materialism*, and that spread
of *neo-Kantianism*, which are to be seen among the educated bourgeoisie
of today.

#### \* \* \*

### V

But let us hark back to Herr Bernstein. The concluding chapter of his
book is embellished with the epigraph: "*Kant wider Cant*". In
explaining the meaning of this epigraph, Herr Bernstein says that he has
invoked the spirit of the Konigsberg philosopher for a struggle against
the conventionality of outmoded views which are seeking to assert
themselves in Social-Democracy, and present a great danger to it. "The
fits of fury I have thereby evoked in Mr. P." (Plekhanov) "have
fortified me in the conviction that Social-Democracy needs a new Kant to
subject the old doctrine to rigorous ethical winnowing and show wherein
its ostensible materialism is the highest and therefore most easily
misleading ideology, show that contempt for the ideal and elevation of
the material factors to the level of omnipotent powers of development is
self-deception, which has always in fact been seen as such by those who
preach it" (p. 330). The reader is hard put to understand what he means
by "ostensible materialism", and "self-deception" -- moreover, one that
is "in fact" quite *deliberate*. The explanation is quite simple: in
Herr Bernstein's opinion, self-deception is unavoidable wherever there
are people who consider the economic factors "omnipotent", while, at the
same time, they are "in fact" capable of harbouring *ideals*. This alone
is sufficient to show how *close* Herr Bernstein now stands to Mr.
Kareyev, and therefore how *far removed* he is from any serious
criticism of Marxism. For conclusive proof of that one has only to read
the pages devoted by Herr Bernstein to an assessment of the *historical*
views of Marx and Engels. The reading of those pages makes one's hair
literally stand on end. For lack of space, we shall not analyse them
here, but shall refer the curious reader to what has been said about
them by Karl Kautsky in his book **Bernstein und das
sozial-demokratische Programm**, and by us in the *Preface* to the new
edition of the **Manifesto of the Communist Party**. [\[9\]](#n9){#f9}
[\[13\*\]](#nm){#fm} We shall only note here the following oddily, which
incidentally refers, not to a philosophico-historical but to a
philosophical "criticism" of Marxism. Herr Bernstein says: "In the
expression 'the materialist understanding of history' are contained, in
advance, all the misunderstandings linked in general with the concept of
materialism. Philosophical or natural-historical materialism is quite
deterministic, which cannot be said of the Marxist understanding of
history, which does not award the economic foundation of the life of
peoples any absolutely determining influence on its forms" (pp. 23--24).
This is tantamount to asserting that a determinist is one that awards to
the economic foundation of life an absolutely determining influence on
the *forms* of life (?!). This must be the height of ignorance and
ineptitude. But that is not all. Later, when Kautsky remarked in **Neue
Zeit** that no scientific explanation of phenomena is possible without
determinism, our "critic" hastened to declare that he had rebelled only
against *materialist* determinism, which consists in an explanation of
psychological phenomena by the operation of matter, while he, Herr
Bernstein, also recognises the operation of another principle. Herr
Bernstein has thus safely put in at the peaceful haven of *dualism*, the
entrance to which hears the edifying inscription: "*Man is made up of
body and soul.*" Again, this is the *Kareyev doctrine* the Russian
reader is so well familiar with. But it is in poor accord even with
Kantianism that Herr Bernstein wishes to "return" to. Kant asserts
categorically that *alle Handlungen der vernünftigen Wesen, sofern sie
Erscheinungen sind, in irgend einer Erfahrung angetroffen werden, stehen
unter der Naturnothwendigkeit* (all the acts of rational beings,
inasmuch as they are phenomena and in one way or another are met by us
in our experience, are subordinate to natural necessity)
(**Prolegomena**, Paragraph 53). Should this be taken to mean that
phenomena obey natural necessity? It means just that they are to he
explained materialistically (*cf.* **Kritik der Urtheilskraft**,
Paragraph 78). It appears, consequently, that Herr Bernstein has
rebelled, not only against the materialists but *also against Kant*, and
with the sole purpose of avoiding any *threat to the bourgeoisie's
ideological interests*, i.e.. to avoid attacking bourgeois cant. *Cant
wider Kant* -- such is the motto Herr Bernstein should choose.

If Herr Bernstein has rejected *materialism* so as to avoid "
threatening" one of the "ideological interests" of the bourgeoisie known
as *religion*, his rejection of *dialectics* has resulted from his
non-desire to frighten the selfsame bourgeoisie with the "*horrors of
violent revolution*". We said above that he was himself probably not
unwilling to condemn the "*abstract either* \... *or*", which takes no
account of conditions of place and time, which is why he himself
unconsciously uses the dialectical method. That is true enough, but it
should now be added that he unconsciously takes up a concretely
dialectical stand only in those cases and only in the measure in which
dialectics is a *convenient weapon in the struggle against the imaginary
radicalism of "revolutionaries'" whose thinking follows the "yes is yes,
no is no" formula*. These are the cases when any *philistine* turns into
a *dialectician*. But that selfsame Herr Bernstein is prepared --
together with all pllilistines the world over -- to utter any kind of
balderdash against dialectics and level the most absurd accusations
against it whenever he thinks it can help strengthen and develop
revolutionary aspirations in the area of socialism. Marx says that in
the good old times dialectics became the fashion with the German
philistines when they knew it only in its mystified form and imagined
that it could serve to justify their conservative aspirations, but they
turned against it when they learnt its real nature and realised that it
considers everything that exists in terms of its transience, that it
stops at nothing and fears nothing, in short, that it *is revolutionary
in its essence. [\[14\*\]](#nn){#fn}* This same attitude towards
dialectics is to be seen in llerr Bernstein, all of whose psychology
reveals him as an offspring of German philistinism. That is why his
"criticism" has been welcomed by the German philistines with loud and
long outcries of joy, and why they have numbered him among the great.
Birds of a feather \...

So as not to "threaten" the bourgeoisie with the "horrors of violent
revolution", Herr Bernstein has rebelled against dialectics and risen up
in arms against the *Zusammenbruchstheorie* which he himself has
invented. At the same time and with the same aim in view, he is acting
as a Pindar of *democracy*. "Democracy," he says, "is, in principle, the
destruction of class domination if not the actual destruction of classes
themselves." (p. 225) We are well aware of all the advantages of
democracy and of all the benefits it gives the working class in its
struggle for liberation. However, we do not wish to distort the truth
even for the sake of democracy, in just the same way as we do not wish
to indulge in unseemly exaggeration. That democracy destroys class
domination is nothing more than an invention of Herr Bernstein's.
Democracy allows that domination to exist in an area to which the notion
of class, properly speaking, belongs, i.e., *the sphere of the economy*.
It abolishes only the *political privileges* of the upper classes. It is
for that reason that it does not destroy the *economic* supremacy of one
class over another -- the bourgeoisie over the proletariat -- it does
not eliminate either the struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie or the need for the proletariat to wage that struggle
employing all the means that may prove *fitting* at a given time. In
reasonable terms, any man in his right mind will agree that the "horrors
of violent revolution", *taken by themselves*, contain nothing that is
*desirable*, but any man who has not been blinded by anti-revolutionary
trends must also acknowledge that a democratic constitution does not
preclude an exacerbation of the class struggle that can make a
revolutionary explosion and a revolutionary dictatorship inevitable.
Herr Bernstein had no grounds to frighten revolutionaries with the
consideration that class dictatorship would be a sign of a lower level
of culture. The great social question of our times -- that of the
abolition of the economic exploitation of man by man \[can be solved --
in just the same way as all great social questions of former times --
*only by force*. True, *force does not yet mean violence; violence is
only one of the forms of the manifestation of force. However*, the
*choice* of the *form* in which the proletariat will have to display its
revolutionary strength *depends, not on its good will but on the
circumstances*. That form is better which leads to victory over the
enemy more speedily and assuredly. If a "*violent revolution*" has
proved the most suitable mode of action in a given country and in given
circumstances then that man will prove a miserable doctrinaire -- if not
a traitor -- who will bring to bear against it principled considerations
like those we meet in Herr Bernstein's writings: "a low level of
culture", "political atavism" and so on. Hand-to-hand fighting\] is, if
you wish, a zoological "atavism" wherever it takes place: two men locked
in struggle remind one of two fighting beasts. But who, except the
"Tolstoyans", will in principle condemn any resistance to evil by means
of hand-to-hand fighting? And will any serious man be found who will
take in earnest the argumenls with the aid of which the Tolstoyans
condemn violence in principle? To any thinking man it is obvious that
such arguments are an unintended caricature of thinking in accordance
with the "*yes is yes, and no is no*" formula so beloved of Herr
Bernstein, which, as we know, is quite identical to the Hegelian
"*abstract either* \... *or*" (violence is *either* evil *or* good). The
"horrors of violent revolution" are always more or less "horrible". That
is so and nobody will question it. However, Herr Bernstein has chosen a
very bad way of evading those horrors: he should address himself to the
bourgeoisie and show those of its elements who have not yet sunk into
the morass of class selfishness that trying to slow down the socialist
movement of today means committing a heinous sin against humaneness and
culture. In the measure of success attending his preachment, it would
weaken the resistance offered by the bourgeoisie to the proletarian
movement and thereby lessen the possibility of the "horrors of violent
revolution". Herr Bernstein has preferred to act differently. He has set
about befogging the class consciousness of the workers by coming out
with a preaching of a Marxism which he has "revised" with the special
purpose of soothing the bourgeoisie. This device has proved effective in
the sense that a considerable part of the educated bourgeoisie has very
well realised all the *advantage to it* of the spread of a Marxism
"revised" by Herr Bernstein at the expense ef the old and revolutionary
theory of Marx. This part of the bourgeoisie has greeted Herr Bernstein
as a kind of Messiah. However, he is dead as far as socialism is
concerned, and, of course, will never rise from the dead, no matter how
loud his outcries that the socialists have failed to understand him and
that, in essence, he has changed very little in comparison with what he
previously was. Surely, an excess of zeal that gets one nowhere!

#### \* \* \*

### VI

At every step Herr Bernstein loses his bearings in the vagueness of his
ideas and is entangled in his own contradictions. Nevertheless, his
arguments contain a logical nub about which all his thoughts group
themselves. That nub is the *incomes doctrine*.

"It is quite wrong to think," he says, "that present-day development
shows a relative or even absolute decrease in the number of
property-owners. Their number is growing, not 'more or less' but simply
more, i.e., is growing absolutely and relatively. If the activities and
prospects of Social-Democracy depended on a decrease in the number of
property-owners, then it could indeed sleep soundly. But that is not the
case. It is not with a decrease but with an increase in social wealth
that the prospects of Social-Democracy are linked." (p. 90)

Neither Marx, Engels nor any of their followers ever linked their hopes
with a *decrease* in social wealth. In his attempts to break *such* a
"link", Herr Bernstein is simply battling against windmills. However,
all Marxists have been convinced that the growth of social wealth in
capitalist society goes hand in hand with the *growth of social
inequality and a decline in the number of property-owners*. Had Herr
Bernstein been able to prove the reverse, it would have to be
acknowledged that he had dealt Marxism a mortal blow. (And then, indeed,
all talk of the social revolution would be useless.) The trouble is that
Herr Bernstein has proved absolutely nothing except his own lack of
understanding. The arguments he adduces in defence of his bold
statements boil down in practice to the thesis that moderate incomes
grow more rapidly than the population does. This is an indisputable fact
but it proves absolutely nothing. *If social income grows more rapidly
than the number of moderate incomes does, then the growth of that number
is fully compatible with the growth of social inequality*. We have
proved that in an article against Mr. P. Struve specially dealing with
the question of the "dulling" of socio-economic inequality.
[\[15\*\]](#no){#fo} We shall refer the reader to that article, limiting
ourselves here to some specific remarks.

In the first place, the growth in the number of moderate incomes, which
is quite compatible with the growth of socioeconomic inequality, in no
way testifies either to the absolute, and still less to the relative
increase in the number of property-owners. *Property and income* are two
quite distinct notions.

In the second place, Herr Bernstein's references to the distribution of
landed property are just as *inaccurate* as his mention of the growth in
the number of moderate incomes lacks conviction. Here is one of the many
examples available.

He says that the group of medium-size peasant farms in Germany grew by
almost 8 per cent in the period between 1882 and 1895, while their area
went up by 9 per cent (p.110). But what sense do figures on the growth
in the absolute number of farms of the area of a *single* category of
farms make if we are not told the *total* number of farms in the country
and the *total* area under cultivation? If we take into account this
circumstance, i.e., if we consider the *share* of medium-size peasant
farms in the aggregate number of farms and the aggregate area, we shall
find that the area occupied in Germany by farms in this category showed
a quite negligible increase. In 1882 it formed 11.9 per cent of the
entire land area, rising to 12.37 per cent in 1895, an increase of *less
than one-half per cent*. But we say this about the *entire* land area in
Germany. As for the agricultural area proper, farms in the category
mentioned accounted for 12.26 per cent in 1882, and 13.02 per cent in
1895, a growlh of not more than 0.75 per cent. [\[10\]](#n10){#f10} This
growth was so insignificant that the use of the word *growth* is
somewhat strange.

So complex is the state of affairs in German agriculture that it cannot
be discussed in terms of bare statistics alone, but calls for a
consideration of the geographical features of each locality, as well as
the technical and economic features of each particular category of
farms, and also the *changes* in those features in the periods under
review.

As for *Britain*, Herr Bernstein has forgotten to add, or does not know,
that the small farmers, who have indeed increased in number in some
areas, this under the influence of overseas competition, go by the name
of "*British slaves"* [\[11\]](#n11){#f11}, so *poor* is their economic
condition.

Marx's theory is just as little disproved by the growth in the number of
such "slaves" as it would be by the increase of the sweating system
[\[12\]](#n12){#f12} in any branch of the manufacturing industry.

In the East of the *United States*, Herr Bernstein says, the number of
small and medium-size farms is growing. Again this is untrue. In the
Eastern States the number of small farms *is falling*, and in general,
according to Levasseur, a certain *trend towards concentration* is to be
seen in North America. [\[13\]](#n13){#f13}

The most recent statistics also reveal a concentration of landed
property in *Belgium* [\[14\]](#n14){#f14} where *a relative decrease in
the number of owners of land is an established fact*.

#### \* \* \*

### VII

"Herr Schulze-Gävernitz's one-sided presentation of the history of
modern British development, against which I came out very sharply in the
past, has not prevented him, either in his **Zum sozialen Frieden** or
in his monograph **Der Grossbetrieb -- ein wirthschaftlicher
Fortschritt**, from establishing facts of great importance for an
understanding of the economic significance of our times," says Herr
Bernstein. "I see nothing bad in that, and willingly admit that I have
noted many facts quoted by Schulze-Gävernitz as well as by other
economists of the Brentano school (Herkner and Sinzheimer), facts I had
not previously noticed or had underestimated. I am not even ashamed to
admit that I have learnt something from J. Wolf's book **Sozialismus und
kapitalistische Gesellschaftsordnung**. Herr Plekhanov calls this an
eclectic blending (of scientific socialism) with the doctrine of
bourgeois economists. As though nine-tenths of the elements of
scientific socialism have not been taken from the works of 'bourgeois
economists', and as though, in general, there exists such a thing as
'partisan science'." (pp.306 and 307)

Strictly speaking, "*partisan science*" is impossible, but, regrettably
enough, the existence is highly possible of "*scientists" who are imbued
with the spirit of parties and with class selfishness*. When Marxists
speak of bourgeois science with contempt, it is "scientists" of that
brand that they have in view. It is to such "scientists" that the
gentlemen Herr Bernstein has "learnt" so much from belong, *viz.* J.
Wolf, Schulze-Gävernitz, and many others. Even if nine-tenths of
scientific socialism has been taken from the writings of bourgeois
economists, it has not been taken in the way in which Herr Bernstein has
borrowed from the Brentanoists and other apologists of capitalism the
material he uses to "revise" Marxism. Marx and Engels were able to take
a *critical* attitude towards bourgeois scientists, something that Herr
Bernstein has been unable or unwilling to do. When he "learns" from
them, he simply places himself under their influence and, without
noticing the fact, adopts their apologetics. He imagines that the
doctrine of the growth of moderate incomes as proof of the absolute and
relative rise in the number of property-owners is a serious advance in
objective science, whereas it is actually an apologetical fabrication.
Were Herr Bernstein capable of scientific thinking, he would not have
barked up the wrong tree, as he has done, but then he would not have
written his book.

As far back as the autumn of 1898, we voiced the thought that Herr
Bernstein had set about "criticising" Marx solely because of his
inability to treat bourgeois apologetics critically.
[\[15\]](#n15){#f15} We also noted at the time the curious fact that
even Herr Bernstein's much-talked-of expression, "*the movement is
everything, the ultimate aim is nothing"*, had been borrowed by him from
Schulze-Gävernitz. Incapable to advance any objections to us on
fundamentals, Herr Bernstein has had recourse to abusive language, to
which we find no reason to react. [\[16\]](#n16){#f16} We set high value
on Herr Bernstein's hostility to us, and are proud to have been among
the first to *draw attention* to his apostasy, and *brand* it. "*It is a
question of who will bury whom*" we wrote in the article in question,
"*whether Bernstein will bury Social-Democracy, or Social-Democracy will
bury Bernstein*." This posing of the qustion seemed too harsh to many of
our comrades in 1898, but that is exactly how the matter is now seen by
*all* in the ranks of revolutionary Social-Democracy. The ensuing course
of events fully confirmed the justice of our words. We had not the
slightest wish in the past to engage in any altercation with Herr
Bernstein and we have no wish to do that today either, but we cannot
withstand the temptation to note the following interesting detail.

Herr Bernstein has interpreted the remarks we directed against him in
the sense that we consider the worker's condition in capitalist society
"hopeless"; he has declared that he does not wish to enter into argument
"with a person according to whose concepts science demands that the
worker's condition should be considered hopeless in all circumstances,
right up to the great upheaval" (pp.309-10). What severity of epithet!
However, we come across the following passage in the severe Bernstein's
book:

In the doctrine of Marx and Engels, "only the following remains
unrefuted: that the productive capacity in present-day society is far
greater than the actual demand for products as determined by purchasing
power; that millions are living in squalid dwellings, are poorly clad
and undernourished despite the abundance of means to provide them with
sufficient housing, food and clothing; that overproduction is a
consequence of this disproportion in various branches of industry \...;
that there consequently exists considerable unfairjicss in providing the
workers with occupations, as a result of which their conditions become
most precarious, subjecting them to ever more humiliating dependence
because of the excess of work at one place, and unemployment at
another." (pp. 145--46)

As is her wont, Mme. Kantsel has made a poor translation of Herr
Bernstein, who says that the workers *are kept* in humiliating
dependence, and not that they find themselves *in ever greater
dependence*, as the translator has made him say. But even in this
correct translation, Herr Bernstein's idea has struck back at him.
Indeed, is not the condition *hopeless*, in capitalist society, of a
class which, despite the amazing growth of labour productivity,
*remains* in the economic condition and the humiliating dependence that
we read of in Herr Bernstein's writings? It is patently *hopeless*, and
obviously it is only *the abolition of the capitalist mode of
production, the social revolution*, that can bring the proletariat out
of that hopeless condition. [\[17\]](#n17){#f17} Herr Bernstein has not
made a neat job of it in his new world-outlook.

Herr Bernstein asks sapiently: "Does not the vast extension of the area
of the world market" (i.e., its size; we are obliged to reiterate that
Mme. Kantsel has made a very poor translation of the book under review.
-- *G.P.*) "combined with the vast reduction of the time required for
the transmission of news and the operation of transport -- does it not
enhance the possibility of a relaxation of depressions; and then, the
steeply mounting wealth of the European industrial states, in connection
with the flexibility of presentday credit and the rise of industrial
cartels -- has this not restricted, at least for a long time to come,
the influence of local or partial depressions on the overall situation
to such an extent that universal business" (i.e., industrial. -- *G.P.*)
"crises such as the former should be considered improbable?" (p. 126)

The events have provided the answer to this question: since the middle
of last year [\[18\]](#n18){#f18} the civilised world has been
experiencing a general industrial crisis, whose approach was foreseen by
some bourgeois businessmen *already at the time Herr Bernstein was
writing his book*.

#### \* \* \*

### VIII

In one of Shakespeare's plays, a courtier says of the demented Ophelia:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| \... *Speaks things in doubt,\                                        |
| That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,\                    |
| Yet the unshaped use of it doth move\                                 |
| The hearers to collection* \...                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The same has to be said of Herr Bernstein's book: it carries half sense;
its speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use of it moves the attentive
reader to collection. In all questions of theory, Herr Bernstein has
shown himself to be as weak as weak can be. How has it come to pass that
for many years he has played the part of one of the most outstanding
theoreticians of his Party? This is a question that gives food for
thought. It is no easy matter to find any satisfactory answer \...

Another and no less important matter is that only faint traces of
socialism have survived in Herr Bernstein's views. In fact, he is *far
closer to the petty-bourgeois adherents of "social reform" than to
revolutionary Social-Democracy*. Yet he remains a "comrade", arid has
not been asked to leave the Party. This can be accounted for in part by
the *false view regarding freedom of opinion*, now so widespread among
Social-Democrats in all countries. "How can a man be expelled from the
Party because of his views?" it is said. "That would mean persecuting
him for heresy." People who think thus forget that *freedom of opinion*
must necessarily be supplemented with freedom to draw closer together or
part company, and that the latter freedom has no existence wherever some
prejudice makes people march together who would do better to part
because of their difference of views. But this erroneous reasoning is
only part of the explanation (why Herr Bernstein has not been expelled
from the German Social-Democratic Party. The main reason is that his new
views are shared by a fairly considerable number of other
Social-Democrats. For reasons we cannot go into in this article,
*opportunism* has won many supporters in the ranks of Social-Democracy
in various countries. This spread of opportunism presents the main
danger threatening it today. Social-Democrats who have remained loyal to
the revolutionary spirit of their programme -- and they are fortunately
still in the majority almost everywhere -- will be making an irreparable
mistake if they do not lake timely and decisive action to counter the
danger.) Taken alone, Herr Bernstein, far from being formidable, is
simply ridiculous and marked by a striking resemblance to the
philosophising Sancho Panza. What his theory stands for, however, is a
most alarming thing as a symptom of possible decline.

**\[**Incidentally, Herr Bernstein has written the following: "To show
Mr. Plekhanov's polemical devices in their true light, I must point out
that a great if not the greater part of Russian Social-Democrats now
active in Russia have decisively adopted a viewpoint close to mine, and
that in that sense some of my 'empty' articles have been translated into
Russian and brought out in separate editions." [\[19\]](#n19){#f19} This
is followed by the malicious remark that such a thing can scarcely fill
us with joy. Leaving aside both the question of our personal sentiments
and that of how our polemical devices can be characterised by the fact
of Social-Democrats active in Russia drawing closer to Herr Bernstein --
if that were true -- we shall note that he is evidently referring to the
so-called "economic" trend in Russian Social-Democracy.
[\[19\*\]](#ns){#fs} It is common knowledge that this trend, which met
with some temporary success in Russia, has now been overcome by our
fellow-thinkers, who see in Herr Bernstein nothing more that a
*renegade*. But it is not yet generally known that there has been a
Russian Social-Democratic publication (issued abroad) which has failed
to notice the existence of the "economic" trend, and has therefore
denied it. Its editors must surely be people of keen vision.
[\[20\*\]](#nt){#ft}**\]**

This wretched translation of Herr Bernstein's wretched little book has
appeared in two "legal" editions, with a third one in the offing. There
is nothing surprising about that. *Any* "criticism" of Marxism and *any*
parody of it -- if only imbued with the *bourgeois* spirit -- is sure to
be to the liking of that section of our legal Marxists which is itself
*a bourgeois parody of Marxism*.

August 1901.

#### \* \* \*

### Footnotes

[1.](#f1){#n1} \[These words are in English in the original.\]

[2.](#f2){#n2} **G.W.F. Hegels Werke**, Bd. IV, S. 150--51.

[3.](#f3){#n3} **Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie**,
Erster Theil, **Hegels Werke**, Bd. III, S. 34--35.

*[4.](#f4){#n4} Cf. **Die Ethik von Spinoza***, neu übersetzt von J.
Stern, II. Th., S. 77 und 80.

[5.](#f5){#n5} In his book he says incidentally that for the expression
"return to Kant" he has now substituted the expression "Let us return to
Lange". But that does not change anything.

[6.](#f6){#n6} Even the ancients realised that herein lay one of the
great services rendered to culture by materialism. Lucretius expressed
this awareness excellently in his extolmont of Epicurus. "When the life
of man lay \... grovelling upon the earth crushed by the weight of
religion which showed her face from the realms of heaven, lowering upon
mortals with dreadful mien, 'twas a man of Greece who dared first to
raise his mortal eyes to meet her, and first to stand forth to meet her:
him neither the stories of the gods nor thunderbolts checked, nor the
sky with its revengeful roar \..."

[7.](#f7){#n7} **op. cit.**, S. 222.

[8.](#f8){#n8} **op cit.**, S. 222--23.

[9.](#f9){#n9} A remark *en passant*: Herr Bernstein does not approve of
our expression: the *monist* explanation of history. With him, the word
monistisch proves synonymous with simplistisch. To avoid entering into
lengthy explanations of why a "*monist"* explanation of history is
essential, we shall say, in the words of Newton: *causas rerum
naturalium non plures admitti debere, quam quae et verae sint et earum
Phenomenis explicandis sufficiant*. \[One should not admit more causes
of natural phenomena than those that are true and sufficient for their
explanation.\] Herr Bernstein does not understand that, while the
development of social -- and ultimately of economic -- relations is not
the radical cause of the development of the so-called *spiritual*
factor, the latter develops *out of itself*, this *self-development of
the spiritual factor* heing nothing more than a variety of the
"*self-development of ideas*" our "critic" has warned his readers
against as one of the most dangerous baits in Hegelian dialectics.

[10.](#f10){#n10} See *Die Landwirthschaft im Deutschen Reich*. Nach der
landwirthschaftlichen Betriebszahlung vom 14. Juni 1895, **Statistik des
Deutschen Reiches**. Neue Folge, Band 112, S. 11.

[11.](#f11){#n11} See **Final Report of H.M. Commissioners appointed to
inquire into the subject of agricultural depression**, London 1879,
p.30. \[The two words in quotes are in English in the original.\]

[12.](#f12){#n12} \[These two words are in English in the original.\]

[13.](#f13){#n13} **L'agriculture aux Etats-Unis**, Paris et Nancy 1894,
pp. 61--62. The latest North American census showed that concentration
is manifesting itself in that country in agriculture as well.

[14.](#f14){#n14} See the book by Vandervelde, **La proprieté foncière
en Belgique**, as well as our note on it in **Zarya**, Issue I.

[15.](#f15){#n15} In the article *Wofür sollen wir ihm dankbar sein*,
**Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung**, Nos. 253--255. We have not yet been
able to understand, incidentally, why, at the Stuttgart Parteitag,
Kantsky had to express thanks to Bmistein. Kautsky's book **Bernstein
und das sozial-demokratische Programm** has fully borne out our opinion
that there is nothing to thank him for.

[16.](#f16){#n16} Our opponent's abusive language has gone hand in hand
with dishonest methods of debate. For instance, Herr Bernstein is out to
prove that it is impossible as yet to abolish classes, with which
purpose he quotes Engels as having allegedly said that the abolition of
classes will be possible "only at a certain and very high stage,
relatively to our times, in the development of the productive forces"
(pp. 325--26). What emerges is that, according to Engels, the level we
have reached in the development of the productive forces is still
insufficient for the abolition of capitalism. In actual fact, Engels
says *quite the reverse*: "*Sie*" (*die Abschaffung der Klassen*) "*hat
also zur Voraussetzung einen Höhegrad der Entwicklung der Produktion,
auf dem Aneignung der Produktionsmittel und Produkte \... durch eine
besondere Gesellschaftsklasse nicht nur überflüssig, sondern auch
ökonomisch, politisch und intellektuell ein Hindernis der Entwicklung
geworden ist. **Dieser Punkt ist erreicht*** \..." (emphasis is ours)
(**Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft**, dritte Auflage, S. 304, XXV.
[\[16\*\]](#np){#fp}) \[It (the abolition of classes) therefore
presupposes a level of development of production at which the
appropriation of the means of production and of the products \... by a
particular social class has become, not merely superfluous but also --
economically, politically and intellectually -- an obstacle to
development.*That stage has been attained* \...\] Herr Bernstein is
surely trying too hard to avoid frightening the bourgeoisie.

[17.](#f17){#n17} Marx would have considered the worker's condition in
capitalist society "*hopeless*" even if a considerable improvement in
that condition were possible. "But just as little as better clothing,
food and treatment, and a larger peculium, do away with the exploitation
of the slave," he says, "so little do they set aside that of the
wage-worker." (**Capital**, I, St. Petersburg, p. 584 \[Buss, ed.\]
[\[17\*\]](#nq){#fq}) Herr Bernstein will himself understand that the
condition of the slave remains "hopeless", in the Marxist sense, *until
slavery is abolished*. We shall note, incidentally, that we have never
used the word "hopeless", which has merely been *ascribed* to us by Herr
Bernstein. Our view concerning the position of the wage-worker in
capitalist society was expressed and substantiated by us in our second
article against Mr. P. Struve. [\[18\*\]](#nr){#fr}

[18.](#f18){#n18} Written in 1901.

[19.](#f19){#n19} This passage is omitted in Mme. Kantsel's translation.
It is to be found in the footnote on page 112 of the Russian translation
of Herr Bernstein's book, which was published in London.

#### \* \* \*

### Notes

*Cant Against Kant* was written by Plekhanov in reply to Bernstein's
pamphlet **Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der
Sozial-Demokratie** (**The Prerequisites of Socialism and the Tasks of
the Social-Democracy**) which appeared in 1901 in a second Russian
edition under the title of *Historical Materialism* in the journal of
the Russian Social-Democrats **Zarya** (**The Dawn**) No. 2--3, which
was published abroad. The **Neue Zeit**, as well as the organ of the
French Socialist Party **Mouvement Socialiste** refused to publish it.

In the epigraph to the last chapter of his book **Historical
Materialism**, *Kant Against Cant* Bernstein explained the word Cant as
follows: "'Cant' is an English word which came into use in the sixteenth
century to denote the dismal chanting common with the Puritans. In its
more general meaning it denotes the way of expression either wrong,
unthinking or deliberately used erroneously." The reference in
Bernstein's epigraph is: the contraposition of Kantianism to allegedly
dogmatic and hypocritical Marxism. Plekhanov has changed the word order
in Bernstein's phrase to make the meaning: hypocrisy against Kant.

[1\*.](#fa){#na} From N. Nekrasov's poem *In the Village*.

[2\*.](#fb){#nb} From G. Burger's poem *Lenore*.

[3\*.](#fc){#nc} K. Marx and F. Engels, **Selected Works** in three
volumes, Vol. 1, Moscow 1973, p. 137.

[4\*.](#fd){#nd} The reference is to Engels's statement against the
"young" in the German Social-Democracy (see Note 144).

[5\*.](#fe){#ne} Mephistopheles's words from Goethe's *Faust*.

[6\*.](#ff){#nf} *Jourdain* -- a character in Moliere's comedy *Le
Bourgeois gentilhomme*.

[7\*.](#fg){#ng} Plekhanov is referring to Bernstein's article
*Dialektik und Entwicklung* (*Dialectics and Development*) published in
**Neue Zeit**, Nos. 37--38 for 1899, in reply to Kautsky's article
*Bernstein und Dialektik* which appeared in No. 28 of the same journal.

[8\*.](#fh){#nh} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, **Collected Works**,
Vol. 6, Moscow 1976, p. 179

[9\*.](#fi){#ni} The reference is to Plekhanov's article *Bernstein and
Materialism*.

[10\*.](#fj){#nj} The reference is to the article *Bernstein and
Materialism* published in **Neue Zeit**, No. 44 for 1898; it was a reply
to Bernstein's article *Das realistische und das ideologische Moment des
Sozialismus* mentioned in the quotation.

[11\*.](#fk){#nk} **Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher** was edited by Karl
Marx and Arnold Ruge, and published in German in Paris. One issue was
put out in February 1844.

[12\*.](#fl){#nl} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, **Collected Works**,
Vol. 3, Moscow 1975, pp. 175--76.

[13\*.](#fm){#nm} See Plekhanov's work, *The Initial Phases of the
Theory of the Class Struggle* (pp. 427--73 of this volume).

[14\*.](#fn){#nn} K. Marx, **Capital**, Vol. I, Moscow 1974, p. 29.

[15\*.](#fo){#no} See Plekhanov's second article against Struve
published in this volume where he argues against the vulgar evolutionist
assertions of the latter about the blunting of contradictions between
labour and capital in bourgeois society.

[16\*.](#fp){#np} F. Engels, **Anti-Dühring**, Moscow 1975, p. 323.

[17\*.](#fq){#nq} K. Marx, **Capital**, Vol. I, Moscow 1974, p. 579.

[18\*.](#fr){#nr} See pp. 513--66 in this volume.

[19\*.](#fs){#ns} *Economic trend (economists)* -- an opportunist trend
in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement at the turn of the century;
adherents of Bernsteinism. Economists limited the tasks of the working
class to economic struggle for higher ;wages, better working conditions,
etc., asserting that political struggle is the liberal bourgeoisie's
affair.

[20\*.](#ft){#nt} The reference is to the journal **Rabocheye Dyelo**
(**Workers' Cause**), organ of the Russian economists which was
published in Geneva from 1899 to 1902.

 \
[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 2 September 2016
