---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## Georgi Plekhanov

# On Croce's book

### (1901)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Georgi Plekhanov, **Selected Philosophical Works In Five Volumes**,
Volume II, Moscow 1976.\
Taken from the [*Archive.org* record of
*Leninist.biz*](http://web.archive.org/web/20110529205859/http://leninist.biz/en/1976/GPSPW2PP/Croce){target="new"}
by Noa Rodman.\
Copied with thanks from Libcom.org.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Plekhanov on the law of the fall in the rate of profit and the alleged
contradiction between Volumes One and Three of *Capital***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Benedetto Croce, **Economic Materialism and Marxist Political Economy.
Critical Essays**\
Translated by p. Shutyakov\
*Published by B.N. Zvonaryov, St. Petersburg 1901*

Signor Benedetto Croce considers himself a Marxist. However, there are
various kinds of Marxists. There are, in Signor Croce's words, some who
"are always ready" to accept Marx's views "without discussion and with
that absence of freedom and intellectual originality which is to be seen
in all their literature" (p. 243). Signor Croce calls such Marxists
*vulgar* (p. 244). Yet there are Marxists of a different coinage, those
that *criticise* their teacher and are marked by "intellectual
originality". To such belongs Signor B. Croce, who thinks that his
"critical" essays "in their sum comprise fairly complete research into
almost all the fundamental problems of Marxism" (p. 3). To this,
however, he adds the modest reservation "*if I am not mistaken*", but
his brash tone shows his conviction that no such mistake exists here and
that, indeed, the fundamental propositions of Marxism have been
seriously and thoroughly (and, of course, "*critically*") studied in his
essays. The claim, as one can see, is no small one. But is it
well-grounded? We shall now see.

Signor B. Croce "analyses" Marx's law of the fall in the rate of profit.
The "vulgar" Marxists accept this thesis "without discussion", in the
way formulated and substantiated by their teacher. With the freedom and
intellectual originality inherent in him, Signor Croce could not leave
this law "unstudied". He has made use of "logical arguments",
"arithmetical calculations" and even the "enlightened intuition of
common sense" (p. 256; the Russian translation says: "the induction of
common sense", but this is a misprint, a slip of the pen or an error);
all this has led him to the firm conviction that Marx was badly mistaken
in this case, so much so that his method "fell apart in his hands"
(p. 259). Elsewhere in the same essay, Signor Croce's critical analysis
leads to a result even sadder for the author of **Capital**: it appears
that Marx "invented" his law of the fall in the rate of profit "out of
his hatred for the kind of political economy he contemptuously called
vulgar". (p. 256) Things must be in a pretty bad way, and we, vulgar
Marxists, have suspected nothing. Horrible is the dream but merciful is
the Lord. Let us turn an attentive eye to our critically-minded Marxist:
perhaps we shall find that he has simply got things all muddled,
following the notorious habit of Marx's other "critics".

The "intuition of common sense" says the following:

"We have before us, according to Marx's strictly schematic hypothesis,
the capitalist class, on one hand, and the class of proletarians, on the
other. Where does technological progress lead to? It increases wealth in
the possession of the capitalist class. Does it not stand to reason
that, as a result of technological progress, the capitalists, who are
spending wealth *whose value is falling*" (italics in the text --
*G.P.*), "will be receiving *the same services*" (italics in the text --
*G.P.*) "from the proletarians as before, and that, in consequence, the
relation between the value of services and that of capital will change
in favour of the former, i.e., that the rate of profit will increase.
With the spending of wealth" (capital), "which was originally reproduced
during five hours of work and is now reproduced in four hours, the
workers continue to toil for the same ten hours. The previous proportion
was five to ten; it is now four to ten. The sponge costs less, but it
absorbs the same amount of water." (p. 257)

Let us imagine that we are dealing with a manufacturer at whose spinning
mill a certain amount of cotton is turned into yarn every year. Let us
further suppose that a breakthrough occurs in machine-spinning which
*doubles* the spinner's *labour productivity*. How will this
breakthrough affect the magnitude of the constant capital, i.e., of the
sponge which, in Croce's words, absorbs the workers' living labour?
Since the spinner's labour productivity *has doubled*, it is clear that
at present *he will turn a double quantity of cotton* into yarn. That
double quantity of cotton should be provided by the manufacturer to the
worker, which means that the former's expenditures on raw material, with
other conditions remaining the same, *will double* (disregarding any
other additional expenditures). Hence it becomes clear that Signor Croce
understood the importance of technological progress poorly when he asked
himself: "How could Marx have imagined that the capitalist's
expenditures always increase with technological progress?" (same page).
In practice, however, it turns out that Marx not only could but should
have imagined this. But that is not all. The technological progress that
doubled the spinner's labour productivity consisted in *improvements in
machinery*. Improved machinery usually costs more -- there you have
another factor of higher expenditures for the capitalist, and fresh
proof that Signor Croce was very naive in asking himself: "How could
Marx have", etc.

But Signor Croce goes on to object:

#8220;Capital \... is calculated, not in its physical volume but in its
economic value. Economically, that capital (supposing all other
conditions remain the same) should have less value, or otherwise there
would have been no technological progress." (p. 258)

Here again our critic displays an extreme and almost moving naïveté.
Technological progress "should" diminish the value of constant capital,
or else there would be no technological progress -- that is all Signor
Croce has to say to refute Marx's law. But, alas, that is too little.
Technological progress consists in higher labour productivity, i.e., in
every given unit of the product embodying a lesser amount of labour than
before. But it does not follow hence that commodities are now produced
by less expensive machines. The reverse is true! Technological progress
usually involves the use of more *complex* and consequently more
*expensive* machinery. That is the case, not only in the sphere of
*production* but also in the *circulation* of commodities. An ocean
liner costs much more than a sailing vessel, though, with the
development of ocean shipping, *freight charges* have fallen
considerably. True, the existence of *counteracting causes* cannot he
denied here. Marx gave a detailed list of them in his **Capital**. (Vol.
III, Part 1, p. 213 *et seq.* in the German edition) Among them he
included cheaper raw materials, machinery and other components of
constant capital.

"For instance," he says, "the quantity of cotton worked up by a single
European spinner in a modern factory has grown tremendously compared to
the quantity formerly worked up by a European spinner with a
spinning-wheel. Yet the value of the worked-up cotton has not grown in
the same proportion as its mass. The same applies to machinery and other
fixed capital." (**ibid.**, p. 217)

"In isolated cases the mass of the elements of constant capital may even
increase, while its value remains the same, or falls." (same page)

But that happens only in individual cases; on the whole, the value of
constant capital increases, though not so rapidly as the mass of its
elements. Any bright schoolboy knows that. But here are some interesting
new facts. In the United States of America, the number of industrial
enterprises (exclusive of mines) with annual productions of at least 500
dollars went up by 44 per cent during the decade between 1889/1890 and
1899/1900; the number of workers employed there rose by 25 per cent; the
aggregate pay-roll grew by 23 per cent; the capital invested in these
factories (the reference is obviously to what is known as fixed capital)
increased by 51 per cent; and, finally, mixed expenditures increased by
63 per cent (see Franz's article *Aus den Vereinigten Staaten* in **Neue
Zeit** of May 17, 1902). These figures show that constant capital grows
more rapidly than variable capital in the United States. What is to be
seen there in terms of *time* is to be seen in Russia in *spatial
terms*. South Russia's iron and steel industry is equipped far better
than that of the Urals, for which reason *there is far more constant
capital* per worker employed in the iron and steel industry *of the
South than there is in the Urals*. That, I repeat, is known to any
schoolboy. Yet, Signor Croce continues to ask: in that case, what sense
is there in improved production methods? With his "critical" naivete he
does not even suspect that a more advanced and therefore (in most cases)
a more expensive machine *shifts lower cost to each separate unit of the
product than the less expensive one does*. Had he known this, he would
have understood how ridiculous his "enlightened intuition of common
sense" is, and how clumsy and helpless he is in his "criticism" of the
law of the fall in the rate of profit. But he is ignorant of that and is
therefore extremely pleased with his "criticism".

We have chosen this particular essay by Signor Croce because it confirms
the truth of the French saying: les beaux esprits se rencontrent. It is
common knowledge that in Russian literature Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky has
used similar arguments to refute Marx's law. That critic's argumentation
has been excellently refuted by Mr. Karelin (in **Nauchnoye
Obozreniye**), while Mr. Tugan's reasoning was recently taken up for
scrutiny by Kautsky in **Neue Zeit** on the occasion of the appearance
of a German translation of Mr. Tugan's book on crises, which included
his pseudorefutation of Marx. Of course, we shall not repeat here the
arguments of Karelin and Kautsky. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

We would just like to note that whenever two great minds make some great
discovery, it is always of interest to decide the question of what
scholarly Germans call *Priorität*. Who holds the "priority" in refuting
Marx's law of the fall in the rate of profit: Signor Croce or Mr.
Tugan-Baranovsky? What does the chronology say? Signor Croce's
"critical" essay, which we are examining, first appeared in a scholarly
Italian publication in May 1899 (see the introduction to his book, p. 4,
footnote); in the same month of the same year Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky
"refuted" Marx in **Nauchnoye Obozreniye**. It is evident that the
priority belongs to neither of them: *les beaux esprits (critiques) se
sont rencontrés*; but should you, dear reader, say that both these
critical minds could borrow their "critical" idea from some third
person, a still more "critical" economist, we would reply: *yu are
right*. Open **Verhandlungen der an 28 und 29 September 1894 in Wien
abgehaltenen Generalversammlung des Vereins für Sozialpolitik über
Kartells und über das ländliche Erbrecht**, Leipzig 1895, and you will
find on page 218 the following words by Professor Julius Wolf, the
notorious Sozialistenfresser:

"Professor Brentano's viewpoint that fixed capital increases as against
circulating capital seems to be shared in many circles. Though in a
slightly different wording, this viewpoint forms part of the socialist
doctrine. I cannot agree with him, at least, not absolutely. Several
weeks ago, a Zurich manufacturer, with whom I am on friendly terms, made
some calculations on that score. He is a spinner himself, with a
thorough knowledge of the history of spinning, especially in Britain,
i.e., in the country where, for quite understandable reasons, Herr
Brentano and the socialists gladly borrow material to back their
arguments. This manufacturer has calculated that fixed capital is now
lower in spinning than before. Buildings, spindles and various machines
have now become relatively less expensive; wages, on the other hand,
have risen \... If so, the natural law (Naturgesetz) of economic
development Herr Brentano makes reference to does not exist."

The Zurich manufacturer mentioned by Herr Wolf was evidently no one else
but Friedrich Bertheau, who, early in 1895, published a booklet, **Fünf
Briefe über Marx an Herrn Dr. Julius Wolf, Professor der
Nationalökonomie in Zürich**, with an introduction by the selfsame Dr.
Wolf. On pages 47--49 of this booklet the author cites figures designed
to show that, in reality, it is not *constant* capital that has shown a
relative increase but *variable* capital (note that Herr Bertheau uses
Marx's terminology: *constant* and *variable* capital). As for the
figures cited by Herr Bertheau, we can say that even if they really
proved what he wanted, they *could not refute* Marx's law, which is
backed by figures of far broader significance than those of the Zurich
manufacturer: *even in this case*, the best, they could indicate that
Britain's spinning industry belongs to those exceptions to the general
rule that Marx himself referred to. But Herr Bertheau's figures do not
contain even the slightest shadow of what he is out to prove with the
frivolity in matters of theory typical of so many "people of practice".
This can be easily seen by anybody who will go to the trouble of reading
the above-mentioned excerpt from **Fünf Briefe über Marx**. We can refer
those who are interested in learning in what direction the ratio of
constant capital to variable capital is proceeding in Britain's cotton
industry to a book **Large-Scale Production, etc.**, by Herr
Schulze-Gävernitz, St. Petersburg, 1897. This book is, in its turn, full
of misunderstandings, understatements, paralogisms and sophisms, but it
contains some very instructive data on the problem we are dealing with.

Be it as it may, our *beaux esprits* have met in the field of \...
*plagiarism*. Criticism, forsooth!

The above-cited arguments of the "intellectually original" Marxist give
a very clear idea of his economic naïveté. But to make sure, here is
another economic gem of his -- after all, plenty is no plague.

In the essay *New Interpretations of the Marxist Theory of Value* we
read:

"Marx constructed his own concept of value; he set forth the process of
the transformation of *value* into *price*, and reduced the nature of
profit to *surplus value*. To me, the entire problem of a criticism of
Marxism boils down to the following: is Marx's concept basically wrong
(wholly, if the premises are erroneous, or partly because of erroneous
deductions)? Or else: if Marx's concept is basically correct, has it not
been brought into a category it does not belong to; has something been
asked of it that it does not give; with a failure also to recognise what
it is in reality? After arriving at the second conclusion, I asked
myself: in what conditions and with which hypotheses is Marx's theory
*intelligible*." (pp. 216--17)

To this clearly formulated question Signor Croce replies to himself as
follows: "The concept of labour value holds true for an ideal society,
in which the products of labour are the only benefits, and class
distinctions are non-existent \..." (p. 231). "Thus we shall have: 1)
An\\ economic producing society without class distinctions. The law of
labour value. 2) A social division of classes. The origins of profit,
which *solely in comparison with the preceding type and inasmuch as the
concepts of the former are transferred to the latter* (Signor Croce's
italics), can be qualified as surplus value. 3) The technological
distinction between various industries, which necessitate a different
composition of capital\.... The appearance of the average rate of
profit, which, *in comparison with the preceding type, can be regarded
as transformed and equalised surplus value*" (p. 213, italics ours).

In the essay *On the Question of the Interpretation and Criticism of
Certain Concepts of Marxism*, in which the same question is examined,
Signor Croce's idea is explained as follows:

"Marx's labour value is not a logical generalisation but a *fact thought
of and taken as a type*, i.e., something quite distinct from a logical
concept. It is not a pale abstraction, but has all the richness of a
concrete fact. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} This concrete *fact* serves, in Marx's
research, as a term of comparison, a measurement, a *type*" (p. 106).

Everything seems clear: labour value is merely a "fact thought of as a
type", and it is only from the standpoint of such a "fact-type" that the
name of surplus value can be applied to profit. Well, well, this is the
way our extraordinary Marxist has understood the author of **Capital**.
Does Marx ever "*call*" profit *surplus value*? Applying such a "name"
to it means confusing those very concepts which have to be clarified.
According to Marx, profit, *like interest or ground rent*, constitutes
*part* of the value created by the workers' unpaid labour. But if that
provides grounds to rename it as surplus value, we shall have to apply
the same "name" *to interest and ground rent* as well. It is obvious
that nothing good can be expected from such terminology. But all this is
merely en passant. The main thing for us here is that, according to
Marx, it is not at all in an imaginary "economic producing society
without class distinctions" that profit constitutes part of the surplus
value, but *in present-day capitalist society, which is an indisputable
"empirical fact"*. This is something our "critically minded" Marxist
does not understand. He is so imbued with the spirit of vulgar political
economy that the question simply pops out of him: why should one
designate as transformation of *surplus-value* something that is the
natural economic outcome of capital, which (because it is capital) must
produce profit? (p. 230). This is something beyond compare! After this,
how can one discuss things with Signor Croce, or explain to him, that it
was Marx's scientific purpose incidentally to prove *why* that "natural
outcome of capital" which is called profit *is possible and where it
comes from*, or present surplus value to him as the *source* of the
"natural outcome"? All that will be in vain, a waste of time, the
intellectually original Marxist will reply with invincible conviction
that the existence of surplus value is possible only in an imaginary
society *without* class divisions and that therefore linking surplus
value with the source of profit -- that *natural* outcome of capital --
means revealing that lack of original thinking which, to their uttermost
shame, marks the vulgar Marxists. Signor Benedetto Croce is evidently
directly descended from the man in the fable by the Russian writer Ivan
Krylov, who *failed to notice the elephant*, and does not see what
stares him in the face.

Indeed, the offspring of that remarkable specimen of human nature are
most numerous. They include all those "critics" of Marx who believe in
the existence of a contradiction between 665 Volumes One and Three of
**Capital**. In a review of Mr. Frank's book **Marx's Theory of Value
and Its Significance** (see **Zarya**, Nos. 2--3, p. 324 *et seq.*
[\[3\]](#n3){#f3}), we showed that, in reality, there is no
contradiction between the two volumes, and that Volume Two -- somehow
quite forgotten in this case -- contained unequivocal indications as to
*how* Marx resolved the antinomy between the law of value, on the one
hand, and the law of the equal rate of profit, on the other. In our
review, we referred to pages 152 and 253 of Volume Two (in the Russian
translation, these correspond to pages 185 and 315 of the second edition
of the German original). Now let us refer to some more passages in the
same volume. On page 79, Marx says that, under the capitalist method of
calculating profit \... for capital in different spheres of investment,
wherever the times of circulation are different, a longer time of
circulation period tends to bring about an increase of prices, in short,
*serves as one of the causes of equalising profits* (italics ours; the
excerpt is on page 97 of the second edition of the German original).
This is completely in the spirit of Volume Three. Further, the excerpt
on p. 88 reads as follows:

"All labour which adds value can also add surplus-value, and will always
add surplus-value under capitalist production, as the value created by
labour depends on the amount of the labour itself, whereas: the
surplus-value created by it depends on the extent to which the
capitalist pays for it. Consequently, costs which enhance the price of a
commodity without adding to its use-value, which therefore are to be
classed as unproductive expenses so far as society is concerned, may be
a source of enrichment to the individual capitalist." (p. 107 in the
German original)

The reader will realise that these unproductive expenses could not serve
as a source of wealth for individual capitalists had not the surplus
value extracted from the working class been distributed between
employers proportionately to the capital of each of them. Finally, on
p. 296, in posing the question of how the value of the capital! consumed
in production is replaced from the annual product, and how the movement
of this replacement is absorbed by the consumption of surplus-value by
the capitalists and of wages by the workers, Marx remarked that he was
implying an exchange of products in accordance with their value, but
made a highly significant reservation, which has been poorly translated
into Russian, and which we shall first quote in the original:

"*So weit die Preise von den Werthen abweichen kann dieser Umstand \...
auf die Bewegung des gesellschaftlichen Kapitals keinen Einfluss
ausüben. Es tauschen sich nach wie vor im Ganzen dieselben Massen
Produkten aus, obgleich die einzelnen Kapitalisten dabei in
Werthverhaltnissen betheiligt sind, die nicht mehr proporzionell waren
ihren respektiven Vorschüssen und den von jedent von ihnen einzeln
produzierten Mehrwerthmassen.*" (p. 368 of the second edition)

What this means is:

"The fact that prices diverge from values cannot, however, exert any
influence on the movements of the social capital. On the whole, there is
the same exchange of the same quantities of products, although the
individual capitalists are involved in value-relations no longer
proportional to their respective advances and to the quantities of
surplus-value produced singly by every one of them."

If, with *prices* diverging from *values*, the exchange of quantities of
products remains the same, this makes it obvious, on the one hand, that
*the aggregate sum of the values exchanged will remain the same too*. If
the above-mentioned divergence does not influence the movements of the
social capital, then, on the other hand, such divergence cannot change
the nature of the *process of creation of that quantity of surplus-value
which is absorbed by social capital and is distributed among individual
capitalists*. Consequently, no matter how we reply to the question of
the divergence between average prices from values -- whether
affirmatively or negatively -- our reply *cannot affect* the solution of
the question of *where social surplus value comes from*. Hence, it
follows that *Volume Three of **Capital** could not contradict Volume
One*, and that the "critics" have sought contradictions where none could
exist, i.e., they have completely misunderstood Marx.

It was not so difficult, however, to understand him. If the "critics"
have held the opinion that, according to Volume One, average commodity
prices *coincide* with their values, they have done so of their own free
will. As to Marx, he stressed, in the above-mentioned volume, that there
is actually no such coincidence. For his part, Frederick Engels declared
that the idea of such a coincidence was quite groundless. In objecting
to Eugen Dühring, he remarked that Marx never claimed that the
individual industrialist, in all and any circumstances, sells at its
full value the surplus product received by him. "Marx says expressly
that merchant's profit also forms a part of surplus-value, and on the
assumptions made this is only possible when the manufacturer sells his
product to the merchant *below* its value." (**Herrn Eugen Dührings
Umwälzung der Wissenschaft**, 3. Auflage, S. 226) Later, referring to a
passage in Volume One, Engels says:

"Herr Dühring might see from this alone that *competition plays a
leading part in the distribution of surplus-value*, and with some
reflection the indications given in the first volume are in fact enough
to make clear, at least in its main features, the transformation of
surplus-value into its subforms (Unterformen)." (**ibid.**, S. 228)

The words we have italicised in themselves provide a clear instruction
with regard *to the direction in which the solution of the celebrated
"riddle" should have been sought*. When the selfsame Engels suggested in
the *Preface* to Volume Two that the riddle should be solved by scholars
who held that Rodbertus's viewpoint was the hidden source of Marx's
economic theory, it should have been perfectly clear to any man of
understanding how matters stood. The reader should note that Engels
addressed those very people who lauded Rodbertus as against Marx, *and
them alone*. He invited them to show that, with the help of Rodbertus's
economic theory, the riddle could be solved, *not only without any
divergence from the law of value but rather on the basis of that law*.
He made the suggestion simply and exclusively because they could not
take it up without renouncing Rodbertus's economic theory. Anyone
familiar with the latter's writings knows that, in his opinion, the law
of value is far from predominant in capitalist society.[\[4\]](#n4){#f4}
It was this aspect of Rodbertus's view on value that Engels had in mind
when he made his wily suggestion to Rodbertus's followers, which the
"critics" understood as a guarantee that the coincidence of prices with
values would be proved in Volume Three of Capital. It was a bad
miscalculation, but responsibility for it lay with the critics, not with
Volume Three or with Marx and Engels.

Consequently, Rodbertus's theory of value differs greatly from Marx's
theory on the same subject. Indeed, it differs in the extreme, though
the "critics" do not, of course, even suspect it. Rodbertus puts it as
follows: if commodities are exchanged in proportion to the amount of
labour spent on their production, the law of value is fully applicable;
if not, the operation of this law seems to be cancelled. *Marx
understood the question in a far broader way*, which is clear from
Volume One of **Capital** and is shown even better in one of his letters
to Kugelmann published recently in **Neue Zeit**. We are referring to
the letter of July 11, 1868 in which Marx says:

"As for the **Centralblatt**, the man is making the greatest possible
concession in admitting that, if one means anything at all by value, the
conclusions I draw must be accepted. The unfortunate fellow does not see
that, even if there were no chapter on 'value' in my book, the analysis
of the real relations which I give would contain the proof and
demonstration of the real value relations. All that palaver about the
necessity of proving the concept of value comes from complete ignorance
both of the subject dealt with and of scientific method. Every child
knows that a nation which ceased to work, I will not say for a year, but
even for a few weeks, would perish. Every child knows, too, that the
volume of products corresponding to the different needs requires
different and quantitatively determined amounts of the total labour of
society (der gesellschaftlichen Gesammtarbeit). That this *necessity* of
the *distribution* of social labour in definite proportions cannot
possibly be done away with by a *particular form* of social production
but can only change the *mode of its appearance*, is self-evident.
Natural laws cannot be abolished at all. What can change in historically
different circumstances is only the form in which these laws assert
themselves. And the form in which this proportional distribution of
labour asserts itself, in a social system where the interconnection of
social labour manifests itself through the *private exchange* of
individual products of labour, is precisely the *exchange value* of
these products. Science consists precisely in demonstrating *how* (in
the original: zu entwickeln -- to develop) the law of value asserts
itself. So that if one wanted at the very beginning to 'explain' all the
phenomena which seemingly contradict that law, one would have to present
the science before science. It is precisely Ricardo's mistake that in
his first chapter on value he takes as *given* a variety of categories
that have not yet been explained in order to prove their conformity with
the law of value\.... The vulgar economist has not the faintest idea
that the actual everyday exchange relations can *not be directly
identical* with the magnitudes of value. The essence (*der Witz*) of
bourgeois society consists precisely in this, that a priori there is no
conscious social regulation of production. The rational and naturally
necessary asserts itself only as a blindly working average. And then the
vulgar economist thinks he has made a great discovery when, in face of
the disclosure of intrinsic interconnection, he proudly states that on
the surface things look different. In fact, he boasts that he sticks to
appearance, and takes it for the ultimate. Why, then, have any science
at all?"

*Exchange value is a form assumed by the operation of the law of value,
a mode of operation* of that law. It is no more than an historical
category. But while the above-mentioned law's *mode* of operation
changes together with social relations, the *operation* itself is just
as ineradicable as the operation of the eternal laws of Nature.
Therefore, if we see that the *mode* of operation *changes* or *becomes
more* complex for one reason or another, say, because of competition
between capitalists that does not mean that the *operation itself* ends,
or is eliminated at least partially. No, while manifesting itself
differently, or intertwining with the operation of another law, *it
still remains in full force*, and it is the researcher's task to follow
it up through a multitude of new forms and intertwinings. Marx
accomplished that task in his **Capital**. As to Rodbertus, he *not only
failed to solve it*, but considered its solution impossible. In his
words, one of Marx's mistakes was that "*er nimmt den Arbeitswerth aller
Güter schon in dem heutigen Zustande als realisiert an, während dies nur
durch Gesetze geschehen kann*" (see his letter to R. Meyer of September
8, 1871 published in his **Briefe und sozial-politische Aufsätze**,
Vol. I, pp. 99--100. Italics ours). For Rodbertus, the entire law of
value consisted in *the exchange relations of commodities being
determined by the amount of labour* spent on the production of each of
them. In other words, Rodbertus *confused the operation of the law with
one of the modes ("forms") of its operation determined in each
particular period by society's economic structure*. The same error is
repeated by all who think that in Volume Three of **Capital** Marx
discarded his theory of value. But enough of that. The reader can see
for himself how far removed Marx's idea is from what is ascribed to him
by Signor Croce with his "fact thought of and taken as a type".

To criticise Marx, or any other thinker, one should *understand* him.
That is the crux of the matter, and it makes itself unpleasantly felt
almost on every page of Signor Croce's critical essays. He has failed to
understand Marx's economic theory, or his historical theory. We have no
space for long excerpts here, so we shall confine ourselves to one
statement alone. After praising Antonio Labriola, incidentally for the
fact that in his book on the materialistic explanation of history he
"*allows*" of the existence of ideology, and even "the frequently
occurring absence in him of a consciousness and understanding of his
position", Signor Croce adds: "Since man lives not only in society but
also in Nature, Labriola recognises the force of race, temperament, and"
(!) "the promptings of Nature. Finally, he does not close his eyes to
human personality, that is to say, the actions of those who are called
great men and who, if not creators, are certainly collaborators of
history" (pp. 29--30). Signor Croce calls all this *concessions*
(p. 30). The term will probably be approved of by the celebrated
Professor Kareyev, but the "vulgar" Marxists will reply with derisive
laughter. Let Signor Croce give good thought to Marx's theory of
history; he will then see that, *far from precluding the "promptings of
Nature", it simply assumes their existence* (as will be seen, for
instance, from Volume One of **Capital**). In exactly the same way, it
has never occurred to any serious Marxist to deny the "actions of great
men", but it is doubtful whether any of them regards the latter as
"collaborators" of history. The idea associated with the word consists
in great people working *together* with or *alongside* of history -- a
patent absurdity, at least for our fraternity of "vulgar" Marxists.
[\[5\]](#n5){#f5} Equally obvious to us is the old truth that people are
not always aware of their condition in life. After all, our activities
are all directed primarily towards developing the *consciousness* of the
proletariat. To see any "concession" here means behaving like one who
has failed to notice what stares him in the face.

We shall not discuss Labriola's other "concessions", which have already
been dealt with in Russian literature (see Kamensky's article in
**Novoye Slovo**).

After everything that has been said, the "vulgar" Marxists will not be
surprised to learn that our intellectually original Marxist belongs to
the category of the forthright opponents *of the dialectical method and
of materialism*. Naturally, he has not the slightest notion of either.
Without feeling a shadow of doubt, he repeats the opinion that
*philosophical materialism consists in a recognition of spiritual
phenomena being merely an unreal semblance, behind which physical
phenomena lie concealed* (p. 190). *Such* patent absurdities deserve no
refutation, which is why we shall leave unanswered the rebuke made
against us personally, namely that, in our **Beiträge zur Geschichte des
Materialismus** we voiced "the need to go back to Holbach and Helvetius"
(pp. 19--20). We returned to Holbach and Helvetius in the sense that we
considered it necessary to compare Marx's materialism with French
eighteenth-century materialism and discover kinship and genetic links
between these two phases in the history of the materialistic
world-outlook. Had not Signor Croce been blinded by the usual philistine
prejudices against materialism, and had he understood Marx's views, he
would have found strange, not that we felt a need of that comparison but
its not having been expressed far earlier in philosophical literature.

Of himself Signor Croce says that he has not "escaped from the power of
Kant's critique" (p. 175), in ethical questions. We shall add that
"Kant's critique" has made a deep and indelible impress on *all* his
world-outlook. Therein lies the secret of his own "critical" exercises.
He senses that *Kantianism* is incompatible with Marx's historical and
socio-political views, which are imbued through and through with the
spirit of *materialism*. But instead of decisively rejecting Kantianism
or completely turning away from Marxism, he tries to sit between two
stools by trying to modify Marxism to make it finally cease from
contradicting what it *cannot but contradict*. With him, as with many
others, this assiduous but quite unproductive labour is adorned with the
label of *criticism*. Hardly has there ever existed, in the history of
human thought, a name less suited to what it should indicate.

Thus, Signor Croce's book is a poor gift to the Russian reader. It is
all the worse for Mr. P. Shutyakov having produced a *very poor*
translation. For example, we read on p. 132 of his translation that
Marx's historical theory is nothing more but a canon, a manual of
historical interpretation, and that the "manual counsels concentration
on society's economic essence, for a better understanding of its
configuration and changes". What is *society's economic essence*"? We
turn to the original and find (p. 115): *Sostrato economico della
societa*, i.e., *society's economic substratum*. This does not precisely
convey Marx's view either, but at least makes some sense, while
"*economic essence*" is sheer nonsense. The footnote on page 61 says:
"On the whole, the form of value pursued by Marx is an *equation between
two concrete values*." What does "*to pursue*" a form of value mean? And
what is an "*equation*" between values? The Italian original (p. 53)
says: "*La concezione del valore nel **Capital** del Marx \... e
insomnia il paragone fra due valori concreti*", i.e., "in a word, the
definition of value in Marx's **Capital** is a comparison between two
concrete values". *Theoretically*, as we already know, this is
incorrect, but there is no "*pursuit*" or "*equation*" here, which
raises Signor Croce's error to the power of two. Mr. P. Shutyakov's
translation contains quite a few such blunders.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

[1.](#f1){#n1} Kautsky, who showed that Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky's
"criticism" was merely a return to the viewpoint of vulgar political
economy, nevertheless, pays him quite a few compliments. To Kautsky's
mind, Mr. Tugan is almost a most outstanding "critic". In fact, this
writer possesses great diligence and a certain *descriptive* skill.
However, as far as economic theory is concerned, he is dead to it, or as
yet unborn. To us, the compliments he has received from Kautsky seem
completely undeserved. We believe they can be explained by the same
psychological aberration which makes socialists in each separate country
think that the bourgeoisie of foreign countries are better than their
own: Kautsky was excessively bored with the German "critics".

[2.](#f2){#n2} In a footnote Signor Croce adds: "It should not be
forgotten that a *concrete fact* need not be an empirical fact, but one
which js purely hypothetical, i.e., existing only in part in an
empirical reality."

[3.](#f3){#n3} I intend to translate this. -- *Noa Rodman*

[4.](#f4){#n4} In 1883 Plekhanov wrote a booklet against Rodbertus:
[Экономическая теория Карла
Родбертуса-Ягецова](http://az.lib.ru/p/plehanow_g_w/text_0290.shtml){target="new"}
(untranslated)

[5.](#f5){#n5} On the question of the role of so-called great and highly
placed men, see our article in the collection of essays **Twenty
Years**.

 \
[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 2 September 2016
