---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE PUBLIC GOOD

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Dec. 6, 1902\

A nent the Pennsylvania Railroad Tunnel Franchise, a great squabble has
arisen among the moneybags who control the capitalist press.

Some favor, and some do not favor, the granting of the franchise. And
both sets set themselves up as deciding "for the public good\".

Opportunity is hereby afforded to kill two flies with one clap.

Who sets up these papers? Was a public vote taken upon them? Indeed not!
A set of moneybags met and decided to set up a newspaper business, the
same as some other set may have met on the same day and hour and decided
to set up a peanut-stand business. In the one case, as in the other, the
concern is a private undertaking started for private profit.

"The public", in such cases, is taken into consideration exactly in the
same way that fish are taken into consideration by excursionists on a
fishing expedition, or people embarking in the fishing business---to be
caught.

Passing impudent is, according, the impudence of capitalist papers when
they set up the claim that they represent "the public\".

And there lies one fly. The other fly is this:

Ad nauseam we are told that we are a homogeneous people, not divided
into classes.

This claim has been so thoroughly triturated, that one should think that
those who make it would feel ashamed to repeat it. But shame is no part
of the capitalist class makeup.

Accordingly, this claim appears in the pretense that these papers are
speaking for "the public good", and that they represent the public. In
reappearing, the claim furnishes the ammunition to blow it up into
fragments.

As already shown, these papers do not essentially differ from any other
peanut stand. And yet they fill the eyes of the unthinking multitude.
Somebody speaks through them. Who speaks? Sir Moneybags. Why does not
the multitude? Because it has no wealth to set up such well-equipped
newspaper peanut stands.

In other words, the fact that these papers exist and can pretend to
speak for "the public" is a proof of the existence of the classes, and
is a further proof of class domination. The property-holding class alone
is heard; the other class is not heard, cannot be heard, is not counted.

And thus "the public" is, in this and in all other instances, narrowed
down to our *rulers*.

One set, holding stock of the Pennsylvania Railroad Corporation,
declares itself in favor of the tunnel under this city. The other set,
holding stock of the New York Central Railroad Corporation, to whom a
Pennsylvania Railroad tunnel under New York would mean competition for
traffic, and resulting shrinking dividends, opposes the tunnel. And both
claim to be "the public\"; and one of them goes even so far in its
vindication of "the public" that, in "the public's name", it---a private
concern---declares the aldermen who oppose its views, and who have at
least gone through the form of a public election, to be "morally and
mentally incapable of deciding for the public good\"!

The spectacle is worth watching---and understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
