---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# The Myth of Athena

### (September 1890)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First published in **Time** (London), September 1890, pp.916-28.\
Transcribed & marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Thanks to Fritz Keller.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

PAUSANIAS, in whose description of Greece we find the popular legends
unsophisticated as yet by the philosopher and the grammanan, after
relating how Rhea gave to her cannibal mate, Kronos, a foal to eat
instead of the little Poseidon, and afterwards in lieu of Zeus, a stone
wrapt up in swaddling clothes, goes on to say : "As to these fables, I
considered them childish when I began this work, but when I got as far
as this book (the eighth) I formed this view, that those who were
reckoned wise among the Greeks spoke of old in riddles, and not
directly; so I imagine the fable about Kronos to be Greek wisdom."
(viii, 8) The myths of the Greeks are riddles for us still, but they
were not intended as such; they expressed the childish conceptions of
the world formed by savages; they were the records of their daily lives,
embellished by so uncontrolled and fiery an imagination that, as Morgan
says, "all primitive religions are grotesque, and to some extent
unintelligible." But what is fabulous and unintelligible to people that
take a sober view of nature, appears, on the contrary, simple and
natural enough to young and uncultivated minds. The Scandinavian Viking
had as firm a belief in the power of the spells of witches to raise
storms as the French *paysan* has in the efficacy of his prayers to
produce rainfall for his own, and hailstorms for his neighbours'
vineyards; as the little English boy has in the incidents of the drama
of the death and burial of Cock Robin, a nursery, tale that modern
mythologists might, without any excessive strain of imagination,
transform into a solar myth of Hindoo origin. It is only in the course
of time, and when the phenomena which had produced them have passed
away, that early popular productions of the intellect are converted into
myths. This holds good also of hieroglyphics. At first they were simply
meant to express the animals and objects they represented, but the
scribes having modified the drawings for convenience' sake, they ceased
to be intelligible to all but the initiated. It is precisely because the
true popular legends are naïve and spontaneous productions of the
intellect that we are enabled by their study to reconstruct the customs
and the ideas of pre-historic men.

The study of the Vedas, like new wine, has intoxicated many a Sanskrit
scholar. It is their boast to have round the magic key that shall unlock
the secrets alike of the riddle that puzzled Pausanias and of numberless
others. Resuscitating a very old theory, they affirm that almost all
myths are meteorological allegories.

There are, however, more things contained in a myth than the motions of
celestial bodies or changes of the atmosphere.

Bachofen, in his work of genius, **Das Mutterecht**, has unravelled in
the Greek myths the ancient forms of the family, which the great
American thinker, Lewis Morgan, succeeded in tracing among the savages
of America and Polynesia. Mr. Andrew Lang has, with equal wit and
humour, shown that the gross fables of the Greeks owed their origin to
the modes of thought habitual to savages.

The myth of Athena, some peculiarities of the origin of which I here
propose to examine, is one of supreme importance, not only because
Athena was the tutelary goddess of the city that has played so unique a
part in the history of mankind, but also because the legends that have
grown round her name in the course of time may, if rightly interpreted,
afford us an insight into the pre-historic times of Greece.\
 

### II

The epithets bestowed upon Athena for her manifold qualities and
functions were easily understood, with the exception of one that has
been, and is to this day, a riddle to ancient and modern etymologists
This unintelligible epithet is met with in the oldest poets. Homer calls
Athena Dioz qug\'athr cudisth Tritogeneia [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} (daughter of
Zeus, terrible Tritogenea) -- Hesiod (**Theogony** 895) gives her the
same epithet, which recurs in the Orphic hymns. (xxxi, 3.) Athens had a
war dance in honour of the goddess called Tritogeneia.

The early Greek poets were wont to incorporate with their verses, words
and entire sentences that were, traditional and bore a sacred meaning.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us that "Homer had taken much from the
Thracian poets, and embodied it in his work." Van Lennep does not accuse
Hesiod of plagiarism when he finds him reproducing Homer, but observes,
that probably both poets follow a common and earlier version. It is for
the same reason that Æschylus is so rich in old legends and archaic
forms of language.

When tradition had crystallized a story, the poet was bound to reproduce
it faithfully. Herodotus (vii., 6) informs us that Onomacritus vats
banished by Flipparchus for having made an interpolation in a passage
from Musæus, a sacred poet. In Iceland, not so very long hack, it was
held a grave offence to public morality to modify a saga or " to recount
it untruthfully."

If in Homer and in Hesiod so inexplicable and singular an epithet as
Tritogeneia recurs persistently, the inference is that the word is not
an indifferent one, employed solely for the sake of the verse, but that
it belonged to a popular tradition, and dad an importantand intelligible
meaning. That the significance of this did not escape the Greeks, is
proved by the contradictory explanations given to the word Tritogeneia.

The word Tritogeneia, if we apply the ordinary rules of etymology to it,
is simple enough; it signifies thrice-born, at first sight a meaningless
epithet. There are many words in the Greek language constructed in a
similar way: tritosporos, of the third generation; tritostates, placed
in the third rank; tritonenis, third day of the month, etc., and
tritogeneia, triad, ternary number of the Pythagorean doctrine. But
those who ignored the primitive meaning of the epithet given to Athena
could not admit the absurdity of the ordinary etymology: some affirmed
that it was derived from Tritonis, a. Bœotian river, because Athena was
said to have been born on its banks; others derived it from an ancient
Œolic, Cretan, or Bœotian word, tritw, head, because she had sprung from
the head of Zeus in Olympus. Homer, Hesiod, and Æschylus, though they
call Athena the daughter of Zeus, make no mention of the manner of her
birth. The tradition which makes her jump out of the head of Zeus, split
open by Hephæstios, seems to be posterior to Homer. Later on, the poets,
improving on the original story, said that she stood in a war chariot on
springing from the head of the father of gods and men. But Hesiod tells
the story in a different way. Here is a literal translation of the
passage: "And Zeus, King of Gods, made Metis first his wife \... When
she was about to give birth to Athena, owl-eyed goddess, having by
deceit beguiled her mind with flattering words, he hid her within his
own belly." In fact his pregnancy manifested itself in the ordinary way
and not in the swelling of the head or thigh as in the case of
Dionysius. Thus, when Homer and Hesiod use the won Tritogeneia, it
cannot mean, sprung from the head. Diodorus Siculus, not satisfied with
the etymological explanation, gives a meteorological one. "The Egyptians
called the air Athena, whom they believed to be the daughter of Zeus and
always a virgin, because the air is incorruptible and reaches the summit
of the universe, for Athena had issued from the head of Zeus. She is
also called Tritogeneia, from the three changes experienced by nature in
the three seasons of the year -- spring, summer, and winter. She bears
the name of *glaucopis*, not because her eyes are blue, as certain among
the Greeks believed, but because the immensity of the atmosphere has a
blueish tint. (i, 12) The reading of the Vedas has not helped the modern
mythologist to anything particularly new.

Let us see if it be possible to recover the lost meaning of Tritogeneia,
*ter-renata*, thrice-born.\
 

### III

Dionysius, surnamed *dimetor*, having two mothers, has the epithet of
trigonos, *ter-renatus*, thrice-born, given him in the Orphic hymns
(xxix., 2); because after Dionysius, son of Persephone, had been torn to
pieces by the Titans, Zeus burned his heart to ashes and gave them to
Semele to drink, who grew pregnant of Dionysius, the latter, on the
death of his second mother, being enclosed in the thigh of Zeus. Athena
shared a similar fate. According to Hesiod, Metis, when pregnant with
Athena, was swallowed by Zeus, but before descending into the Divine
stomach of the "father and mother of Gods," she gave birth to Athena;
and Zeus, in order to make good his claim to the titles of father and
mother, made believe to have been delivered of her. The eastern
frontispiece of the Parthenon that represented the scene has been so
mutilated that the most important personages, Zeus and Athena, have
disappeared; but in the University of Bologna there is a bronze Etruscan
mirror, on the back of which exists a representation in intaglio of the
accouchement of Zeus, which enables us to form an idea of the antique
conception of this famous scene. "Zeus appears to faint away with pain,"
writes M. Beulé in his description of the mirror ; "Venus supports him
in her arms; Diana Lucina delicately extracts from his brain the little
Athena shaking her lance. Hephæstios contemplates the group with an air
of satisfaction. In fact, the birth of Athena was an ordinary basque
*Couvade* (hatching): the father \... plays the mother's part, goes to
bed, fills the room with his cries and groans, and swears he has been
delivered of the new-born baby. This grotesque farce, which has a great
historical importance, has been enacted all over the world. Mr. Tylor,
in his **Early History of Mankind**, gives a long but incomplete list of
peoples among whom this curious custom has been traced.

In Hesiod, Metis is the mother of Athena, but according to other
traditions, she is described as the daughter of Tritonis by Poseidon,
and of Coryphe, daughter of Okeanos, by Zeus. Dionysius also had it
superfluity of mothers: Demeter, Persephone, Dione, Amalthea, etc. This
uncertainty respecting the parentage proves that in the popular mind the
tradition was doubtful, either because there was a multiplicity of
Dionysiuses and Athenas who contributed to build up the Athena and
Dionysius of later days; or because Athena was one of those primitive
divinities of savages, living in a social state, in which, the family
not being as yet constituted, the children call *mother* all the women
of the tribe belonging to the same generation as their real mother. We
know positively that Athena; belonged to a generation of divinities
anterior to Zeus, Apollo, and the other "new gods" as Æschylus calls
them in the **Eumenides**. Athena in all likelihood is one of those
goddesses who, according to the popular belief, had neither father nor
mother, but had sprung from- that "profound abyss from which everything
comes and to which everything returns"; like Ghè "the antique mother of
Gods and men"; like Tanath, the Phœnician goddess; like the Egyptian
Neitha, the mother of Rà, the Sun, worshipped at Sais. If it could be
proved that Athena belonged to this very antique generation of
divinities, then the meaning of Tritogeneia would be clear. In order to
do that, we should have to show how :Athena, before she became the *mens
divina* of the philosophers, the perfect incarnation of intellect and of
power, the master-piece. of Greek sculpture, had been the goddess of
savage peoples, worshipped under the form of a log of wood ; how, like
the butterfly, that does not turn into a winged flower before having
crawled in the shape of an ugly worm, she has undergone a series of
metamorphoses, was thrice-born and remodelled periodically to suit the
progressive ideals of more advanced states of civilisation.\
 

### IV

A great diversity of opinion prevailed with regard, to the birthplace of
Dionysius and Athena. Wheresoever a river or a fountain was discovered
that bore the name of Tritonis, as in Crete, Thessaly; Arcadia, Bœotia,
the inhabitants maintained that Athena was born there.

Not a few mythographs believed that Bœotia had serious claims to such an
honour, and that the worship of the goddess had spread over Attica from
the banks of the river Tritonis, which flows into Lake Copais: Strabo,
Pausanias, and other writers record a tradition preserving the memory of
two small towns, Athens and Eleusis, situated on the borders of Lake
Copais, that were swept away by a winter flood. Considering that
incessant warfare was carried on by the savage tribes of primitive
Greece; that the towns, in consequence, were built like eagles' nests,
high up amid the rocks, and hence could not easily have been stormed, it
is improbable that these two towns should have been built on the borders
of a lake. It is true that the towns may have been built on the lake
itself, as was the case with the lake habitations of pre-historic
Switzerland and New Guinea: the likelier that Herodotus (v, 16) mentions
such a city built on Lake Prasias by the Pœonians, who had their women
in common and fed their horses on fish. Very possibly the Bœotian
Athens, and Eleusis were two lake cities, the rather that \[*sic*\] Lake
Copais was rich in fishes, and that in the time of Aristophanes and
Pausanias its eels were considered very delicate eating. These towns,
whose savage inhabitants very probably had their women in common, as had
the Lybians living around Lake Tritonis, in Africa (**Herod.** iv. 180),
were a suitable birthplace for such a goddess as Athena.

The Greeks, not unlike other nations, looked upon themselves as being
the centre of the universe, whence learning and civilisation flowed over
the rest of the world: they held that the Argive king Apis, who gave his
name to Peloponesus, once called Apia, land of Apis, had colonised Egypt
and imported there the arts of civilisation, in recognition of which the
Egyptians worshipped him under the name of' Serapis. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}
When we bear in mind that the worship of Isis, Osiris, and Apis is as
old as the oldest monument of Egypt, and that their names occur in the
times of the IVth dynasty, *i.e.*, more than 5000 years before Christ,
the probability is that it was Egyptian art which civilised primitive
Greece, and Egyptian religion which has had an influence on the
formation of the Greek divinities.

The Egyptians having a superstitious horror of the sea, this action was
not a direct one, but exercised through the medium of the Phœnicians,
Karians, Koushites, Lybians, and other Mediterranean peoples Dr.
Schliemann, in his excavations at Tiryus and Mycenæ among other objects
of Egyptian origin discovered a number of golden masks in the tombs.
Homer and later writers who abound in descriptions of funeral rites,
make no mention of the use of such masks so common in Egypt.
[\[3\]](#n3){#f3} The soil of Greece bears everywhere the traces of the
influence of Egypt: in Acro-Corinthus, the ancient acropolis of Corinth,
situated further inland, there were two temples of Isis, one styled
Pelasgian and the other Egyptian, and two temples of Serapis, one of the
name of Canobus, the town where Menelaus is said to have been wrecked on
his return from Troy. (**Pausanias Cor.** § iv) Among the ruins of the
ancient city of Hermione, Pausanias found, contiguous to the sanctuary
of Athena, the temples of Isis and Serapis, and a ring of huge unhewn
stones, in the interior of which the sacred rites of Demeter were
performed. (**Cor.**, § xxxiv.) Serapis had a temple at Copæ, a small
town on the banks of Lake Copais, mentioned by Homer. (**Tel.** ii, 503;
**Paus. Bœot.**, § xxxiv) On . the top of Mount Pontinus, near Lerna,
was the temple of Saitian Athena, built by Danaos.

Ancient tradition described Athena as a foreign goddess. The Phœnician
Kadmos, the founder of Thebes, imported into Bœotia the worship of
Athena *Onga*, a word of Phenician origin, the sense of which is lost.
[\[4\]](#n4){#f4} At Delphi and elsewhere she was worshipped under that
name. Another tradition has it that the daughters of Danaos, on their
flight from Sais, on the fifty-oared vessel built by their father, under
the guidance of Athena, had introduced her worship into Lindus, in the
isle of Rhodes, where they landed on their way to Lerna, in the
neighbourhood of Mycenæ and Tiryus.

When. the Greeks of. historic times came into contact with Egypt, they
identified Athena with the great goddess of Sais, Neith or Neitha, by
inversion Athena, whose emblem was the ewe. No ewe lamb was sacrificed
to Athena. Neitha was the mother of Rà, the Sun; Athena was the mother
of Apollo, the Greek sun-god. [\[5\]](#n5){#f5} A weaver's shuttle was
employed to express the name of Neitha, because, like Athena, she was
supposed to have invented the art of weaving. Athena is admittedly not a
word of Greek origin. M. Ch. Lenormant, in his **Galerie mythologique**,
compares the name of Athena with that of Tanath, the Phenician goddess
with whom she has much in common. Neitha and Tanath belong to the
primitive group of goddesses who were self-born.

The Egyptians and Phœnicians may have had a part in the formation of the
myth of Athena, but the decisive influence was that exercised by the
Lybians. How the savage tribes of Africa came into contact with the
pre-historic Greek remains to this day an unsolved historical problem.
The Greeks could not but recognise the resemblance which their own
goddess bore to the divinity worshipped on the banks of the Lybian
river, Tritonis, and that this region was considered as the birth-place
and abode of Athena. [\[6\]](#n6){#f6} Herodotus tells us that Athena
was a goddess held in high honour among the Lybians. The country girls
had the manners and customs of Amazons, just as Athena had before she
grew to be the personification of wisdom. They indulged in rough sports
among themselves, fighting with stones and sticks; those who died of
their wounds were reputed false virgins. The Lybian women, like the
Australians, studied by Messrs. Fison and Howitt, had for husbands all
the men of their marital group, the children being reared by the mothers
[\[7\]](#n7){#f7}; when grown up they were taken to the assembly of the
men held every month, arid the man whom a child resembled was considered
his father. Probably when the Greeks came into contact with the Lybians
they were greater savages than the African tribes: according to
Herodotus they borrowed from them the costume and "the ægis of Athena
\... with this difference that the fringe of their ægis consisted not of
snakes but of thongs of leather \... The Lybian women wore over their
clothes hairless goat skins, bordered with red fringe, and it is from
those skins that the Greeks have drawn the name of *œgis*. I believe
also that the piercing shrieks heard in the temples of this goddess
derived their origin from Lybia." (iv, 189) "The Lybian Athena is the
daughter not of Zeus, but of his brother Poseidon; but having quarrelled
with her father she goes to Zeus and is adopted by him." (iv. § 180)

On a closer study of the history of Athena we find that she is
characterised by certain features which render her the fitting goddess
of a savage people, like the pre-historic Greeks.

A legend preserved by Tzetzes represents Athena killing her father
Pallas, in order to escape his lust, flaying his corpse and decking
herself with his skin, after the manner of Herakles with the hide of the
Nemean lion. During the long period of Athena's infancy the women were
doubtless constantly exposed to the danger of violation; as indeed were
all the women of these savage tribes in which marriage by group
obtained; numberless nymphs and goddesses had fallen victims to such a
fate; nor did Athena escape it. She was violated by Hephæstios and bore
Erichthonius, whom Ghè was good enough to go pregnant with for her. The
fact of having borne a child or two in no way nullified the claim to the
title of virgin. Her temple in the Acropolis of Athens, the Erechtheum,
was consecrated to the *virgin mother*. [\[8\]](#n8){#f8} There is
nothing calculated to shock the savage mind in this confusion of
virginity and motherhood; and the prerogative of being a virgin mother
Athena shared with many Asiatic and Egyptian divinities who gloried in
their power to conceive children without the co-operation of the male.
Sacred animals shared the same privilege: the divine bull Apis was born
of a virgin cow impregnated by the rays of the sun; vultures were
rendered fertile by the wind; and Horapollo informs us that the vulture
stands for the hieroglyphic symbol of motherhood.

The costume of this primitive Athena no doubt resembled that of the Juno
of Lanuvium, as we find it represented on medals and as it is described
by Cicero (**De nat. Deor.** i, § 29). It was composed of the skin of a
goat, covering the head and falling over the back, drawn in at the
waist, and there tied into a knot formed by the forelegs of the animal.
We may presume that her ægis, which has so greatly exercised the minds
of the German and French Sanskrit scholars, was nothing else than a
goat's skin wound round her left arm in the way that the Spaniards wrap
their cloaks about their arms in their duels with the *navaja*
(bowie-knife). To impart a character of ferocity to this ægis, a border
formed of serpents' heads was added to it, and from the centre of it
hung a human head horribly mutilated. The **Lexicon of Greek and Roman
Mythology**, now in course of publication under the direction of W.H.
Roscher, reproduces an antique Gorgon's head having the lips and nose
cut off and stretching out its tongue. The later poets and artists,
forgetting or disregarding the earlier conception of the ægis,
represented it as a breastplate covered with metallic scales and
extending from shoulder to shoulder. If this coarse and ferocious
costume was little worthy of the Athena destined to become the goddess
of divine wisdom, the primitive religious images of her were equally
unworthy of that perfect work of art which the Greek statuary was
ultimately, to produce in representation of her.

The statue of Athena, left by the daughters of Danaos at Lindus, was, if
we credit Callimachus (**frag.** 105), a mere log of wood. The oldest
statue of Athena *polias*, namely protectress of the city, which was
preciously preserved at Athens, and which was said to have fallen from
heaven on the day of the foundation of the Acropolis, was like the
Athena of Lindus, a shapeless block of wood. [\[9\]](#n9){#f9} At
Mantinea Athena was represented by an erect quadrangular stone, to which
were added two stumps of arms. [\[10\]](#n10){#f10} Rude images of a
similar kind were used to represent other primitive divinities: the Hera
of Pharis was a lump of wood; the renowned Aphrodite of Cyprus was
represented under the form of a stone pyramid (Tacitus, **Hist.** ii.
§ 3). The Dionysius worshipped at Thebes was a piece of wood ornamented
with brass (Pausanias, **Bœoti.** xii). The pre-historic Greeks, like
other savages, did not, worship mystic gods personifying the hidden
forces of nature; stones, bits of wood or bones endowed with magical
properties were the gods of their divinity. It required long ages of
development before man gave to his superior beings the animal or human
form.

The worship rendered to the savage Athena was in keeping with the
coarseness of her images. In the Troade she was a sanguinary divinity,
and human blood was spilt upon her altars; yet an object of such
profound veneration was this Trojan Athena, that Alexander stopped at
Ilios to bring offerings to her, and that Xerxes sacrificed to her a
holocaust of a thousand bulls. Porphyrios recounts that it was customary
to immolate virgins to the Athena of Laodicea, in Syria (**De Abst.**
ii. § 56). And not only to her, but to her companion Agraulos, daughter
of Kekrops were human sacrifices offered: in the temple she inhabited at
Salamis, together with Athena and Diomedes, a man was immolated to her.

Before taking up her habitation in the towns, and dwelling in the
temples, Athena had climbed the mountain-tops, and lived in caves, in
attestation whereof we have her epithet Agraulos, wild, rustic, and the
Orphic hymn. She was then "the goddess who strikes doubt and terror into
the souls of men"; she resembled the Eumenides, these antique goddesses
who, later on, were to choose her for umpire in their quarrel with
Apollo, the new god, who violated the ancient usages. (Æschylus,
**Eumenides**). Zeus and the gods of the new Olympus had had for
predecessors other divinities that successively had been dethroned and
consigned to inferior functions or simply suppressed. The savage Athena
and the Eumenides belonged to those antique divinities that had been
compelled to submit to Zeus. Hesiod relates that when Zeus married
Metis, and gave birth to Athena, he was already the uncontested lord of
the heavens. Popular traditions describe Athena as taking part in the
struggle with the Titans, burying Enceladus under a rock, and helping
Zeus to triumph over his enemies: the child-bed scene, played by the
master of men and gods, was but the shamming of his adoption of her,
after which Athena consents to recognise his patriarchal authority. It
is because Athena belonged to this antique class of divinities that she
possessed such virile qualities, and that; according to the Orphic hymn
(xxxii, 10), she was "arsen kai thélus," male and female. Though it is
impossible to identify Athena with Dionysius, we cannot help remarking
the curious analogies of the two myths: not only is Dionysius
thrice-born like Athena, but like her he has a double nature (diphues,
**Orphic Hymn**, xxx, 2). Furthermore, Dionysius was bull-headed
(tauropos), and as Schliemann concludes, from certain idols found at
Ilios, that *glaucopis* Athena does not mean blue-eyed, but
*owl-headed*, we may infer that she was a *totem* goddess of a savage
tribe, whose women had the habits of Amazons, and who recognised the owl
for its ancestor.

The epithet Tritogeneia meant that Athena was thrice-born -- for she
belonged originally to the group of antique self-born goddesses -- but,
in the course of time, when her savage adorers reached the stage of
development in which the matriarchal family was constituted, she was
endowed with a mother, who bore different names, according to the people
who worshipped Athena; and at last, when on earth, and afterwards in
heaven, man bad become the ruling power in the family, she consented, to
the great joy of the gods, to recognise the authority of Zeus, who went
through the ludicrous ceremony of giving her birth, as was the custom in
case of an adoption. Hera, to adopt Herakles, went to bed, hid the child
under her clothing, and let it drop as in a natural accouchement.
(**Diod. Sic.** iv, § 39) [\[11\]](#n11){#f11} Savages and barbarians
always want to have the material scene reproduced. Plinius (**In
Paneg.** § 8) relates that even in his time adoption was made in front
of the nuptial bed, in order to make believe that the adopted person was
the real offspring of the conjugal bed.

Thus, the epithet Tritogeneia not only takes us back to the remotest
times of Greek history, but marks three most important epochs of human
pre-historic evolution.

Philosophers and grammarians of antiquity have diverted themselves by
transfiguring Athena into a divinity as imponderable as wisdom and as it
impalpable as the air; but the popular traditions, the coarse fables,
the meaningless epithets which cling to her, enable the unbiased student
to reconstruct a primitive Athena adapted to the character of a savage
tribe, war-loving and ferocious, who sent colonies from Africa to Greece
and Asia Minor.

The myth of Athena was not produced all of a piece, nor does it present
the immutability of t mathematical formula. In common with all things,
both in the natural and the intellectual world, it has been subject to
the laws of evolution. Athena had the same fate as other supreme beings
who evolve as their savage creator evolves, and are informed with a
higher life as man advances in civilisation: like the soul in the
Egyptian hell, she has passed through so many states that the goddess of
the savage tribes is barely discoverable in the divinity of the poets
and in the agia sofia of the philosophers.

 

### Footnotes

[1.](#f1){#n1} **Iliad**, iv. 515.

[2.](#f2){#n2} The bull-god, Apis, was allowed to live upwards of
twenty-five years; when the time allotted him for his terrestrial
existence had expired, if he did not die of his own accord, he was
drowned. The priests killed him on earth in order to raise him to life
again, a god in heaven, where he was identified with Osiris and raised
to the rank of Osiris-Apis, or by abbreviation, Osar-Apis, Sarapis,
transformed by the Greeks into Serapis.

[3.](#f3){#n3} The Egyptian museum at Paris possesses many gold masks,
and a considerable quantity of pasteboard ones.

[4.](#f4){#n4} M. Maury derives the word *onga* from *ógen* or *iggoum*,
anchor, supposing that *Onga Athena* was represented on the anchor of
Phœnician vessels. (**Histoire des religions de l'ancienne Grèce**, i,
97.)

[5.](#f5){#n5} Cicero, **De naturâ Deorum**, iii, 23.

[6.](#f6){#n6} Æschylus, **Eumenides** 292-296; **Diod. Sic.** iii.,
§ 70.

[7.](#f7){#n7} Fison anti Howitt, **Kamilaroi and Kurnai**, 1880,
Melbourne.

[8.](#f8){#n8} Emile Burnouf, directeur de l'Ecole francaise d'Athèns,
**La Légende Athénienne**, 1872, ch. iii.

[9.](#f9){#n9} Rudi palo et informi Ligno. **Tertullianus, Apol. adv.
Gent.** xvi.

[10.](#f10){#n10} F. Lenormant, **Les Betyles, Rev. Hist. des
Religions**, Janvier 1881.

[11.](#f11){#n11} Wesse1ing quotes a passage of the Abbé Guibert
(**Histor. Hierosl.** iii, 13), who narrates in this wise the adoption
of Baudouin by the Prince of Edessa: -- Adoptationis autem talis pro
gentis consuetudine dicitur fuisse modus. Intra lineam interulam, quam
nos vocamus camisiam, nudum intrare fecit et sibi adstrinxit; et haec
omnia osculo libato firmavit; idem et mulier postmodum fecit.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.11.2003
