---
layout: default
title: 
---
# A COLONEL'S HALF-TRUTHS

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
July 7, 1911\

I n the course of his address to the 72 young men who received the
degree of mechanical engineer at this year's commencement of Stevens
Institute of Technology, Col. Robert M. Thompson said:

"The making of money or losing of money in a business is a fair test of
efficiency."

The colonel must have sat up all night to frame a sentence so full of
half-truths, hence so false in social technology.

No doubt, if a capitalist is grossly inefficient, whether through mental
incapacity, or by reason of addiction to any or many of the several
vices that capitalists are celebrated for patronizing---most probably,
under such circumstances, his inefficiency will interfere with is making
money.

At the same time, inefficiency is by no means a positive preventive to
the making of money. Capitalists are not a few who, though wearing the
marks of inefficiency on every line in their face, make money, plenty of
it. The mechanism of capitalism is such that, once a capitalist, the
money is made, regardless of any quality of the capitalist. Capitalistic
plumbing so arranges things that the money flows into the capitalist's
pocket, work or no work, efficiency or no efficiency.

Obversely, it does not at all follow that if a workingman is efficient
he will "make money." In exceptional instances, other and fortuitous
circumstances aiding, and efficient workingman may get to where he can
profit by the capitalistic plumbing, and make money. The rule is to the
contrary.

The very capitalistic plumbing that turns the current of money into the
pocket of the capitalist, whether he be efficient or not, whether he at
all works or not, keeps the money from being made by the vast majority
of workingmen.

Efficiency in any shape on the part of the workingman does not mean
money for him; it means more money for his capitalist employer.

Efficiency on the part of the workingman is like wool on the sheep's
back. The more plentiful the wool, and the better its quality, all the
more plentiful and profitable the clip for the sheep's owner. The
greater the efficiency of the worker, all the more plentiful is the
efficiency's proceeds for the workingman's employer.

That is the trick of the plumbing of the capitalistic social system. The
trick works to such perfection that wealth is, under capitalism, defined
as the product of labor and the reward of idleness, or inefficiency.

The young men of Stevens who graduated in mechanical technology, and who
had the misfortune of hearing, and may have had the greater misfortune
of taking stock in Col. Thompson, were launched with a technologic
conception of modern society that will long prevent them from acquiring
the efficiency necessary to render their mechanical efficiency fruitful
to themselves---the efficiency in economics, that will render them
militants in the movement to tear up the existing capitalist, and
substitute for it the socialist, plumbing, the plumbing that insures to
the worker the reward of his efficiency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
