---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1881

# Bourgeois Sentimentalism

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *L\'Egalité*, December 25, 1881;\
[Translated]{.info}: from the French for marxists.org by [Mitch
Abidor](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/mabidor.htm);\
[CopyLeft]{.info}: [Creative
Commons](../../../../admin/legal/cc/by-sa.htm) (Attribute & ShareAlike)
marxists.org 2005.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When it comes to beasts the bourgeois have the tenderness of angels.
They feel themselves to be closer relatives of beasts than of workers.
In England, that official country of hypocrisy, everywhere there are
societies for the protection of dogs, cats, sparrows, etc. All of these
societies are speculations: a certain number of influential members
(presidents, secretaries, agents, inspectors, etc) are lavishly
maintained on the funds intended for beasts. They consider themselves to
have all the qualities required to deserve the solicitude of the friends
of animals.

Of all these societies the most bothersome, the most hypocritical, the
most nauseating is the anti-vivisection society. This society has been
introduced into Germany, where it found many animal souls willing to
sympathize with the pains of their four-footed like. It is attempting to
slip into France. It's in the process of conquering the Radicals, who
are jealous to demonstrate that they have an excess of delicate
sentiments.

A Radical journalist, M. Aurelien Scholl, has declared himself the
champion of the anti-vivisectionists. And the newspaper of the chief of
Radicalism, *La Justice*, reproduces his articles intended to give
hysterical bourgeois nervous attacks.

The society of anti-vivisectionist animals of England has pulled so many
strings that it has obtained from parliament a law prohibiting
physiological experiments on living animals without permission from the
police. This is how the bourgeois treat their illustrious men. They
degrade them to the point of putting them under the control of the cops
even in the laboratory. But that society, which has so well succeeded in
paralyzing the work of English physiologists, has no intention of
intervening to trouble the pleasures of the rich. Pigeon shooting, where
thousands of tamed pigeons are wounded and mutilated for the amusement
of a few imbecilic aristocrats, is highly approved of by the
antivivisection society. Several of its most influential members are big
pigeon shooters. This sentimentalism is so turbulent that at the
international medical congress held in London last August Virchow and
John Simon felt the need to protest in the name of German and English
science.

John Simon is one of the official inspectors of English factories. He
has seen and studied the tortures that the tender bourgeois inflict on
children, women, and men of the proletariat in the capitalist prison in
order to steal from them the fruits of their labor. He has denounced
them with a courage the Radicals will never know. In his speech to the
congress he established that there exist two kinds of experiments: one
practiced by physiologists on a few animals, the other practiced on
thousands of men by speculators. As an example he cites the classic
experiments of Professor Tesich on a mouse in order to discover the
means of propagation of Asiatic cholera and the " well-known popular
experiments which, during the two cholera epidemics of 1848-49 and
1853-54 were practiced on a half million human beings of the southern
districts of London by a certain commercial company which provided these
neighborhoods with corrupted water." At this time experiments are being
done on the transmission of tuberculosis in order to learn if the milk
of cows with phthisis communicates that disease. The physiologist is
sacrificing to his experiments a few rabbits and dogs. The farmer who
sells the milk of these sick cows sacrifices thousands of men.

Two years ago a manufacturer of rice powder in London, Mr. King,
falsified his merchandise with clay and arsenical dust. Babies whose
delicate and porous skin had been sprinkled with his drug died poisoned
by the cutaneous absorption of arsenical matter. The poisonings were
noted in the autopsies and chemical analyses, and arsenic was found in
sealed packets sold by grocers and pharmacists. King was brought before
the courts. Twelve jurors were found to acquit him. A few weeks ago the
English physiologist Ferrier, well known in the scientific worlds of
Europe and America for his research on the localization of cerebral
functions was taken before a police court. He had neglected to obtain a
police permit. The scientist was condemned to a fine.

This is where hypocritical bourgeois sentimentality leads. Mr. Bright
the radical was one of those who most energetically opposed the law that
limited the labor of women and children to ten hours a day. And Mr.
Bright, a pious man, goes to read the bible every Sunday with the
workers that he tortures and steals from in his factory six days of the
week. If he kills them with work on earth, he helps them to gain
paradise in heaven. A poisoner of children is acquitted. A scientist is
condemned. King, the manufacturer of arsenical rice powder falsified his
products in order to increase his profits, i.e., his thefts, and this is
his excuse in the eyes of bourgeois law, promulgated and put into effect
in order to protect the thieves. Ferrier, the scientific physiologist is
condemned for having experimented on monkeys and for having given as the
goal for his experiments scientific knowledge, without any thoughts of
lucre, and precisely this is his crime in the eyes of bourgeois law. In
order to earn profits the bourgeois are permitted to torture human
beings in the capitalist prison and to poison them with falsified
products. The end sanctifies the means.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
