---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## Georgi Plekhanov

# What Should We Thank Him For?

#### *An Open Letter to Karl Kautsky*

### (October 1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Georgi Plekhanov, **Selected Philosophical Works**, Vol.II, Moscow
1976, pp.340-351.\
Originally published in German in **Sächsische Arbeiterzeitung**,
Nos.253-255, October 30, November 2 & 3, 1898.\
Translated from Russian by Julius Katzer.\
Scan & OCR by [\@At
Leninist.Biz](http://www.leninist.biz){target="new"}.\
Proofreading & mark-up [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Dear and esteemed comrade*:

Permit me to begin by thanking you for the pleasure I got from your
speeches at the Stuttgart Party Congress of German Social-Democrats. The
speeches were a political event of great importance, in view of the warm
approval of you expressed by the vast majority of delegates to the Party
Congress. There was a time when speeches and articles by certain members
of the German Party, such as Herren Bernstein, Conrad Schmidt and Heine,
could evoke in the hearts of our enemies the fond hope that the German
Social-Democrats intended to abandon the revolutionary ground of the
*class struggle*, and sink into the morass of opportunism; that hope has
now vanished like the morning mist. There can no longer be any doubt.
People are coming to realise that Herren Bernstein, Conrad Schmidt, and
Heine were not voicing the Party's views, and that Comrade Singer had
good reason to say, in his concluding address: we are and shall remain
what we have always been. Indeed, German SocialDemocracy has remained
what it has been always and at all times: the true standard-bearer of
the revolutionary thought of our times!

It is to be regretted that one of your speeches contained passages
capable of somewhat weakening the overall deep and gratifying
impression, and give cause for considerable misunderstandings in the
future. I am referring to your speech against Bernstein. Since the
controversial points in it could not but have surprised many other
people besides myself, I would like to bring them up for discussion in
an open letter to you, in lieu of a private talk.

You said in your address: "Bernstein has not discouraged us, but has
given us food for thought; we shall be thankful to him for that."

That is true, but only partly so. Indeed, Bernstein has not discouraged
the German Social-Democrats, as is shown by the decisions of the
Stuttgart Party Congress. But has he given us any food for thought? Has
he been in a position to do so? That is hardly the case, I think.

To provide food for thought, either new facts must be adduced or
familiar facts should be presented in a new light. Bernstein has done
neither, which is why he has been unable to get anybody to engage in the
appropriate thinking.

Perhaps I am mistaken in my appraisal of Bernstein's literary
activities. Let us see if that is so.

It goes without saying that we are interested only in that part of his
literary activities which has led to his being reproved by some of the
comrades. The reference here is to the latter years of his activities.
There may be varying opinions of his former literary work, but we have
no reason to enlarge on it here.

In recent years, Bernstein has been waging a struggle against what he
has called revolutionary phraseology in general and against the "theory
of catastrophes" in particular. The gist of his argument against that
theory lies in his stating what he considers an indubitable fact, namely
that many views voiced by Marx and Engels in the **Communist Manifesto**
have not been confirmed by the ensuing course of social life. "The
aggravation of social relations," he says, "has not proceeded in the
manner described in the **Manifesto**. It is not only useless but most
stupid to turn a blind eye to that. The number of property-owners, far
from decreasing, has grown. The tremendous growth of social wealth has
been accompanied, not by a rapid fall in the number of capitalist
magnates but by a greater number of capitalists of all degrees. The
middle strata are changing in character but they are not disappearing
from the social ladder." If we add to these thoughts of Bernstein's his
remarks that concentration is proceeding very slowly in certain branches
of industry and that trade crises should not be expected to be as acute
and widespread as before, we shall have every right to say that this
exhausts all his arguments against the "theory of catastrophes". And
now, esteemed and dear comrade, if you give serious consideration to
this line of argument, you will see that it contains nothing, absolutely
nothing, that has not already been said on countless occasions by our
enemies in the bourgeois camp. In that case, you will also have to admit
that we have absolutely no grounds to feel in any way indebted to
Bernstein.

You are, no doubt, familiar with the writings of Herr
Schultze-Gävernitz. Kindly take his book **Zum sozialen Frieden** and
read page 487 *et seq.* in Volume 2. The author attempts to disprove the
"theory of catastrophes", which he formulates as follows: "The
development of large-scale industry means the workers being reduced ever
more to the status of the non-differentiated proletariat, the
accumulation of wealth in the hands of the few, the disappearance of the
middle classes, and the appearance of the party of social revolution."
In Schultze-Gävernitz's opinion, the facts do not fall in with this
theory: "The detailed statistics provided by the Board of Trade show the
reverse in the case of Britain, this leaving the social-revolutionary
trend witli nothing to stand on." On one hand, the workers' economic
condition has been constantly improving during the last fifty years; on
the other hand, "the widespread idea that property is being concentrated
in ever fewer hands" has proved erroneous. Last, the spread of
joint-stock companies has drawn ever more possessors of small savings
into participation in the profits of the big industrial enterprises. In
Schultze-Gävernitz's opinion, all these circumstances taken together
open the road towards the peaceful solution of the social question.

He voices similar views in another book, **Der Grossbetrieb---ein
wirtschaftlicher und sozialer Fortschritt**.

"It is far from true that the rich are becoming richer, and the poor
poorer; in fact, just the reverse is taking place, which has been proved
statistically in respect of Britain. By the time the industrial
employers come to the fore socially and politically, new middle classes
arise in their rear, which gain strength first economically, and then
politically." (p.225)

Schultze-Gävernitz's arguments and conclusions refer to Britain. He
admits that relations are developing differently in other countries, and
that in Germany, for instance, "the middle classes are still rapidly
diminishing in number". However, he attributes this fact simply to
*Germany's backwardness*, thereby indicating that what he considers
himself entitled to assert in respect of Britain will hold good in time
for Germany as well.

This is not the place to show how one-sided and tendentious these
arguments and conclusions of Schulze-Gävernitz's are. That is something
that you, esteemed and dear comrade, of course know far better than I
do. George Joachim Goschen, one of the researchers who were out to prove
that a new middle class is at present in the process of formation in
Britain, remarked in a speech he made to the Royal Statistical Society
in December 1887: "The expression, derogatory to statisticians, that
'figures will prove anything' \... simply means that figures, which
never tell untruths, may be so handled as to present untruths. Figures
themselves never lie, but every one must admit that there is no sound
and accurate material which can be so easily handled for the special
purposes of the compiler as statistics can." These words of Goschen's
come to my mind each time I have occasion to turn the leaves of the
above-mentioned book by Schultze-Gävernitz, but that is something I
shall not dwell on here. I merely wished to point out to you that
Bernstein is merely repeating what Schultze-Gävernitz said several years
ago.

But Schultze-Gävernitz has said absolutely nothing new either. Several
British statisticians dealt with the same subject before he did, as, for
instance, the above-mentioned Goschen, as did several French economists,
for instance, Paul Leroy-Beaulieu in his essay on the distribution of
wealth and the trend towards the least inequality in social status
(Paris, 1881). It will be no exaggeration to say that the works of
Schultze-Gävernitz I have quoted from are nothing but a new variation on
an old theme dealt with specially and in the greatest detail by Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu. Thus, Bernstein is merely giving us a rehash from
bourgeois economists. Why then should we thank him, and not those
economists? Why should we assert thai Bernstein, not they, has given us
food for thought? No, most esteemed and dear comrade, we cannot do that.
If we really have to speak here of our debt of gratitude, let us be fair
and address our thanks to the proper quarters. Let us do so. in general,
to all supporters and admirers of "*harmonies economiques*", and, of
course, first and foremost to the immortal Bastiat.

Bernstein has often voiced regret that "serious attempts to
scientifically implement scientific socialism are still very rare", and,
in launching, in his **Problems of Socialism**, a "searching criticism
of long-proved Social-Democratic theories and demands", he proudly
declares that "any theoretical work consists in a 'searching' criticism
of hitherto recognised propositions" and that "if **Neue Zeit** would be
the theoretical organ of Social-Democracy, it cannot eschew such
'searching' criticism". "Besides," he goes on to say, "what error was
not once a 'long-proved truth'?" And what has been the outcome of his
"theoretical work"? Several philistine considerations, such as the
importance of the "principle of economic self-responsibility", and then
\... a decisive *turn towards the theoretical viewpoint of the opponents
of scientific socialism*. Bernstein presents us with the "truths" of the
latest bourgeois economy, imagining that he is "carrying Marx's theory
beyond the point it was left at by that great thinker". What strange
self-deception! One can only repeat about Bernstein what Faust says of
Wagner:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Mit gier'ger Hand nach Schätzen gräbt,\                              |
| Und froh ist, wenn er Regenwürmer findet!* [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}          |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

When the Stuttgart Party Congress was ending its deliberations, Comrade
Greulich came out in defence of Bernstein, incidentally stating the
following: "I am deeply convinced that our cause can only gain from
criticism. German Social-Democracy has received a great heritage from
those great thinkers Marx and Engels. But we are dealing here, not with
the ultimate truth but with science, which must always take fresh
account of the facts." Nothing could be truer, but does Comrade Greulich
really think that the great heritage handed down to us by Marx and
Engels stands to gain anything from an eclectic fusion with the
doctrines of bourgeois economists? Can he, forsooth, make so bold as to
call *criticism* something that is an absolutely *uncritical iteration
of those doctrines*? Yet, we find in Bernstein nothing but that
uncritical iteration. It is only due to that uncritical iteration that
he has been able to make us a gift of his *earthworms*.

Incidentally I shall note that Bernstein has not alone been at fault in
revealing such an uncritical attitude towards the doctrines of our
opponents, although he has shown it with a particular outspokenness.
There are also other of our scholarly comrades who find a fleeting
pleasure in trying to prove that they can be "critical" even of Marx
himself. With that end in view, they take his theory in the distorted
form it has been given by its bourgeois opponents and then triumphantly
unleash their "criticism" with the aid of arguments borrowed from those
opponents.

Of course, you realise, most esteemed and dear comrade, that it is not
socialist theory that stands to gain anything from *this kind* of
"criticism"; at best, it will merely enhance *the favour in which such
"critics" are held in educated bourgeois quarters*.

Indeed Marx's theory is no ultimate or eternal truth, but it is the
*supreme social truth of our times*, and we have just as little ground
to downgrade that theory to the level of the "*harmonies économiques*"
of the new-fangled Bastiats and Says as to welcome as *serious
criticism* the attempts made along the same lines, and to give them our
approval.

Please forgive me this digression, most esteemed and dear comrade. I
shall now return to Bernstein, namely to the now resounding episode of
the "*ultimate aim*". [\[1\*\]](#na){#fa}

#### \* \* \*

### II

After Bernstein had made clear his attitude of indifference to the
ultimate aim, he saw himself obliged to explain matters to justify
himself, which however led nowhere. When I read his explanations and
self-justification, I realised more and more the usefulness of the old
and tested rule that any writer should unswervingly observe, namely,
that one should first carefully peruse the proofs of one's articles and
only *then send them to the printers*, since corrections made *after
publication of an article* rarely help matters. At the same time, I
asked myself what could have induced Bernstein to write that article,
which patently lacked all logical meaning or, as they say, was without
rhyme or reason. At first I thought that he had rehashed in his own way,
a la Bernstein, the well-known dictum which, if I am not mistaken,
belongs to Lessing: "If the Creator held all the truth in one hand, and,
in the other, a striving towards that truth and told me to choose
between the two, I would prefer the striving towards the truth to
possession of the ready-made truth." But then, I had occasion to turn
the pages of **Zum sozialen Frieden**, and saw that this well-known
sentence had quite a different origin.

According to Schultze-Gävernitz, the old British economy was hostile to
any labour legislation, and could not but be hostile, because that
legislation placed restrictions on the individual freedom of adults.
Yet, the restrictions on individual freedom were an inescapable outcome
of the factory legislation, which, for its part, could not but develop
together with the mountingpolitical influence of the working class.
These conditions laid the ground, in Britain, for the acceptance and
spread of the theory of continental socialism, which had, however,
undergone appreciable change, inasmuch as "the assertion that the
condition of the worker was hopeless" had, so to speak, lost validity. "
Socialism thereby loses its revolutionary edge," Schultze-Gävernitz goes
on to say, "and is used to substantiate legislative demands. *Hence, it
is, in essence, a matter of indifference whether the etatisation of all
means of production is accepted or rejected as an ultimate aim; since,
if that demand is essential to revolutionary socialism, that is not the
case in respect of practical-political socialism, which prefers
immediate aims to the distant ones*." (**Zum sozialen Frieden**, II,
S.98).

Among the representatives of British "practical-political" socialism is,
in Schultze-Gävernitz's opinion, John Stuart Mill, who, though not a
socialist in the "spirit of Engels and Marx", yet considers permissible
far-reaching state intervention in the individual's economic activities,
and is "the first political economist to defend the need to extend
protection, in certain conditions, to adult men as well." (**Zum
sozialen Frieden**, II, S.99.) I aver that Eduard Bernstein is now a
"practical-political" socialist of the same brand. Schultze-Gävernitz
tells us the history of the development of John Stuart Mill's
"socialist" views, and does so on the basis of the latter's
autobiography. For our part, we can picture to ourselves, in just the
same way, the course of Eduard Bernstein's evolution, with due account
of his own explanations, and *linking them together with* the
above-quoted ideas of Schultze-Gavernilz regarding the minor
significance of the ultimate aim to "*practical-political*"
*socialists*.

After assimilating the view held by Schultze-Gavornitz and other
harmonists to the effect that the development of social life in Britain
has disproved the views of Engels and Marx, Bernstein has felt drawn to
the "practical-political" socialism described by the selfsame
Schultze-Gävernitz, from the viewpoint of which the ultimate aim---the
etatisation of all means of production---is indeed something almost
indifferent if not quite utopian. And now, imbued with the spirit of
that socialism, Bernstein lias hastened to make public his new attitude
to the ultimate aim, Schultze-Gävernitz's above-mentioned remark on the
ultimate aim determining, not only the direction of his thoughts but
even his mode of expression. Thus, everything becomes quite clear, and
his celebrated sentence, which at first glance seemed most absurd,
acquires a very clear and very definite meaning. True, Bernstein himself
is frightened by that meaning, this being borne out by his explanations
and his attempts to justify himself. It is also shown by his letter to
the Stuttgart Party Congress, in which he wrote: "The forecast made in
the **Communist Manifesto** regarding the development of modern society
was correct, inasmuch as it characterised the overall trends in that
development." However, what follows next in the letter patently
contradicts these words, and if Bernstein himself does not or will not
realise that, the contradiction is obvious both to the friends and the
enemies of our cause. You stressed that splendidly in your Stuttgart
speech when you said: "He" (Bernstein) "explains to us that the number
of the wealthy capitalists is growing, so that the foundations on which
we have built our views are wrong. Indeed, if that were true then not
only would the moment of our victory be put very far off, but we would
never arrive at our goal at all."

Comrade Liebknecht expressed himself in much the same way: "If
Bernstein's arguments were true, we could then bury our programme and
all our past, and would cease to be a proletarian party."

On the other hand, Professor Julius Wolf wrote the following shortly
after the appearance of Bernstein's article *The Struggle of
Social-Democracy, and Revolutions in Society*: "The importance of his
words cannot he exaggerated. They are a punch in the face to present-day
socialist theory, an open declaration of war against it."
(*Illusionisten und Realisten in der Nationalökonomie*, **Zeitschrift
fiir Sozialwissenschaft**, 1898, Heft 4, Seite 251.)

I have not the least desire to dispute Bernstein's right to engage in
fisticuffs against that very party whose views lie formerly preached.
Anyone is entitled to change his views. However, he should not have
tried to convince us that the change in his views is of no substantial
significance. He should have known and understood that his new views
inevitably lead to the "social peace" preached by Herr
Schultze-Gävernitz and his ilk. In short, Bernstein had every right to
wage battle against Social-Democracy, but he should have done so with
his intentions declared. Since he has not done that, he deserves, not
our gratitude but bitter rebuke. During the Renaissance and even
earlier, there were scholars who did their best to prove that some
philosophers of antiquity were Christians. It goes without saying that
they actually proved, not what they had set out to but what they had no
intention of proving, namely, that they had themselves abandoned the
stand of *Christianity* and had become *pagans*. Something of the kind
has happened to our "scholars", who have taken Bernstein under their
wing; they have not proved that Bernstein lias remained true to
socialism ("in the spirit of Engels and Marx"), but that they are
themselves infected with the views of the bourgeois
"social-politicians". World Social-Democracy should be on the alert
against such "scholars", otherwise they can cause it a good deal of
harm.

#### \* \* \*

### III

The instance of Bernstein is highly instructive to anybody who would
give thought to the matter; it is only in this sense that I will say,
together with you, most esteemed and dear comrade, that Bernstein
deserves our thanks. The history of his conversion from a
Social-Democrat into a "social-politician" should always draw attention
from all thinking members of our Party. Comrade Liebknecht ascribed this
defection to the influence of the British conditions. "A mind like
Marx," he said, "had to he in Britain \... in order to \... write his
**Capital**. As for Bernstein, he has been impressed by the tremendous
\... development of the British bourgeoisie." But is it really necessary
to be a Marx to avoid falling under the influence of the British
bourgeoisie, while living in that country? As I see it, there are quite
a number of comrades in the ranks of the German Social-Democrats who,
though they have lived in Britain, have remained true to socialism ("in
the spirit of Marx and Engels"). No, the reason is not that Bernstein is
living in Britain hut that he has gained a poor knowledge of that very
scientific socialism that he has undertaken to "implement
scientifically". I know that many people may find this unbelievable, hut
it is true.

In my article *Bernstein and Materialism*, which was published in **Neue
Zeit**, I showed how infinitesimal this man's knowledge of philosophy
is, and how erroneous in general his ideas of materialism. In the
article I am now writing for **Neue Zeit** I shall show how poorly he
has mastered the materialist understanding of history.
[\[2\*\]](#nb){#fb} I shall now ask you to note how amazingly little he
has understood of the theory of catastrophes, which he has "critically"
risen up against.

Here is how he sets forth "the understanding now predominant among
Social-Democrats of the course of the development of present-day
society":

"According to this understanding, an economic crisis of vast force and
extent will sooner or later, in view of the impoverishment it brings
about, so passionately inflame hearts against the capitalist economic
system, and so irrefutably convince the masses of the impossibility,
under the domination of that system, of guiding the given productive
forces for the common weal that the movement against that system will
acquire an irresistible force, and the system will collapse under its
pressure. In other words, the great and irresolvable economic crisis
will grow into an all-embracing social crisis, whose outcome will be the
political domination of the proletariat as the sole consciously
revolutionary class, and the complete transformation of society in the
socialist sense, under the rule of that class."

Please tell us, most esteemed and dear comrade, is it in that light you
have seen the social "catastrophe" which will come about sooner or later
as the inevitable outcome of the class struggle? Are you, too, of the
opinion that such a "catastrophe" can be the result only of a vast and
universal economic crisis? I think that is hardly the case. Moreover, I
think that, for you, the future victory of the proletariat is not of
necessity linked with an *acute* and universal economic crisis. You have
never seen the matter in such schematic terms. As far as I can remember,
nobody else has understood the matter in that way. True, the
revolutionary movement of 1848 was preceded by the crisis of 1847, but
it does not hence follow that a "catastrophe" is unthinkable without a
crisis.

It is also true that an exacerbation of the class struggle can hardly be
counted on during a sharp economic upswing. Who, however, can guarantee
a continuous industrial upswing in the future? Bernstein thinks that, in
view of the present-day international means of communication, acute and
general crises have become impossible. Let us assume that is the case
and that the business slump, as stated as early as 1865 by the French
economist Batbie, will be only partial, "*l'engagement des produits ne
sera que partiel*". But then, nobody denies the possibility of a
repetition of the terrible "trade depression" [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} we have
just gone through. Does not a depression of that kind show most
tellingly that present-day society's productive forces have outgrown its
production relations? And is it indeed so difficult for the working
class to realise the meaning of that phenomenon? The fact that periods
of industrial depression, with their concomitant unemployment, need and
hardships, extremely aggravate the class struggle has been graphically
shown by the example of America.

Bernstein passes all these considerations by. He makes all our
expectations of the future hinge on an acute and universal economic
crisis, and, after saying that such crises can hardly occur in the
future, he imagines that he has done away with the entire "theory of
catastrophes". He gives us his patterns and then proves to us that these
*patterns* are absolutely *stereotype*. After that, he voices the utmost
delight at these cheap triumphs. This is to be seen in the tone in which
he instructs the "dogmatists".

You remember, of course, most esteemed and dear comrade, how very many
comrades at the Stuttgart Party Congress rebuked Parvus for the tone in
which he waged his polemic against Bernstein. I, too, think that had
Parvus polemised in a different tone, Bernstein would have had no
pretext to fall silent. The whole world would then have clearly seen the
amazing poverty of Bernstein's thinking. That is why I, too, regret that
Parvus did not keep himself in check, but at the same time I can fully
understand his indignation. As I see it, he was fully justified by the
circumstances as well. Besides, none of those who rebuked Parvus paid
due attention to the unpleasant tone used by Bernstein himself, one of a
smug pedant. When I read Bernstein's didactics addressed to the
"dogmatists of German and, in part, of British Social-Democracy", I said
to myself: had Sancho Panza been appointed, not governor of an island
but professor of social sciences, and had his natural common sense
become suddenly clouded over, he would have fallen into no other tone
but Bernstein's. I know that *de gustibus non est disputandum*---there
is no arguing about tastes---but I do think that many people find that
tone much less to their liking than one that is ardent and passionate.

You have yourself admitted, most esteemed and dear comrade, that you
were amazed by the vapidity of the series of articles which Bernstein
has so pregnantly entitled *Probleme des Sozialismus*. Yet you say that
these vapid articles have given yon food for thought. You are
predisposed in favour of Bernstein and, for that reason, you are very
much in the wrong.

"Bernstein has been reproached," you said at Stuttgart, "for his
articles weakening our confidence in victory, and tying the hands of the
fighting proletariat. I do not share that view \... If Bernstein's
articles have indeed made one person or other falter in his convictions,
then that would merely prove that there is no reason to feel sorry over
such people, that their convictions are not very deep rooted, and that
they have grasped at the iirst opportunity to turn their backs on us; in
that case we can only feel glad that this has taken place now, and not
during a catastrophe, when we shall stand in need of each arid every
man."

Who could have been discouraged by Bernstein's articles? Obviously only
one who has, even if temporarily, adopted Bernstein's new point of view.
The transition to that point of view must inevitably lead any logically
thinking man to a complete break with the old Social-Democratic
programme. But this kind of change of front cannot go unpunished, and
mnst inevitably, if only temporarily, sap the energy of one who has made
that change; besides, the energy of those who have adopted Bernstein's
point of view has very little in common with that characteristic of a
Social-Democratic party confident of victory. Such people must of
necessity understand the struggle differently from the way we do, and
consequently their confidence of victory must also be substantially
different from ours. That is why it has to be said that the energy
needed by our Party has been weakened in direct proportion to the number
of those who have joined forces with Bernstein if only temporarily. Like
you, I also think that international Social-Democracy has no reason to
attach particular importance to such people's loyalty; on the contrary,
it has every reason to wish that such people should leave its ranks
before the hour of grave trial strikes. In my opinion, your rigorous
judgement of such people is well grounded, but it seems to me that you
are inconsistent, and that, if you decided to be consistent, you should
have passed even severer judgement on a man under whose influence such
people have fallen, i.e., on Eduard Bernstein himself.

I have no desire to interfere in the internal affairs of German
Social-Democracy or to decide whether you should have accepted
Bernstein's articles for **Neue Zeit**, or not. Nothing of the kind has
occurred to me, but you are well aware, most esteemed and dear comrade,
that at Stuttgart matters came up for discussion which are of tremendous
significance to Social-Democrats the world over. It is only for that
reason that I have decided to address you with this letter. You say
that, properly speaking, the polemic with Bernstein is only beginning. I
am not quite in agreement with that, since the questions posed by
Bernstein were, in considerable measure, brought closer to solution by
Parvus's articles. This is a great service rendered by Parvus to the
proletariat of all lands. But that is not what I am referring to. What
is most important is that, in returning to the polemic with Bernstein,
we must recall the words of Liebknecht, which I have already mentioned:
were Bernstein right we could bury our programme and all our past. We
must insist on that, and *frankly explain* to our readers that the
matter can be worded as follows: who is to bury whom, *whether Bernstein
will bury Social Democracy* or *Social-Democracy will bury Bernstein*.
As for me, I do not doubt and have never doubted the outcome of this
controversy, but, most esteemed and dear comrade, permit me. in closing
my letter, again to ask you the following question: do we really owe a
debt of gratitude to a man who has dealt such a savage blow at socialist
theory and (consciously or unconsciously---that makes no difference) is
out to bury that theory, to the delight of the concordant "reactionary
mass"? No, and a thousand times no. It is not our gratitude that such a
man deserves!

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Yours sincerely,\                 |
|                                   |         ***G. Plekhanov***        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 \
[Top of the page](#top)\
 

### Footnotes

[1.](#f1){#n1} \[Who doth, with greedy hand, for treasure grope,\
And finding earthworms, is with joy inspired!\]

[2.](#f2){#n2} \[These two words are in English in the original.)

#### \* \* \*

### Notes

This article was written by Plekhanov as an open letter to Kautsky after
the Stuttgart Congress of the German Social-Democratic Party, on October
3-8, 1898. Bernstein addressed the Congress with a statement in which he
set forth his principal "critical" propositions directed against
Marxism. This statement gave rise to a heated discussion on the question
of revisionism. A resolution was finally passed condemning revisionism,
but no organisational measures against Bernstein were taken.

It was the concluding sentence in Kautsky's speech to the Congress, in
which he thanked Bernstein, that prompted Plekhanov's article. It was
published in the newspaper **Sächsische Arbeiterzeitung**, Nos.253-55,
October 30, November 2 and 3, 1898.

[1\*.](#fa){#na} Plekhanov is referring to Bernstein's well-known
proposition, "the movement is everything, the ultimate aim is nothing",
developed by the latter in his article *Der Kampf der Sozial-Demokratie
und die Revolution der Gesellschaft* (*The Struggle of Social-Democracy
and Revolution of Society*),

[2\*.](#fb){#nb} Plekhanov means his own article [*Cant Against
Kant*](../../1901/xx/cant.htm){target="new"}.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 3.8.2008
