---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Parliamentary Democracy

### (1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 22 September 1900.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Parliament is dissolved! By whom? By whom was Parliament elected? By the
voters of Great Britain and Ireland. Was it then the voters of Great
Britain and Ireland who called upon Parliament to dissolve? No, it was
the Prime Minister of England, Lord Salisbury to wit, whom nobody
elected and who is incapable under the laws of his country of being a
parliamentary representative; it was this gentleman with whom lay the
power of putting an end to the deliberations of Parliament and sending
its members back to the ordeal of the hustings.

This ridiculous situation is highly illustrative of many anomalies and
absurdities with which the English Constitution abounds. Eulogised by
its supporters as the most perfect constitution yet evolved it is in
reality so full of illogical and apparently impossible provisions and
conditions that if presented to the reasoning mind as the basis of a
workable constitution for a new country it would be laughed out of court
as too ridiculous to consider.

Let us examine a few of its provisions in order that we may the more
effectively contrast this parliamentary democracy with the democracy of
the revolutionist. Parliament is elected by the voters of Great Britain
and Ireland. When elected that party which counts the greatest number of
followers is presumed to form the Cabinet as representing a majority of
the electorate. But it by no means follows that a majority in the House
represents a majority of the people. In many constituencies for instance
where there are more than two candidates for a seat it frequently
happens that although a candidate polls a larger vote than either of his
opponents and so obtains the seat, yet he only represents a minority of
the constituents as the vote cast for his two opponents if united would
be much greater than his own. The cabinet formed out of the members of
the party strongest numerically constitutes the government of the
country and as such has full control of our destinies during its term of
office. But the Cabinet is not elected by the Parliament, voted for by
the people, nor chosen by its own party. The Cabinet is chosen by the
gentleman chosen by the Sovereign as the leader of the strongest party.
The gentleman so chosen after a consultation with the Queen (who perhaps
detests both him and his party) selects certain of his own followers,
and invests them with certain positions, and salaries, and so forms the
Cabinet.

The Cabinet controls the government and practically dictates the laws,
yet the Cabinet itself is unknown to the law and is not recognised by
the Constitution. In fact the Cabinet is entirely destitute of any legal
right to existence. Yet although outside the law and unknown to the
Constitution it possesses the most fearful powers, such as the
declaration of war, and can not be prevented by the elected
representatives of the people from committing the nation to the
perpetration of any crime it chooses. After the crime has been
perpetrated Parliament can repudiate when it meets the acts of the
Cabinet, but in the meanwhile nations may have been invaded, governments
overturned, and territories devastated with fire and sword.

The powers of Parliament are also somewhat arbitrary and ill-defined.
Every general election is fought on one or two main issues, and on these
alone. It may be the Franchise, it may be Temperance, it may be Home
Rule, or any other question, but when Parliament has received from the
electors its mandate on that one question it arrogates to itself the
right to rule and decide on every other question without the slightest
reference to the wishes of the electorate.

If Parliament, elected to carry out the wishes of the electors on one
question, chooses to act in a manner contrary to the wishes of the
electors in a dozen other questions, the electors have no redress except
to wait for another general election to give them the opportunity to
return other gentlemen under similar conditions and with similar
opportunities of evil-doing.

The democracy of Parliament is in short the democracy of Capitalism.
Capitalism gives to the worker the right to choose his master, but
insists that the fact of mastership shall remain unquestioned;
Parliamentary Democracy gives to the worker the right to a voice in the
selection of his rulers but insists that he shall bend as a subject to
be ruled. The fundamental feature of both in their relation to the
worker is that they imply his continued subjection to a ruling class
once his choice of the personnel of the rulers is made.

But the freedom of the revolutionist will change the choice of rulers
which we have to-day into the choice of administrators of laws voted
upon directly by the people; and will also substitute for the choice of
masters (capitalists) the appointment of reliable public servants under
direct public control. That will mean true democracy -- the industrial
democracy of the Socialist Republic.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
