---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Coronation of King Edward VII

### (1902)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fellow-Workers,

Unless unforseen accidents intervene to prevent this consummation, His
Majesty, Edward VII, King and Emperor, will be crowned on June 26th.
Were we able to follow our own inclinations in the matter we would be
inclined to treat it with contempt as being of but little importance to
the cause for which we stand, or to the workers with whose interests we
are concerned. To us, as Socialists, it is but of little moment who may
for the time being wear the trappings of royalty; that we are compelled
to acquiesce in his rule by the bayonets of his hireling soldiery and
police is for us sufficient; and to us, as workers, the personality of
the head of the Capitalist system in these islands is of small concern
when we realise that our exploitation by the master class would proceed
apace even if King Edward VII were a Christian gentleman instead of a --

But although we would rather treat the matter thus philosophically, we
find that the machinations of those in power do not leave us that
possibility; with them, and because of them, the festivities attending
the Coronation have taken on the aspect not merely of a huge parade of
pomp and magnificence -- cloaking the festering sores of that slave
society on which it is built -- but have also become an elaborately
contrived and astutely worked piece of Royalist and Capitalist
propaganda, designed to captivate the imagination of the unthinking
multitude, and thus lead them to look askance upon every movement which
would set up as an ideal to work for something less gorgeously
spectacular, even if more solidly real. The evil effects of private
ownership of industries is thus illustrated once more in a manner that
ought to appeal to those patriots in our midst who still dread the
innovating effects of Socialism on the National spirit of the Irish
people.

Because of this private ownership and control of our newspapers, of our
shops, of our manufactures, we find our Home Rule press devoting columns
to descriptions of all the preparations for the Coronation, nauseating
the thinking portion of its readers, but insidiously sapping the manhood
of the weak and vulgar, and preparing their minds for the worship of the
foul gods of Imperialism. We find our shops stocked with every kind of
article, from the toy of the babe in arms to the dress patterns of our
womankind dedicated by name to the Coronation; and we find our
manufacturers able by their economic power over the bread and butter of
their employees, to enforce observance of this saturnalia of tyranny,
even upon those workers whose whole beings are hot with revolt against
it. Hence we are compelled to speak, lest by those who have trusted us
by their adherence, or by those who have honoured us by their hatred for
our unflinching championship of the workers' cause, our silence should
be construed either into an approval or even into weakness in front of
this demonstration of the power of the enemy, or the imbecility of its
slaves.

We are Socialist Republicans; we work for the realisation of that time
when kings and emperors will be no more, when they will be remembered by
mankind as the strong man awakened remembers the hideous nightmare which
oppressed him as he slept. As Socialist Republicans we desire the
application to society in all its relations, industrial and political,
of the freest republican principles. We unceasingly devote our energies
to awakening in the minds of the workers consciousness of the
sufficiency of their own manhood and of the dignity of their class; and
we hope and believe in the rapid approach of that time when those ideas
and that consciousness will have so far leavened the minds of the
workers as to justify us in calling upon them to rally up for that final
struggle, the issue of which will assuredly usher in the era of free and
enfranchised labour, instead of the barbaric splendour of military and
financial castes. Meanwhile, animated by such hopes, inspired by such
principles, looking forward impatiently to that time of glorious
struggle, when the eyes of the world are turned upon that City of
London, when Capital and its cringing slaves are united in adoration of
the monarch who has been successful in uniting in his person, all the
baser attributes of the mediaeval monarch and the modern stockjobbing
capitalist; we also in imagination hasten thither in order to offer to
King Edward, in the name of ourselves and our class, the only homage we
owe him -- OUR HATRED.

We are neither awed by the magnificence of the robbers, daunted by the
bayonets of their hired assassins, nor dismayed by the plaudits of the
multitude. The magnificence of the robbers but serves to fire our hearts
with a greater hatred when we think of the squalid surroundings and
miserable homes of our class. The glitter of the sunlight on the
bayonets of its hired assassins reveals to the vision of the humanist
the moral hideousness of a society propped by such means, and the
plaudits of the multitude are but useful to him who desires to sound the
depths to which such a system can degrade a people.

Let those who are pleased, and those who are dismayed, by the pressure
of gaping, cheering crowds of witless ones, remember the pregnant words
of Cromwell in the same city on a similar occasion, "My Lord Protector,"
said one of his attendants, as Cromwell rode through London, "how the
people crowd to see you." "Yes," replied Cromwell, "but how many
thousands more would crowd to see me hanged!"

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
