---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE DRUG HABIT

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
July 30, 1906\

A contemporary yesterday published an article by a well-known charity
worker, showing the appalling growth of the drug habit in all grades of
society.

Opium, morphine and cocaine are said to have today more than 50,000
slaves in New York City. Radical action is demanded from medical and
legislative authorities. While these may mitigate the evil complained
of, they cannot eradicate it.

The drug habit is the unfailing accompaniment of the neurosis produced
by this wonderful age of private-owned machinery. Machinery imposes an
exhaustive drain on the nervous system. It compels an acceleration and
competition in all departments of life, that is reflected in increased
physical breakdown. Drugs then step in as a stimulant.

Further, machinery has the tendency to drive men out of fruitful
beneficial production into parasitic occupations. Among the latter are
the quack and the drug seller. These batten upon the nervous and the
physical wrecks of society, dosing them with narcotics and otherwise
encouraging the spread of the drug habit, in order that they may eke out
a livelihood and attain a competence in their nefarious callings.

Were their victims able to secure the rest, change of scene, and
wholesome, normal conditions they so much need, these rogues would be
without a means of existence. But such is capitalism that any relaxation
of effort entails a loss of position and business standing. Men must
keep to their tasks if they would succeed and survive. The result is the
condition that now proves so appalling.

The only cure is to eradicate the cause of the evil by making machinery
common property, so that it may serve as a blessing, instead of a means
of competitive destruction and thieving profit to private individuals,
as at present. With machinery common property, the hours of labor and
the stress of occupation will be proportionate to the progress of
invention and the general well-being of society. Franklin, even in his
day, estimated that four hours of labor would be ample to supply the
needs of civilized man under a proper social system employing machinery.
Then neurosis will disappear, and with it will go the vile drug habit
and all that thereby hangs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
