Marx-Engels Correspondence 1893

# Engels to Franz Mehring

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} International Publishers (1968);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gestamtausgabe*;\
[ Translated:]{.info} Donna Torr;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} [Sally
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) in 2000;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, July 14, 1893

Today is my first opportunity to thank you for the *Lessing Legend* you
were kind enough to send me. I did not want to reply with a bare formal
acknowledgment of receipt of the book but intended at the same time to
tell you something about it, about its contents. Hence the delay.

I shall begin at the end --- the appendix on historical materialism, in
which you have described the main things excellently and for any
unprejudiced person convincingly. If I find anything to object to it is
that you attribute more credit to me than I deserve, even if I count in
everything which I might possibly have found out for myself -- in time
-- but which Marx with his more rapid *coup d'oeil* (grasp) and wider
vision discovered much more quickly. When one has the good fortune to
work for forty years with a man like Marx, one does not usually get the
recognition one thinks one deserves during his lifetime. Then if the
greater man dies, the lesser easily gets overrated, and this seems to me
to be just my case at present; history will set all this right in the
end and by that time one will be safely round the corner and know
nothing more about anything.

Otherwise there is only one other point lacking, which, however, Marx
and I always failed to stress enough in our writings and in regard to
which we are all equally guilty. That is to say, we all laid, and *were
bound to lay*, the main emphasis, in the first place, on the
*derivation* of political, juridical and other ideological notions, and
of actions arising through the medium of these notions, from basic
economic facts. But in so doing we neglected the formal side --- the
ways and means by which these notions, etc., come about --- for the sake
of the content. This has given our adversaries a welcome opportunity for
misunderstandings, of which Paul Barth is a striking example.

Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker consciously,
indeed, but with a false consciousness. The real motives impelling him
remain unknown to him, otherwise it would not be an ideological process
at all. Hence he imagines false or apparent motives. Because it is a
process of thought he derives both its form and its content from pure
thought, either his own or that of his predecessors. He works with mere
thought material which he accepts without examination as the product of
thought, he does not investigate further for a more remote process
independent of thought; indeed its origin seems obvious to him, because
as all action is produced through the medium of thought it also appears
to him to be ultimately based upon thought. The ideologist who deals
with history (history is here simply meant to comprise all the spheres
-- political, juridical, philosophical, theological -- belonging to
society and not only to nature), the ideologist dealing with history
then, possesses in every sphere of science material which has formed
itself independently out of the thought of previous generations and has
gone through an independent series of developments in the brains of
these successive generations. True, external facts belonging to its own
or other spheres may have exercised a co-determining influence on this
development, but the tacit pre-supposition is that these facts
themselves are also only the fruits of a process of thought, and so we
still remain within that realm of pure thought which has successfully
digested the hardest facts.

It is above all this appearance of an independent history of state
constitutions, of systems of law, of ideological conceptions in every
separate domain, which dazzles most people. If Luther and Calvin
"overcome" the official Catholic religion, or Hegel "overcomes" Fichte
and Kant, or if the constitutional Montesquieu is indirectly "overcome"
by Rousseau with his "Social Contract," each of these events remains
within the sphere of theology, philosophy or political science,
represents a stage in the history of these particular spheres of thought
and never passes outside the sphere of thought. And since the bourgeois
illusion of the eternity and the finality of capitalist production has
been added as well, even the victory of the physiocrats and Adam Smith
over the mercantilists is accounted as a sheer victory of thought; not
as the reflection in thought of changed economic facts but as the
finally achieved correct understanding of actual conditions subsisting
always and everywhere -- in fact if Richard Coeur-de-Lion and Philip
Augustus had introduced free trade instead of getting mixed up in the
crusades we should have been spared five hundred years of misery and
stupidity.

This side of the matter, which I can only indicate here, we have all, I
think, neglected more than it deserves. It is the old story: form is
always neglected at first for content. As I say, I have done that too,
and the mistake has always only struck me later. So I am not only far
from reproaching you with this in any way, but as the older of the
guilty parties I have no right to do so, on the contrary; but I would
like all the same to draw your attention to this point for the future.

Hanging together with this too is the fatuous notion of the ideologists
that because we deny an independent historical development to the
various ideological spheres which play a part in history we also deny
them any effect upon history. The basis of this is the common
undialectical conception of cause and effect as rigidly opposite poles,
the total disregarding of interaction; these gentlemen often almost
deliberately forget that once an historic element has been brought into
the world by other elements, ultimately by economic facts, it also
reacts in its turn and may react on its environment and even on its own
causes. For instance, Barth on the priesthood and religion on your page
475. I was very glad to see how you settled this fellow, whose banality
exceeds all expectations; and him they make a professor of history in
Leipzig! I must say that old man Wachsmuth --- also rather a bonehead
but greatly appreciative of facts --- was quite a different chap.

As for the rest, I can only repeat about the book what I repeatedly said
about the articles when they appeared in the *Neue Zeit*; it is by far
the best presentation in existence of the genesis of the Prussian state.
Indeed, I may well say that it is the only good presentation, correctly
developing in most matters their interconnections down to the very
details. One regrets only that you were unable to include the entire
further development down to Bismarck and one cannot help hoping that you
will do this another time and present a complete coherent picture, from
the Elector Frederick William down to old William. For you have already
made the preliminary investigations and, in the main at least, they are
as good as finished. The thing has to be done sometime anyhow before the
shaky old shanty comes tumbling down. The dissipation of the
monarchical-patriotic legends, although not really a necessary
precondition for the abolition of the monarchy which screens class
domination (for a *pure,* bourgeois republic in Germany has been made
obsolete by events before it has come into existence) is nevertheless
one of the most effective levers for that purpose.

Then you will also have more space and opportunity to depict the local
history of Prussia as part of Germany's general misery. This is the
point where I occasionally depart somewhat from your view, especially in
the conception of the preliminary conditions for the dismemberment of
Germany and of the failure of the bourgeois revolution in Germany during
the sixteenth century. If I get down to reworking the historical
introduction to my *Peasant War*, which I hope I shall do next winter, I
shall be able to develop there the points in question. Not that I
consider those you indicated incorrect, but I put others alongside them
and group them somewhat differently.

In studying German history --- the story of a continuous state of
wretchedness --- I have always found that only a comparison with the
corresponding French periods produces a correct idea of proportions,
because what happens there is the direct opposite of what happens in our
country. There, the establishment of a national state from the scattered
parts of the feudal state, just when we pass through the period of our
greatest decline. There, a rare objective logic, during the whole course
of the process; with us, increasingly dreary desultoriness. There,
during the Middle Ages, the English conqueror, who intervenes in favour
of the Provencal nationality against the Northern French nationality,
represents foreign intervention, and the wars with England represent, in
a way, the Thirty Years' War, which there, however, ends in the ejection
of the foreign invaders and the subjugation of the South by the North.
Then comes the struggle between the central power and Burgundy, the
vassal, which relies on its foreign possessions, and plays the part of
Brandenburg-Prussia, a struggle which ends, however, in the victory of
the central power and conclusively establishes the national state. And
precisely at that moment the national state completely collapses in our
country (in so far as the "German kingdom" within the Holy Roman Empire
can be called a national state) and the plundering of German territory
on a large scale sets in. This comparison is most humiliating for
Germans but for that very reason the more instructive; and since our
workers have put Germany back again in the forefront of the historical
movement it has become somewhat easier for us to swallow the ignominy of
the past.

Another especially significant feature of the development of Germany is
the fact that not one of the two member states which in the end
partitioned Germany between them was purely German --- both were
colonies on conquered Slav territory: Austria a Bavarian and Brandenburg
a Saxon colony --- and that they acquired power *within* Germany only by
relying upon the support of foreign, non-German possessions: Austria
upon that of Hungary (not to mention Bohemia) and Brandenburg upon that
of Prussia. On the Western border, the one in greatest jeopardy, nothing
of the kind took place; on the Northern border it was left to the Danes
to protect Germany against the Danes; and in the South there was so
little to protect that the frontier guard, the Swiss, even succeeded in
tearing themselves loose from Germany!

But I am speaking of all kinds of extraneous matter, let this palaver at
least serve you as proof of how stimulating an effect your work has upon
me.

Once more cordial thanks and greetings from

Yours,\
F. Engels

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1893 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
