---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1909

### Henri Bergson

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 294-98.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov's review of Henri Bergson's book
*L\'Evolution cr√©atrice* (*Creative Evolution*) was published in the
journal *Sovremenny Mir*, no 3, 1909. *Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary
World*) -- a literary, scientific and political monthly published in St
Petersburg from 1906 to 1918.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Henri Bergson, *Creative Evolution* (translated from the Third French
Edition by M Bulgakov, Moscow, 1909).

Hegel, in his *Lectures on the History of Philosophy*, called the Greek
sophists *experts in the treatment of ideas*. This description could
with complete justification be applied to Henri Bergson. He is a real
expert in this field. In this respect he leaves very far behind him
Ernst Mach who is now fashionable here in Russia. Mach is clumsy in most
things, even when he is right. Henri Bergson almost always astonishes us
with his adroitness even when he is in the wrong. It is impossible to
read him without pleasure, just as it is pleasing to watch the
performance of a gymnast at the top of his profession.

Henri Bergson also resembles the sophists in this respect that the
*positive* result of his exceptionally skilful exercises in logic is
extremely meagre. More than that: this result is a *negative quantity*
when Bergson tries to look at the fundamental questions of metaphysics
and epistemology from a *new* point of view. At first glance this may
appear strange. Naturally one wonders why a man endowed with great
flexibility of thought and possessing in addition extensive and varied
knowledge should be intellectually so unproductive. But on closer
examination, the reason for this becomes quite clear.

Bergson has no love for the beaten paths; he strives to blaze his own
trail, and undoubtedly displays no little originality. But none the less
his originality is confined to *matters of detail* only, although
sometimes his efforts here are truly remarkable. *In general*, however,
he is incapable of freeing himself from the *tendency to idealism*, now
prevalent among philosophers. This tendency to idealism, from whose
influence Bergson cannot escape in spite of all his originality, finally
reduces to zero all the results of his investigations quite remarkable
in their own way. He is truly a victim of his own inability to make an
end of his idealism. In this sense, his example is extremely
instructive.

In order better to explain the significance of this example, we shall
draw the reader's attention to what might be described as the
*materialist* element in Bergson's views.

Here, for instance, on page 99 of his *Creative Evolution*, we read:

The vegetable manufactures organic substances directly with mineral
substances: as a rule this aptitude enables it to dispense with movement
and consequently with feeling. Animals, which are obliged to go in
search of their food, have evolved in the direction of locomotor
activity, and consequently of a more and more ample, more and more
distinct consciousness. (p 99)

This means that the development of *consciousness* is conditioned by the
needs of *being*. Apply this remark, which, incidentally, is only the
translation into the language of contemporary biology of one of
Aristotle's most profound thoughts, to the explanation of the
development of *social* thought and you will get the *theory of
historical materialism*. Bergson, indeed, comes quite close to this
theory, it might even be said that he is one of its followers. He
writes:

As regards human intelligence, it has not been sufficiently noted that
mechanical invention has been from the first its essential feature, that
even today our social life gravitates around the manufacture and use of
artificial instruments, that the inventions which like milestones mark
the road of progress have also traced its direction. (pp 118-19)

This is one of the basic principles of historical materialism. But as
will be seen by the reference in the footnote on page 119, Bergson was
familiar only with the very vulgar variety of historical materialism
represented by P Lacombe in his book *Sociological Foundations of
History*. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ Marx's historical materialism has remained
quite unknown to Bergson, otherwise he would not have credited Lacombe
with something that had been done much earlier and better by Marx. Being
unfamiliar with historical materialism in its classical formulation,
Bergson could not grasp the proper significance of the *changing
succession of relations of production in the process of development of
human society*. He thought that:

\... in thousands of years, when, seen from a distance, only the main
lines of the present age will still be visible, our wars and our
revolutions will count for little, even supposing they are still
remembered; but the steam engine, and the procession of inventions of
every kind that came in its train, will perhaps be spoken of as we speak
of the bronze or of the chipped stone; it will serve to define an age.
(p 119)

This is too narrow a view. No two revolutions are alike. But as for
revolutions in relations of production, *characterising in their
totality different modes of production*, these are such 'main lines' in
the history of social development that they will not by any means 'count
for little' to any serious historian. However, that by the way. The main
point here is that Bergson defines complete 'intelligence' as the
'*faculty of making and using inorganic instruments*' (p 120, Bergson's
italics). This means that the idea of the implements of labour playing a
decisive role in the development of mankind has for Bergson an
*epistemological* -- and not just a *sociological* -- significance.
There is nothing surprising in this. If in all animals in general
*consciousness* is the product of *activity*, as we have seen above,
then it is natural that in man in particular the *faculty of
understanding*, as Bergson expresses it, is simply '*an appendage of the
faculty of acting*' (p 3, our italics). It cannot be otherwise, for the
second idea is no more than a particular case of the first.
^[\[2\]](#n2)^ However, it is also very natural that the theory of
cognition acquires a materialist form from this materialist point of
view. 'Action cannot move in the unreal', says Bergson quite rightly (p
5). Therefore such current arguments as that we do not know and cannot
know the essence of things, that we must stop at the unknowable, and so
on, prove to be groundless:

A mind born to speculate or to dream \[says Bergson\] I admit, might
remain outside reality, might deform or transform the real, perhaps even
create it -- as we create the figures of men and animals that our
imagination cuts out of the passing cloud. But an intellect bent upon
the act to be performed and the reaction to follow, feeling its object
so as to get its mobile impression at every instant, is an intellect
that touches something of the absolute. (p 5)

The expression 'absolute' may give rise to misunderstanding. We believe
it to be out of place here. But as we have no desire to enter into
terminological argument with Bergson, we readily grant that he is right.
We could not act upon external nature if it were beyond the reach of our
knowledge. This was explained very well a long time ago by the
materialist philosophy of Marx and Engels. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ Let us
proceed. Bergson affirms that knowledge 'becomes relative' where
activity is directed to 'industry' (as with man -- GP) (p 5). This is
also perfectly true. Here again the conclusions to be drawn are fully
materialist. If Bergson had wished to draw such conclusions and follow
them through to the logical end, there is no doubt that, with his strong
inclination to and outstanding ability for dialectical thinking, he
could have thrown a vivid light on the most important problems of the
theory of cognition. But he did not have the least desire to do so. He
is a convinced idealist, to whom physics is merely a '*reflection of the
psyche*'. Consequently, his very promising arguments on the theory of
knowledge end in hackneyed nonsense, and instead of new results we
receive from him only the old, so familiar idealist *petitio principii*.
^[\[4\]](#n4)^

Bergson's overpowering prejudice in favour of idealism thwarts the very
principles he succeeds in shaping when relying upon his materialist
premises. Thus, having stated our faculty of *understanding* to be a
simple appendage of our faculty of *acting*, he hastens to add on the
plea of further analysis that '*in reality there are no things, there
are only actions*' (p 211, our italics). That is very radical. But if it
is true, it goes without saying that Bergson has nothing left but to
appeal to *consciousness*, and that is what he does. To him,
'consciousness' is 'the basic principle' (p 202). True, he qualifies
this by saying that he uses the term 'consciousness' for want of a
better word. 'But we do not mean the narrowed consciousness that
functions in each of us' (p 202). Such a qualification, however,
contains absolutely nothing new and so does not improve matters; indeed,
it confuses them still more. Consciousness of the super-individual type
is a myth; reference to it may satisfy the *religious feelings* of a
believer, but it is positively worthless as the basis for a *philosophy*
which, in fact, is *alien to dogmatism*.

Returning to his idealist harbour from his materialist excursions,
Bergson avers that the *intellect* has the faculty of knowing reality
only from its *outward* aspect and that this is not true knowledge (see,
for example, p 167). True knowledge, knowledge of reality from its
*inward* aspect, may be obtained only from a philosophy which steps
beyond the limits of the intellect and relies on *intuition*. There is
little need to point out that such thinking opens wide the door to
*fantasy*. Advancing the reason that 'the philosopher must go further
than the scientist' (p 317), he makes up a philosophical story whose
nature and content may be gathered from the following passage:

Let us imagine a vessel full of steam at a high pressure, and here and
there in its sides a crack through which the steam is escaping in a jet.
The steam thrown into the air is nearly all condensed into little drops
which fall, and this condensation and this fall represent simply the
loss of something, an interruption, a deficit. But a small part of the
jet of steam subsists, uncondensed, for some seconds; it is making an
effort to raise the drops which are falling; it succeeds at most in
retarding their fall. So, from an immense reservoir of life, jets must
be gushing out unceasingly, of which each, falling, is a world. The
evolution of living species within this world represents what subsists
of the primitive direction of the original jet, and of an impulsion
which continues itself in a direction the inverse of materiality. (p
211)

Should you remark that this *comparaison n\'est pas raison*,
^[\[5\]](#n5)^ like any other, Bergson will at once agree with you:

But let us not carry too far this comparison \[he says\], it gives us
but a feeble and even deceptive image of reality, for the crack, the jet
of steam, the forming of the drops, are determined necessarily, whereas
the creation of the world is a free act, and the life within the
material world participates in that liberty. Let us think rather of an
action like that of raising the arm; then let us suppose that the arm,
left to itself, falls back, and yet that there subsists in it, striving
to raise it up again, something of the will that animates it. In this
image of a *creative action which unmakes itself* we have already a more
exact representation of matter. (p 211)

*Life is a creative action, an '√©lan*'. *Matter is the halting of the
√©lan, the cessation of the creative action*. We are sure that nowadays
many Russian readers will find this both easy to comprehend and
profound. We congratulate them heartily, and wish them further
penetration, under Bergson's guidance, into the essence of life seen
from its *internal* aspect. To those who are not attracted to the
present philosophical fashion for idealism, we shall, in ending this
long review, offer the remark that Bergson in his intuitive philosophy
makes two great errors.

First, the attempt to observe the process of the formation of reality
from its internal aspect is condemned in advance to dismal failure;
nothing has ever, or can, come out of it but a dense fog of mysticism.
Why? Spinoza gave the answer already in Proposition 23 in Part 2 of his
*Ethics*. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

Secondly, the *process of becoming*, about which Bergson has such a lot
to say, is understood by him very one-sidedly: *the element of existence
is utterly missing*. This, of course, facilitates the decomposing of
'the material world' into a simple 'jet', which he advocates in the
interests of his mystical idealism: but thereby he *transforms
dialectics into simple sophistry*, as has been made clear from the
history of *Greek* philosophy.

Bergson sympathises with *Plotonius*, which is quite natural and could
not be otherwise. But that Bergson has an attraction for certain
*theoreticians* of French *syndicalism* is one of the most ludicrous
misunderstandings known in the history of philosophical thought, so rich
in misunderstandings. It demonstrates the low theoretical level reached
by the theoreticians of French syndicalism, so *low that, in fact, they
cannot fall any lower*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. On Lacombe's book see Appendix III to the last
edition of my book *The Development of the Monist View on History*.
\[Plekhanov has in mind his article 'Something About History', in Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1976) -- Editor.\]

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. One other point should be noted here. By
domesticating *animals*, man acquired for himself *organic* instruments
of labour, yet their domestication is also partly the business of the
'intellect'. This is very important.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. See my polemic with Conrad Schmidt in the work *A
Critique of Our Critics*. \[See 'Conrad Schmidt Versus Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels', Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 379-97 -- Editor.
Available at [Conrad Schmidt Versus Karl Marx and Frederick
Engels](../1898/conrad-schmidt.htm) -- MIA\]

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. *Petitio principii* -- assuming the initial point. An
argument where the proposition to be proven is implicitly or explicitly
assumed in the premise -- MIA.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. That is, 'comparisons are misleading' -- MIA.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. 'The mind has no knowledge of itself; except in so
far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body.'
(*Ethics*, Part 2, p 84)

¬†

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
