---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1909

### On Mr Guyau's Book

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 414-18.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The review of Guyau's book was published in
*Sovremenny Mir*, no 9, 1909. *Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary World*) --
a literary, scientific and political monthly published in St Petersburg
from 1906 to 1918. Marie Jean Guyau (1854-1888) -- French philosopher
and sociologist; idealist.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

M Guyau, *Unbelief of the Future: A Sociological Investigation* (with a
Biographical Note by A Fouillee and a Preface by Professor DN
Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky; translated from the French (eleventh edition),
edited by YL Saker, St Petersburg).

Religion is a widely discussed topic nowadays in Russia. For the most
part, those who are discussing it show themselves to be completely
uninformed about this social phenomenon, which, in any case deserves the
serious attention of a sociologist. M Guyau's book has therefore arrived
at an opportune moment; it will help to disperse the dense fog of
ignorance surrounding the religious question in Russia.

The book opens with a preface by Professor DN Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky. In
it the esteemed professor touches on our contemporary religious
searches, which appear to him to be 'at the very least, unnecessary'. We
could not agree more with him on this point. In his words, the great
majority of these searches 'are more like a religious game, an infantile
exercise on religious themes, and there is in them something at once
scholastic, dilettante and fantastic' (p ix). This is severe but just
criticism. No less just is DN Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky's remark that in
these searches 'there is noticeable an endeavour to furnish a religious
basis to social phenomena', (p ix) -- for example, our emancipation
movement -- and that there is not the slightest need for it:

This is a feature of an archaistic nature \[he says\], contradicting the
general and ever-growing tendency of progress towards freeing social
phenomena from the religious ferule\... It is true that our religious
reformers and Utopians do not introduce new rituals but they seek a new
religious sanction for such 'secular' affairs as liberalism, socialism,
the emancipation movement, and so on. This would be a step backward,
into the depths of the archaic stages of both religion and culture, if
it, in fact, could be called a 'step', and not just an intellectual game
and empty 'fancy'. (pp ix-x)

We shall add that among the reformers and Utopians DN
Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky includes Mr Lunacharsky, who 'has launched an
attempt to create a "Social-Democratic" religion, for which there is
hardly any need' (p ix). In this case, it might be remarked that our
author is expressing himself too mildly; actually, one is fully
justified in declaring that there was positively no need at all for Mr
Lunacharsky's attempt.

But -- we are very sorry to have to use this 'but' -- we do not entirely
agree with DN Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky. Frankly speaking, we see no
necessity either for the 'coming religiosity' to which he pays homage in
his preface. He writes:

The progress of positive science and philosophy brings man face to face
with the unknowable -- and it is here that that *religion* begins which,
in contrast to past religions, *does not bind* ('religio' means 'bond')
the human soul but frees it from the bonds that chain it to time and
place, to the problems of the day, to the worries of the age, as it was
always chained by past religions, so closely connected were they with
history, with culture, with society, with the state, with classes and
the interests of human groups. In comparison with them the religion of
the future seems to us, *not a religion*, but in it man's *religiosity*
will ascend to the highest peak of that *rational contemplation* which,
ennobling the human spirit, accumulates and frees man's energy for
non-religious cultural activity and struggle for humanity and the
highest ideals of mankind. (pp x-xi)

This argumentation seems to us not very convincing. We think that
'rational contemplation' has nothing to do with religiosity. Moreover,
DN Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky himself seems to support our opinion with some
remarks of his own. Indeed, from what he says it emerges that underlying
the coming religiosity will be 'the idea of the infinite and eternal
Cosmos' (p x). This idea 'transcends the bounds of human understanding;
though conceived in a rational manner, it is irrational or
supra-rational, in other words, mystical' (p x). Let us assume that this
is so. But then the coming religiosity also must be 'irrational or
supra-rational, in other words, *mystical*'. But in that case, as we
have said, it has nothing to do with '*rational contemplation*'.
Besides, what is inaccessible to scientific knowledge cannot be called
*mystical*. We know that the moon always turns the same side towards the
earth. The other side of the moon will, therefore, forever remain
inaccessible to scientific investigation. (In saying this we have in
mind, of course, the scientists living on the earth.) But does it follow
from this that the other side of the moon is irrational, supra-rational,
or mystical? In our opinion, it does not follow at all. It will, of
course, be objected -- and perhaps our author may be among the objectors
-- that it is one thing when something is unknown or inaccessible to
knowledge as a consequence of some special conditions, but absolute
unknowability is quite another matter. Our reply is, yes, that may be
so\... from the viewpoint of the Kantian theory of cognition, or of one
of its modern varieties. But for a reference to that theory of cognition
to be convincing, that theory must first be proved correct and that is
not such an easy task. In addition, the suggestion that the 'mystical'
is identical with the unknowable will just not hold water.

M Guyau says in the book under review:

The universe is, without doubt, infinite; consequently the *material*
for human science is also infinite; nevertheless, the universe is
governed by a certain number of simple laws which we are more and more
becoming aware of. (pp 358-59)

That is very true. And it contains the answer to DN
Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky, who considers the idea of the infinity and
eternity of the Cosmos 'mystical'. Once a man has finally become
convinced that the infinite universe is governed by a certain number of
simple laws, *there is no room* in his world-outlook *for mysticism*.
The esteemed professor, in characterising the late M Guyau's views, says
that this French philosopher foresaw 'not a decline of morality and
religion, but the opposite, *the blossoming of moral and religious
creativity*, inspired not only by the external guarantees of freedom of
conscience and thought, but also by the *inner freedom* of man from the
shackles of dogmatism in questions of religious and moral consciousness'
(p vi). Just so: but it would not be out of place to add that by the
religion of the future M Guyau understands something that has no
resemblance to religion. Thus, he writes:

We have said that science is likewise a religion, which returns to
reality, resumes its normal direction, finds itself again, so to speak.
Science says to living beings: penetrate one another, know one another.
Religion says to them: unite with one another; conclude among yourselves
a close, solid union. These two precepts are one and the same. (p 186)

If 'science is a religion', then, undoubtedly, in the future religious
creativity will wax greatly in strength, since the scientific activity
of civilised man grows apace. But in other places -- for instance, in
the first and second chapters of the first part of his book -- Guyau
himself explains very well that the religious viewpoint is directly
opposed to the scientific viewpoint; science considers nature as a chain
of phenomena, interdependent on one another; religion, or more exactly,
the theory underlying religion, sees nature as the manifestation of
'wills more or less independent, endowed with extraordinary powers and
capable of acting on one another and on us' (p 50; see also p 51). Thus
any identification of science with religion becomes logically
inconsistent. Guyau remarks that 'Spencer's supposed reconciliation of
science and religion springs only from ambiguity of expression' (p 361).
He might well have applied this remark to himself. Only by using
ambiguous expressions can one assert that 'science is a religion', and
so on.

But however ambiguous Guyau's expressions may sometimes be, it is none
the less plain that he understands the blossoming of religious
creativity in the future as, strictly speaking, the blossoming of
science, art and morality. To be assured of this, it is enough to read
but Chapter II of the Part Three of his work (pp 364-95). This chapter
has the characteristic title: 'Association -- What Will Remain of
Religion in Social Life?' It turns out that nothing will remain. We are
not joking. Guyau says:

If religion is regarded as the popularisation of man's first scientific
theories, there is reason to believe that the most reliable means to
combat the errors and preserve the good sides of religion will be the
popularisation of the true theories of modern science. (p 369)

For our part, we repeat that the popularisation of the true theories of
science will, of course, increase greatly in the future, but this is no
guarantee at all for the preservation of even the good sides of
religion, since its viewpoint is directly opposed to that of science.
Some pages further on we read:

The object of enthusiasm changes from epoch to epoch; it applies itself
to religion, but it can also apply itself to scientific doctrines and
discoveries, and especially moral and social beliefs. From this follows
a new consequence, that the very spirit of *proselytism*, which appears
to be peculiar to religions, will by no means disappear with them; it
will merely be transformed. (p 374)

Here again it is clear that the only religion which will 'remain' will
not be at all the religion that we know, and it would be a great mistake
to confuse it with the old religion.

M Guyau is an inconsistent thinker, and we considered it our duty to
warn the reader in advance about his inconsistency. Nevertheless, he is
a thinker, and not afflicted by religious hysterics like our
'god-seekers'. Therefore, in spite of his inconsistencies, there are in
his book many elements which, as we have said, will help to disperse the
dense fog of ignorance surrounding the religious question in Russia.
Most of these elements are to be found in the first part of his book; we
strongly recommend this part to the attention of our readers.

Unfortunately, we can recommend even this part only with reservations;
we can agree in an absolute sense with hardly anything Guyau says in it.
Take, for instance, his definition of religion. His opinion is that:

\... religion is a *physical, metaphysical, and moral explanation* of
all things by analogy with human society, in imaginative and symbolic
form. In short: religion is the *universal sociological explanation of
the world in mythical form*. (p xix).

In fact, religion does explain much by analogy with human society. But
not everything. We know already that a religious person sees in nature
the manifestation of the will of divine beings. This view represents
that animistic element which has always had its place in every religion.
But animism arose not by analogy with human *society*, but by analogy
with the *individual* as a being endowed with consciousness and will.
Primitive man explained all phenomena of nature by analogy with himself;
he personified nature, assuming the presence of consciousness and will
everywhere. This personification of nature was connected in the closest
possible way with the state of primitive technique. We think it
necessary to point this out because Guyau's characteristic view of
religion as *universal sociomorphism* has prevented him from assessing
at its full value the most important influence of technique on the
development of primitive mythology.

In general, it should be noted that the ethnological material on which
Guyau based his work is now largely out of date. Suffice it to say that,
in regarding religion as universal sociomorphism, he says nothing about
totemism, which is such an eloquent example of the explanation of
phenomena, that is, of *some aspects of them*, by analogy with human
society.

It is useful to read Guyau's book, but a mistake to think that it has
even approximately exhausted the question. It is a very, very long way
from that!

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
