---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The American SDP

### Its Origin, its Press, and its Policies {#its-origin-its-press-and-its-policies .cr}

#### (1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Socialist**, July 1903.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In my article in the June issue of the **Socialist** I sought to place
before our readers a correct picture of the position of the Socialist
Labour Party of America, by contrasting it with the London SDF, and in
doing so to expose the misrepresentations of Mr Hyndman and 'comrade
**Justice**'. One point in the **Justice** American letter, however, I
missed. It was the statement that the SLP had lost its place on the
ballot in several states through corrupt practices. Of course no
particulars were given, because none could be given as the statement was
as destitute of any foundation in fact as the persons who made and
retailed it were destitute of honour. Yet the persons who utter such
slanders are they who whine about the "outrageous language" of the
writers in the **Socialist**. We would ask those honest men who still
remain in the SDF to require from the organ of the Twentieth Century
Press the particulars, state, and date where the SLP lost its place
through corrupt practices, and the name of the correspondent who makes
the charge.

In this article I propose to give some details about the Social
Democratic, or Socialist Party, the pet protege in American politics of
the SDF. This party was established by Eugene V Debs, and at its
foundation was not a political, but a colonising party. That is to say,
that it did not propose to realise Socialism through the conquest of the
public powers of government by the working class marching to the ballot
box in their respective localities. Oh, no! The bright brains of the
leaders conceived a more brilliant plan than that. This plan was that
all the Socialists in the United States should leave their then homes
and move simultaneously into one State to be fixed upon by the party,
and so secure a majority in that State. Then that they should elect the
legislature of that State, appoint Socialists to administer the public
powers, and so inaugurate the Socialist Republic. Then the theory ran
that all the other States in the Union would be lost in admiration of
the Socialist institutions in full working order, and would signify
their admiration by rushing into Socialism. This plan was undoubtedly
simple -- so were the people who thought it practicable.

But the Socialist Labour Party men began attending the meetings of this
SDP and asking irreverent questions. They wanted to know why, if Debs
was a Socialist, he supported Bryan the Democrat in 1896. Considering
there were already many unemployed in each State, how the Socialists,
who gave up their situations in order to colonise, were going to find
employment in the new State while waiting for the majority. Seeing that
the United States Government was a capitalist government, and had
already sent the Federal troops into Illinois in order to put down a
strike, what would it do when the Socialist governors or legislature of
Mr Debs' colony-state started in to socialise any capitalist property?

A few questions like these continually driven home and supplemented by
vigorous criticism soon punctured the colony scheme, and eventually it
was dropped by its promoters, thanks entirely to the light let in on the
subject by the SLP men. But with the dropping of the colony scheme the
SDP definitely entered politics as a Socialist (?) party. In 1898 its
ranks received an accession of numbers from those who had either been
expelled from the SLP for treachery, or had incontinently fled its
councils to escape expulsion. These formed what was styled the kangaroo
party, and the circumstances attending its formation are worth
recording.

The **People**, the organ of the Socialist Labour Party, was at that
time published in the office of a private printing corporation, which
was known as the Volkszeitung Corporation, from the fact that it had
been established to print and publish a Socialist paper in the German
language -- the **Volkszeitung**. This paper accepted capitalist
advertisements, even the advertisements of capitalist politicians, and
advocated all kinds of tax reform as Socialism. Eventually a motion was
sent round the SLP sections, to be voted upon by the entire membership,
in favour of placing the printing and publishing of the SLP organs and
literature generally in the hands of the party itself. In passing, I may
remark that in the SLP general votes are taken by individual membership
and not by sections or branches. In the case of the vote under
consideration, all those in favour of compromises, of conciliating the
Debsites, and truckling for the support of pure and simple trade
unionism, were in favour of leaving the paper in the control of the
Volkszeitung Corporation. But as the vote came in gradually and was duly
tabulated in the columns of the **People**, it was seen that the
straight and uncompromising members were in the majority, and that the
private ownership of the party press was doomed.

Affrighted at this, the unclean section of the party strove to avert
disaster and keep the press in their hands by making a midnight raid on
the premises of the National Executive, and by force to override the
constitution of the party and set at naught its vote. They failed, but
as a last measure formed another party and issued a rival paper, both
party and paper usurping the titles of the original until compelled by
law to abandon the fraudulent practice. Now they are called in New York
the Social Democratic Party, and their organ is called the **Worker**,
owned of course not by the party, but by the aforementioned private
corporation.

In the presidential election of 1900, this element sent a deputation to
the National Convention of the Debsite party and succeeded in getting
their nominee, Job Harriman, nominated as candidate for Vice-President
of the United States. This was to bring unity between the two sections
of those opposed to the SLP, but it did not succeed, for as soon as the
Convention was over Debs sent a letter to his press vehemently
denouncing what he termed the trickery and treacherous methods of the
Harriman party. As a result, although the nomination held good for the
election, the two candidates, who were supposed to be running in harness
and harmony, never appeared on the same platform.

Some time ago a letter from that wonderful 'American Correspondent'
appeared in **Justice** announcing the consummation of unity among the
socialists of the United States, "except the De Leonite faction", of
course. This unity was arrived at by means of a resolution at a
convention in Indianapolis, if I remember aright, in which it was agreed
that all sections should unite on the following basis:--

> That each State should have full local autonomy in all matters,
> including policy and tactics.
>
> That each State organisation should sail under whatever name it chose,
> or the laws of the State allowed.
>
> That there should be no official organ of the party.

In other words, that everybody could join who chose, and could do what
he blamed well pleased after joining. That each State should frame its
own policy, even if that policy was in direct opposition to that of the
party in the adjoining State, and that the party should have no official
organ in case the members should get to know the muddled condition in
which the party was. Thus was unity accomplished. What anarchist could
desire more? The result of all this is made manifest in the present
position of that united party. In some States it is named the 'Social
Democratic', in some the 'Socialist', in some the 'Public Ownership', in
some the 'Union Labour' party. Its policies are as varied as its names.
In the Eastern States where the example and record of the SLP is to be
reckoned with, it gives a lip adhesion to the principle of the class
struggle, and appeals to the working class. In the Middle West, where
capital is not so highly developed and the petty middle class is still a
force, it trades mainly in schemes of municipalisation for the benefit
of the taxpayer. In the Western Agricultural States it declares that the
hope of the Social Revolution is in the farming class, and in California
it withdrew its candidates in favour of those of a Union Labour Party
formed by the trade union, and supported Mayor Schmidt of San Francisco,
a Republican trade-unionist and enemy of socialism.

Each faction of the party represented by those various policies has an
organ in the press devoted to its interests, but always privately owned.
The manner in which those various organs of the united party speak of
their 'comrades' who belong to opposite factions makes the "abusive
language" of De Leon seem complimentary by comparison.

The following are the names and locations of the principal
representatives in the press of the faction indicated:-- The **Worker**,
New York, the **Socialist**, Seattle, Wash., the **Chicago Socialist**,
the **Social Democratic Herald**, Milwaukee, the **Los Angeles
Socialist**, California. The body which acted as a National Executive of
this hybrid organisation was situated at St Louis, Mo., and its official
designation was the 'Local Quorum'. Early in the present year its chief
members made a furore by openly repudiating the principle that the wage
worker and his interests should be the basis of the Socialist movement,
and by insisting that the farmer was the real basis, and that our policy
should be shaped accordingly. After a bitter and acrimonious discussion
the members of Section St Louis met and suspended the chiefs of this
local quorum for treason. Setting their suspension at defiance, the
Local Quorum moved itself to Omaha, Nebraska, an agricultural State, and
proceeded with their new propaganda. They were supported by the **Social
Democratic Herald**, and denounced as traitors by the Seattle
**Socialist**. The **Chicago Socialist** declared the seat of the Local
Quorum as the party executive should neither be at St Louis nor at
Omaha, but at Chicago, and the **Los Angeles Socialist** darkly hinted
that both were wrong, that Salvation lay not in Socialist consolidation,
but in Socialist support of trade union nominees.

This unity of purpose and principle is still further exemplified by the
fact that in the Eastern States they support the American Federation of
Labour, the head of which is Mr Samuel Gompers, and in the West they
cater for the support of the Western Federation of Miners, whose
official organ, the **Miner**, correctly stigmatises Mr Gompers as a
"traitor", a "fraud", and a "Judas". Quite recently this latter
organisation enacted a rule to the effect that none of its members could
be allowed to accept nomination for office by any capitalist party. This
seems to show that it is marching towards the light, and I have no doubt
that when it realises that the SDP is busy all through the States in
accepting those capitalist nominations the Western Federation of Miners
will not allow its members to accept, then it will not hesitate to throw
that bundle of inconsistencies overboard and cleave to the Socialist
Labour Party with its clean record and uncompromising policy.

This brief sketch of the SDP of America will explain why **Justice** has
such an enthusiastic love for that organisation, viz, it seeks its
affinity.

Inconsistency and sacrifice of principle for the sake of votes mark both
organisations, and "Be all things to all men" might be the watchword of
either.

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
