Works of Frederick Engels 1885

### Preface to the Third German Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte^[\[39\]](#n39)^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Karl Marx and Frederick Engels Selected Works*,
Progress Publishers, 1968;\
[Translated]{.info}: from the German written in 1885;\
[First Published]{.info}: in: *Karl Marx. Der Achtzente Brumaire des
Louis Bonaparte*, Hamburg, 1885;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Mike Bessler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fact that a new edition of *The Eighteenth Brumaire* has become
necessary, thirty-three years after its first appearance, proves that
even today this little book has lost none of its value.

It was in truth a work of genius. Immediately after the event that
struck the whole political world like a thunderbolt from the blue, that
was condemned by some with loud cries of moral indignation and accepted
by others as salvation from the revolution and as punishment for its
errors, but was only wondered at by all and understood by
none-immediately after this event Marx came out with a concise,
epigrammatic exposition that laid bare the whole course of French
history since the February days in its inner interconnection, reduced
the miracle of December 2^[\[40\]](#n40)^ to a natural, necessary result
of this interconnection and in so doing did not even need to treat the
hero of the coup d\'état otherwise than with the contempt he so well
deserved. And the picture was drawn with such a master hand that every
fresh disclosure since made has only provided fresh proofs of how
faithfully it reflected reality. This eminent understanding of the
living history of the day, this clear-sighted appreciation of events at
the moment of happening, is indeed without parallel.

But for this, Marx's thorough knowledge of French history was needed.
France is the land where, more than anywhere else, the historical class
struggles were each time fought out to a decision, and where,
consequently, the changing political forms within which they move and in
which their results are summarised have been stamped in the sharpest
outlines. The centre of feudalism in the Middle Ages, the model country
of unified monarchy, resting on estates, since the
Renaissance,^[\[41\]](#n41)^ France demolished feudalism in the Great
Revolution and established the unalloyed rule of the bourgeoisie in a
classical purity unequalled by any other European land. And the struggle
of the upward-striving proletariat against the ruling bourgeoisie
appeared here in an acute form unknown elsewhere. This was the reason
why Marx not only studied the past history of France with particular
predilection, but also followed her current history in every detail,
stored up the material for future use and, consequently, events never
took him by surprise.

In addition, however, there was still another circumstance. It was
precisely Marx who had first discovered the great law of motion of
history, the law according to which all historical struggles, whether
they proceed in the political, religious, philosophical or some other
ideological domain, are in fact only the more or less clear expression
of struggles of social classes, and that the existence and thereby the
collisions, too, between these classes are in turn conditioned by the
degree of development of their economic position, by the mode of their
production and of their exchange determined by it. This law, which has
the same significance for history as the law of the transformation of
energy has for natural science - this law gave him here, too, the key to
an understanding of the history of the Second French
Republic.^[\[42\]](#n42)^ He put his law to the test on these historical
events, and even after thirty-three years we must still say that it has
stood the test brilliantly.

Frederick Engels

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

[[39]{#n39}]{.info} This work, written on the basis of a concrete
analysis of the revolutionary events in France from 1848 to 1851, is one
of the most important Marxist writings. In it Marx gives a further
elaboration of all the basic tenets of historical materialism-the theory
of the class struggle and proletarian revolution, the state and the
dictatorship of the proletariat. Of extremely great importance is the
conclusion which Marx arrived at on the question of the attitude of the
proletariat to the bourgeois state. He says, "All revolutions perfected
this machine instead of smashing it" (see p. 171 of this volume). Lenin
described it as one of the most important propositions in the Marxist
teaching on the state.

In *The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte* Marx continued his
analysis of the question of the peasantry, as a potential ally of the
working class in the imminent revolution, outlined the role of the
political parties in the life of society and exposed for what they were
the essential features of Bonapartism. --- 95, 97

[[40]{#n40}]{.info} On December 2, 1851 a counter-revolutionary coup
d\'état in France was carried out by Louis Bonaparte and his adherents.
--- 95, 99, 120, 254, 264, 287, 393, 653.

[[41]{#n41}]{.info} Renaissance-a period in the cultural and ideological
development of a number of countries in Western and Central Europe
called forth by the emergence of capitalist relations, which covers the
second half of the fifteenth and the sixteenth century. This period is
usually associated with a rapid development in the arts and sciences and
the revival of interest in the culture of classical Greece and Rome
(hence the name of the period). For Engels's description of the
Renaissance see his "Introduction to Dialectics of Nature" (pp. 342-44)
of this volume. --- 95, 628

[[42]{#n42}]{.info} The Second Republic existed in France from 1848 to
1852. For Marx's description of this period see The Class Struggles in
France, 1848 to 1850 and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. ---
96

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1885 Works](../index.htm) \| [18th
Brumaire](../../1852/18th-brumaire/index.htm)
