---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Idealism and materialism in the conception of history               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1895)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extract from a lecture to the Group of Collectivist Students of Paris,
1895.\
From **Socialist Standard**, May 1915. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}\
Transcribed by Adam Buick.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Man and the animals think only because they have a brain; the brain
transforms sensations into ideas as dynamos convert into electricity the
movement supplied to them. It is nature, or rather, the *natural
environment* -- not to use an expression that would idealise Nature as a
metaphysical entity, as did the philosophers of the 18th century, -- it
is the natural environment that forms the brain and the other organs. I
say intentionally the other organs because, just as the spiritualists
separate man from the animal group in order to set him up as a
miraculous being, for whom God comes to earth to be crucified, in the
same way the idealists isolate the brain from the other organs in order
to subject its function, that is to say thought, to magical causes.

The natural environment that created the organs and the brain of man has
brought them to such a degree of perfection that they are capable of the
most marvellous adaptations. Thus, for centuries Christians and
civilised man carried off Negroes from the coast of Africa to sell them
as slaves in the colonies. These blacks were barbarians and savages,
separated from civilised man by thousands of years of culture, and yet,
at the end of an extremely short time they learned the trades of
civilisation.

In Paraguay the Jesuits had a social experience -- the most remarkable
known to me -- which for us Socialists, is of first rate importance,
because it shows with what extraordinary rapidity a nation is
transformed after being transplanted in a new social environment. The
Jesuits, those incomparable educators, those learned exploiters of
labour, formed with savages a civilised people of more than 150,000
individuals.

The Guaranys whom they sequestered in the *pueblos* of Paraguay had
wandered naked in the forests, their only arms the bow and wooden club.
Their knowledge of agriculture being merely rudimentary, they cultivated
only maize. So little developed was their intelligence that they could
only count up to twenty, and still were obliged to count on their
fingers. One finger was one, two fingers were two, one hand was five,
one hand and a finger of the other hand were six, two hands were ten,
two hands and a toe were eleven, two hands and a foot were fifteen, two
hands and two feet were twenty; anything more was a great deal. It is
always by using their fingers and their toes that the lowest savages
count. Thus the figure, the most abstract idea that exists in the mind
of the civilised, was at first, in the mind of the savage, the reflex of
a material object. When we say or think of 1, 2, 5, 10, we see no object
at all; the savage sees a finger, two fingers, a hand, two hands. (It is
more than probable that the little children of the civilised as well as
savages, still picture to themselves material objects when reckoning up
numbers.) So true is this that the Roman figures, used by civilised
peoples for so long, before the introduction of the Arabian figures,
were shaped after the hand. I is one finger, II are two fingers, V are a
hand, of which the three middle fingers are lowered while the thumb and
the little finger are held up; X are two Vs or two hands reversed.

Of these Paraguayan savages the Jesuits made clever workmen, capable of
executing the most difficult tasks. This is what Charlevoix says of
them:

"The Indians of the Missions possess in the highest degree the faculty
of imitation. It is enough, for example, to show them a cross, a
candlestick, a censer, for them to reproduce them, and it puzzles one to
distinguish their work from the model. They make their musical
instruments, most complicated organs, at a single inspection, -- as well
as astronomical spheres, Turkey carpets, and the most difficult things
in manufacture." (Xavier de Charlevoix, **Histoire de Paraguay**, Paris,
1757.)

The materialist d'Orbigny, who in 1832 visited the pueblos of Paraguay,
disorganised and ruined after the expulsion of the Jesuits, marvelled at
the churches that these savages had constructed and decorated with
paintings and sculptures "in the style of the Middle Ages".

Now, these trades and these arts, as well as the ideas corresponding to
them, were not innate in the hand and the head of the savage Guaranys;
they had been put in so to speak, as an air of Verdi is put into a
barrel organ. It is through the education that the Jesuits gave them
that they acquired these divers trades and diverse thoughts. Here we see
a case of direct action of man on man. But are there not other means by
which the organs and the brain of man may be perfected? Do not the
phenomena of the natural and of the social environment, does not
experience develop the technical capacity of his organs and modify his
thoughts?

The idea of Justice which, according to Jaurès, lies dormant in the mind
of the savage, did not creep into the human brain until after the
institution of private property.

Savages have no idea at all of Justice; they even have no word to
designate such an idea. At the most are they acquainted with the *lex
talionis*, the blow for a blow, the eye for an eye, which after all is
merely another form of the reflex movement that makes the eyelid blink
when an object threatens the eye, or at limb become slack when it is
struck. Amongst barbarians even, living in well-developed, but communist
social environments, where in consequence private property has hardly
had a beginning, the idea of Justice is very vague. In this connection I
will quote you Sumner Maine's opinion, the high philosophic value of
which will not be disputed by Jaurès.

"Nor, in the sense of the analytical jurists", says Maine, "is there
*right* and *duty* in an Indian village-community; a person aggrieved
complains not of an individual wrong but of the disturbance of the order
of the entire little society. More than all, customary law is not
enforced by a sanction. In the almost inconceivable case of disobedience
to the award of the village council, the sole punishment, or the sole
certain punishment, would appear to be universal disapprobation." (H.S.
Maine, **Village Communities in the East and West**.)

Locke, who, like the philosophers of the 17th and 18th centuries, used
the deductive method employed in geometry, came to think that private
property engendered the idea of justice. In his **Human Understanding**
he expressly says that

where there is no property there is no injustice, is a proposition as
certain as any demonstration in Euclid: for the idea of property being a
right to anything, and the idea to which the name injustice is given
being the invasion or violation of that right \... (**An Essay
concerning Human Understanding**, Book IV. Chap. III.)

If the idea of Justice, as Locke thought, can only appear after and as a
consequence of private property, the idea of theft, or rather the
tendency to take unthinkingly what one needs or desires, is on the
contrary, well developed, before the institution of private property.
The communistic savage and barbarian behave in regard to material goods
as our savants and writers do in regard to intellectual goods: whenever
they find them they take them, to use Molière's expression. But this
natural custom becomes theft, crime, from the time when common property
is replaced by private property.

Into the head and heart of savages and barbarians common property put
ideas and sentiments which bourgeois Christians, those sad results of
private property, will find very strange.

Heckwelder, a Moravian missionary who in the 18th century lived fifteen
years among North American savages, not yet corrupted by Christian and
bourgeois civilisation, said:

The Indians believe that the Great Spirit created the world and all that
it contains for the common good of men; when he stocked the earth and
filled the woods with game, it was not for the advantage of some, but of
all. Everything is given in common to the children of men. Everything
that breathes on the earth, everything that grows in the fields,
everything that lives in the rivers and waters, belongs jointly to all,
and everyone has a right to his share.

With them hospitality is not a virtue but an imperative duty. They would
go to rest without eating rather than be accused of having neglected
their duties by not satisfying the needs of the stranger, the invalid,
the necessitous, because these have a common right to be helped from the
common fund; because the game with which they are nourished, if it was
taken in the forest, was the property of all before the hunter captured
it; because the vegetables and the maize that are offered grew in the
common land.

On his part, the Jesuit, Charlevoix, who also had lived among savages
ungoverned by the virtues of Christian and property morality, says in
his **Histoire de la Nouvelle France**:

The fraternal disposition of the Redskins doubtless comes in part from
the fact that *mine* and *thine*, those icy words, as St. John
Chrysostom calls them, are as yet unknown to the savages. The care that
they take of orphans, widows, and the infirm, the hospitality they
practise in so admirable a manner, are but a consequence of their view
that everything ought to be common for all men.

Private property, in establishing the distinction of mine and thine, not
only insinuated the idea of justice in the mind of man, but slipped into
his hearts sentiments which have so rooted themselves there that we
believe them innate, and which I should scandalise you by mentioning.
However it is well established that jealousy and paternal love are
unknown to man so long as he lives in a communist state. Women and men
are then polygamous. The woman takes as many husbands as she pleases and
the man as many wives as he can, and travellers inform us that all these
good folks live content and more united than the members of the sad and
egoistic monogamic family. But from the time when private property is
instituted, the man buys his wife and reserves for himself alone the
enjoyment of his reproductive animal; jealousy is a property sentiment
transformed. Not until there is private property for him to transmit
does the father think of troubling about his child.

The ideas of Justice which encumber the minds of the civilised, and
which are based on mine and thine, will vanish like a bad dream when
common property shall have taken the place of private property.

Jaurès has told us that the ideas of Justice and Fraternity, coming into
contradiction with the social environment, produced the movement of
humanity; but if that were true there would have been no historic
evolution, for man never would have emerged from the primitive communist
environment, in which the idea of Justice does not and cannot exist, and
in which the sentiments of fraternity can manifest themselves more
freely than in any other social environment whatever.

 

### Footnote by MIA

[1.](#f1){#n1} The article was given the following introduction in
**Socialist Standard**:

The following extract is taken from a lecture delivered by Paul
Lafargue, under the auspices of the Group of Collectivist Students of
Paris, this lecture being a reply to one given by Jean Jaurès on the
above-named subject. The terms Idealism and Materialism are used here to
designate the "two opposite views regarding the nature of human thought,
that it is to say, concerning the ultimate sources of intellectual
cognition, concerning the origin of ideas", the former designating "the
doctrine of innate ideas, of ideas a priori", and the latter "the
doctrine of cognition through experience, through the senses, the
doctrine of ideas a posteriori" (Heine).

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.11.2003
