---
layout: default
title: 
---
# RACE RIOTS

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
July 30, 1900\

A flood of ignorance is pouring out of the papers regarding the
slaughter of the Negroes in New Orleans by the mob.

Various explanations are given, all silly, and many "remedies" are
suggested, each one vying with the other in craziness.

The war in New Orleans is not between black and white. It is a war
between workingmen, and the prize they battle for is a "job\"; and that
job means the same to them as the carcass of the animal, over which two
savages fight, means to the savage: life or death.

When the vulgar editors prate about "racial hate" and ascribe the riots
to that, they merely display their crass ignorance.

We are living in a time when the comforts of life, and all the material
wealth needed to bring happiness to every human being, can be produced
in abundance. There is no need whatever for one human being to go
hungry, homeless or naked. Man's inventive genius has developed the tool
to that point, and guided the natural forces to that degree, that
abundance is possible to all.

But between that abundance and its enjoyment by the children of men an
obstacle is interposed. That obstacle is the modern social system,
capitalism, and its defenders and beneficiaries are the capitalist
class.

Balked and baffled by this obstacle, eyeing wistfully that abundance of
wealth which the capitalist class forbids them to touch, the ignorant
workingmen, black and white, instead of fighting the capitalist, with
wealth and freedom as the prize at stake, fall to fighting each other;
and the stakes in that conflict are: death to the loser; poverty, misery
and wage-slavery to the winner.

More horrible than the battle of the savages who fought for the meat, is
this fight between workingmen. This has for a result the survival of the
slave. A more brutal and demoralizing spectacle cannot be conceived.

How strong becomes the desire to forever end a system and a class
responsible for this manifestation of social atavism! What bitter hate
must fill the breast of the class-conscious proletarian for the real
authors: the capitalist class!

To the work, then, of organizing and educating the proletariat, to fight
for wealth and freedom, and not for poverty and slavery; to fight their
masters and not their fellow slaves, and to win that victory in the
class war which will forever put an end to race riots.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
