---
layout: default
title: 
---
# FOR A MERRY CHRISTMAS

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
December 25 1900\

T he latent goodness in the human heart is shown at this season when
thousands of people, buffeted, spurned, wronged, and abused by the
world, make an attempt to be merry, and to give a message and a greeting
of good cheer to their fellow men.

The merriment that one must attempt, and the cheery greeting that is
mechanically given, cannot be said to indicate a heart that overflows
with bubbling joy, or a spirit that is exuberant with lightness. It is a
merriment under difficulties, and it is a spirit of good fellowship that
comes under the most adverse circumstances. Yet this spirit exists, it
flourishes for one day only in a class that has too little reason to
rejoice, and to which causes of sorrow are its everyday life.

The major portion of the people must literally wring a holiday out of
its trials and its wrongs. To some, the day of rest, if they get it,
will be an infliction, because, as a day of idleness, it means that
there will be no pay, and no pay means an added intensity to their want.

Those who work in the mines, the cotton mills, the steel works, and the
different factories, have before them a long, hard winter. They have
behind them years of bitter toil that have served to sap their energies,
shatter their frames, and render them incapable of enjoying the rest and
quiet that are necessary to true happiness. The uncertainty of
everything about them brings, even into their holidays, the haunting
fear of coming trouble. It renders them uneasy because they know that,
though they may strive to hide the true state of affairs from themselves
today, tomorrow they must return to the rack, or they must continue
their weary pilgrimage in search of work.

The "charitably minded" will attempt to lighten the woes of those who
are out of work, of those who have been violently torn from the sources
of livelihood, by giving them free dinners. The number of poor who will
be fed today is not an indication of the goodness of man, but it is an
arraignment of the capitalist system, a protest against that system and
a menace to the human race. It is well to assist the fallen, but it is
dangerous, it is criminal, to throw them to the ground so that you can
assist them. More charity is shown in pointing out the right way for
society than there is in feeding millions of men who are kept in
servitude.

The arrangements that were made for the wholesale feeding of the poor
gave the lie direct to the claim that we are either a civilized or a
prosperous nation. If so many mouths must be fed at the expense of
others, and if thousands, or hundreds of thousands, will get but the
meager dinner to which they are accustomed from day to day, then
prosperity is distributed so unevenly that that such a large proportion
of the people are cut out of it, that it is better to abolish the whole
thing and substitute a little justice.

The Salvation Army will be the feeder in chief, and for many months it
has waged a relentless campaign for contributions. If it were half as
successful in rescuing souls as it is in rescuing pennies, heaven would
be overcrowded. Its position as a social scavenger excuses many of its
questionable actions, just as the work of the buzzard is an excuse for
its uncleanliness.

At least 90,000 people in Greater New York alone depend wholly on
charity for their dinner today. There are 10 times that number who will
go on short rations because they do not wish to accept the degradation
of charity.

Christmas is jolly enough, a day that brings kindliness enough, but you
must be able to pay for it. While happiness cannot be bought on the open
market, there are many things which, unless they are bought, will cause
misery. The position of the working class, now more than ever before, is
one in which suffering must result. Gloss over the matter as the
apologists can, there still remains the fact that this charity is the
outcome of a most deplorable condition.

The great organization on which they pride themselves, the strenuous
measures undertaken to "bring a little brightness" into the life of the
poor, the unprecedented efforts to handle a large number of diners, and
the work done to give thousands and thousands of dollars worth away, are
the result, not of goodheartedness, but of sheer necessity. If these
people are capable of feeding themselves, why make all this effort on
their behalf? If they are not capable of feeding themselves, who is
responsible for this lamentable condition of affairs?

There was a time here when it would have been an insult to a man to
offer him his Christmas dinner. He was capable of providing all that he
needed. He is no longer. He must depend on what charity doles out to
him. He is made a suppliant for Christmas cheer. He is no longer capable
of providing for himself, and must depend on what is given him.

The race has not deteriorated. Men are just as anxious now to be
self-sustaining as they ever were. The trouble is that they are not
allowed to be.

That army of unemployed or underpaid men who dine at the public expense
today is necessary to capitalism. It is one of the methods whereby
capitalism can beat down the working class and hold it in restraint.
Those men can be pitted against the men who have jobs, and such a
conflict can have but one result. The working class as a whole will be
the sufferer.

There is not a wage worker in the world who may not truthfully say that
he may not be a candidate for a public dinner at the next Christmas. The
list is growing proportionately larger. The number to be fed increases.
The victims of capitalism are so plentiful that a helping hand cannot be
held out to all, but some are assisted so that the wheel may not grind
too finely. Charity is an insult. Charity is a degradation. But charity
is also a weapon in the hands of the capitalist, and it is one that he
uses with dire effect.

Such a "merry" Christmas cannot come unless there is some great and
terrible wrong. Such a state of affairs works the ruin of all who take
part in it. Its increase betokens disaster. Its continuance breeds
crime.

A merry Christmas should be a Christmas that finds all men capable of
producing their own merriment, instead of having it ladled out to them,
to a chorus of self-praise and gratulation on the part of the givers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
