---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Socialism and Irish Nationalism

### (1897)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **L'Irlande Libre**, Paris 1897.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The public life of Ireland has been generally so much identified with
the struggle for political emancipation, that, naturally, the economic
side of the situation has only received from our historians and public
men a very small amount of attention.

Scientific Socialism is based upon the truth incorporated in this
proposition of Karl Marx, that, "the economic dependence of the workers
on the monopolists of the means of production is the foundation of
slavery in all its forms, the cause of nearly all social misery, modern
crime, mental degradation and political dependence". Thus this false
exaggeration of purely political forms which has clothed in Ireland the
struggle for liberty, must appear to the Socialist an inexplicable error
on the part of a people so strongly crushed down as the Irish.

But the error is more in appearance than in reality.

The reactionary attitude of our political leaders notwithstanding, the
great mass of the Irish people know full well that if they had once
conquered that political liberty which they struggle for with so much
ardour, it would have to be used as a means of social redemption before
their well-being would be assured.

In spite of occasional exaggeration of its immediate results one must
remember that by striving determinedly, as they have done, towards this
definite political end, the Irish are working on the lines of conduct
laid down by modern Socialism as the indispensable condition of success.

Since the abandonment of the unfortunate insurrectionism of the early
Socialists whose hopes were exclusively concentrated on the eventual
triumph of an uprising and barricade struggle, modern Socialism, relying
on the slower, but surer method of the ballot-box, has directed the
attention of its partisans toward the peaceful conquest of the forces of
government in the interests of the revolutionary ideal.

The advent of Socialism can only take place when the revolutionary
proletariat, in possession of the organized forces of the nation (the
political power of government) will be able to build up a social
organization in conformity with the natural march of industrial
development.

On the other hand, non-political co operative effort must infallibly
succumb in face of the opposition of the privileged classes, entrenched
behind the ramparts of law and monopoly. This is why, even when he is
from the economic point of view intensely conservative, the Irish
Nationalist, even with his false reasoning, is an active agent in social
regeneration, in so far as he seeks to invest with full power over its
own destinies a people actually governed in the interests of a feudal
aristocracy.

The section of the Socialist army to which I belong, the Irish Socialist
Republican Party, never seeks to hide its hostility to those purely
bourgeois parties which at present direct Irish politics.

But, in inscribing on our banners an ideal to which they also give
lip-homage, we have no intention of joining in a movement which could
debase the banner of revolutionary Socialism.

The Socialist parties of France oppose the mere Republicans without
ceasing to love the Republic. In the same way the Irish Socialist
Republican Party seeks the independence of the nation, while refusing to
conform to the methods or to employ the arguments of the chauvinist
Nationalist.

As Socialists we are not imbued with national or racial hatred by the
remembrance that the political and social order under which we live was
imposed on our fathers at the point of the sword; that during 700 years
Ireland has resisted this unjust foreign domination; that famine,
pestilence and bad government have made this western isle almost a
desert and scattered our exiled fellow-countrymen over the whole face of
the globe.

The enunciation of facts such as I have just stated is not able today to
inspire or to direct the political energies of the militant working
class of Ireland; such is not the foundation of our resolve to free
Ireland from the yoke of the British Empire. We recognize rather that
during all these centuries the great mass of the British people had no
political existence whatever; that England was, politically and
socially, terrorized by a numerically small governing class; that the
atrocities which have been perpetrated against Ireland are only
imputable to the unscrupulous ambition of this class, greedy to enrich
itself at the expense of defenceless men; that up to the present
generation the great majority of the English people were denied a
deliberate voice in the government of their own country; that it is,
therefore, manifestly unjust to charge the English people with the past
crimes of their Government; and that at the worst we can but charge them
with a criminal apathy in submitting to slavery and allowing themselves
to be made an instrument of coercion for the enslavement of others. An
accusation as applicable to the present as to the past.

But whilst refusing to base our political action on hereditary national
antipathy, and wishing rather comradeship with the English workers than
to regard them with hatred, we desire with our precursors the United
Irishmen of 1798 that our animosities be buried with the bones of our
ancestors -- there is not a party in Ireland which accentuates more as a
vital principle of its political faith the need of separating Ireland
from England and of making it absolutely independent. In the eyes of the
ignorant and of the unreflecting this appears an inconsistency, but I am
persuaded that our Socialist brothers in France will immediately
recognize the justice of the reasoning upon which such a policy is
based.

> 1\. We hold "the economic emancipation of the worker requires the
> conversion of the means of production into the common property of
> Society". Translated into the current language and practice of actual
> politics this teaches that the necessary road to be travelled towards
> the establishment of Socialism requires the transference of the means
> of production from the hands of private owners to those of public
> bodies directly responsible to the entire community.
>
> 2\. Socialism seeks then in the interest of the democracy to
> strengthen popular action on all public bodies.
>
> 3\. Representative bodies in Ireland would express more directly the
> will of the Irish people than when those bodies reside in England.

An Irish Republic would then be the natural depository of popular power;
the weapon of popular emancipation, the only power which would show in
the full light of day all these class antagonisms and lines of economic
demarcation now obscured by the mists of bourgeois patriotism.

In that there is not a trace of chauvinism. We desire to preserve with
the English people the same political relations as with the people of
France, or Germany, or of any other country; the greatest possible
friendship, but also the strictest independence. Brothers, but not
bedfellows. Thus, inspired by another ideal, conducted by reason not by
tradition, following a different course, the Socialist Republican Party
of Ireland arrives at the same conclusion as the most irreconcilable
Nationalist. The governmental power of England over us must be
destroyed; the bonds which bind us to her must be broken. Having learned
from history that all bourgeois movements end in compromise, that the
bourgeois revolutionists of today become the conservatives of tomorrow,
the Irish Socialists refuse to deny or to lose their identity with those
who only half understand the problem of liberty. They seek only the
alliance and the friendship of those hearts who, loving liberty for its
own sake, are not afraid to follow its banner when it is uplifted by the
hands of the working class who have most need of it. Their friends are
those who would not hesitate to follow that standard of liberty, to
consecrate their lives in its service even should it lead to the
terrible arbitration of the sword.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
