---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Revolutionary Song

### (1907)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

First published as the introduction to **Songs of Freedom by Irish
Authors**, Dublin 1907.\
Republished in Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom (eds), **James
Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, New York 1974.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This little book of revolutionary songs is published for a twofold
purpose. First, it is in response to the belief of the Editor that no
revolutionary movement is complete without its poetical expression. If
such a movement has caught hold of the imagination of the masses they
will seek a vent in song for the aspirations, the fears and the hopes,
the loves and the hatreds engendered by the struggle. Until the movement
is marked by the joyous, defiant, singing of revolutionary songs, it
lacks one of the most distinctive marks of a popular revolutionary
movement, it is the dogma of a few, and not the faith of the multitude.
In this belief this small bouquet of songs, culled from a very limited
garden, is offered until some one with greater means shall present to
the American Working Class a more suitable collection, drawn not from
the store of one nation alone, but from the Socialist poetry of the
World. The propagandist effect of such a volume of songs with their
proper musical setting, would be simply incalculable.

The second purpose of this volume may be readily guessed by a glance at
its contents. It will be seen that every song herein contained was
written by an Irishman.

This is in no spirit of insularity, but rather is meant as an
encouragement to other Irishmen and women, to take their part and do
their share in the upbuilding of the revolutionary movement of the
Working Class. Most of these songs were written in Ireland, by men
actually engaged in the revolutionary struggle of their time, whatever
ruggedness may attach to their numbers is due to the fact that they were
born in the stress and strain of the fight, and not in the scholarly
seclusion of the study.

In conclusion, if this venture meets approval, we will carry our next
into the field of recitative poetry, where a rich Irish harvest awaits
the gleaner.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
