---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Importation v. Deportation

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From [Irish Worker]{.underline}, November 8, 1913.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is a crime to deport Dublin children in order to feed, clothe and
house them better than they were before. All the newspapers are against
it.

It is not a crime to import English scabs to take the bread out of the
mouths of Dublin men, women and children, and to reduce them to slavery.

The newspapers are overjoyed about it. Fellow-workers! All the
collection of hypocrites and sweaters who paraded our docks and railway
stations a few days ago, and prostituted the name of religion to suit
the base ends of those who for generations have grown fat by grinding
the faces of the poor, are silent as the grave in face of the
importation of British scabs. They poured insult, lies and calumny upon
the British labour men and women who offered our children the shelter
and comfort of their homes in the day of our trial; but they allow
British blacklegs to enter Dublin without a word of protest! Will you
allow this? If not, you must rally!

Rally and fight as you never fought before. Begin, Monday, November
10th. All individual picketing is abolished, and all persons on strike
or lock-out must attend a mass picket outside the doors or gates of
their former employment at the usual hours of labour, commencing at the
first hours of opening in the morning.

No food tickets will be issued at Liberty Hall in future except to
casual labourers, who must sign their names each day between the hours
of 9.30 a.m. and 12 noon. Permanent men will receive food tickets from
their respective committee men, delegates or shop stewards, to whom they
must report in the morning, and who have the power to refuse if they
consider that the member applying has neglected to attend the mass
picket. Any member found hanging around Liberty Hall without special
reason will forfeit strike allowance.

Fellow-workers -- the employers are determined to starve you into
submission, and if you resist, to club you, jail you, and kill you. We
defy them! If they think they can carry on their industries without you,
we will, in the words of the Ulster Orangeman, "Take steps to prevent
it."

It is your duty to find the ways and means. Be men now, or be for ever
slaves.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 20.8.2003
