---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# How to Release Larkin

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Irish Worker**, 1 November 1913.\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.3 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcription: Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have always held that when we are at war we should fight according to
the rules of war, and that means that the first aim and object of all
our activities ought to be to disable and destroy the enemy. Everyone
familiar with the history of working class revolts in the past knows
that these revolts generally failed through the fact that the
revolutionists tried to practise their ideas of humanity before the war
was over and their victory assured; they, in short, wished to practise
peace in the midst of war. The enemy, the possessing governing classes,
on the other hand, having no scruples of conscience and desiring only
their own victory, proceeded ruthlessly to the work of extermination;
and so naturally and inevitably the established order won over the
working class idealists. We do not propose to make that mistake. We are
at war. Our enemy is the governing class; the political force of that
enemy is the Liberal Government. Next year it may be the Conservative
Government, and Sir Edward Carson may be again prosecuting Irish rebels
as he did in the past; [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} but this year and this moment
it is the Liberal Government that fills the jury box with employers to
try strike leaders; that sets policemen to ride roughshod over the law
guaranteeing the right of peaceful picketing; who orders the bludgeoning
of men and women in the streets of Dublin; that has turned Dublin into
an armed camp, in which the citizens walk about in terror of their lives
in the presence of uniformed bullies -- in short, it is the Liberal
Government that has lent itself to the employers to imprison, bludgeon,
and murder the Dublin working class.

Therefore, the Liberal Government must go.

Larkin is in prison, jailed by this cowardly gang! [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} We
appeal to the workers everywhere in these islands to vote against the
nominees of that government at every contested election until Larkin is
released. To-day we are sending a telegram to the electors of Keighley
[\[3\]](#n3){#f3}, asking them, in the name of working class solidarity,
to vote against the murderers of Nolan and Byrne [\[4\]](#n4){#f4},
against the bludgeoners of the Dublin working class, against the jailers
of Larkin. [\[5\]](#n5){#f5}

It is war, war to the end, against all the unholy crew who, with the
cant of democracy upon their lying lips, are forever crucifying the
Christ of Labour between the two thieves of Land and Capital.

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} Carson, leader of the Ulster Volunteers, set up a few
months earlier to resist home rule, had previously been the British
government's Solicitor General.

[2.](#f2){#n2} Larkin had just been sentenced to seven months in prison
for a seditious speech.

[3.](#f3){#n3} Where a by-election was impending.

[4.](#f4){#n4} James Nolan and James Byrne were killed by a police
baton-charge on 30 August.

[5.](#f5){#n5} The Liberal candidate was defeated at Keighley and Larkin
was released the following day.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 6.10.2003
