---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Irish Rebels and English Mobs

#### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Irish Worker**, 22 November 1913.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sunday, November 23rd, will be the forty-sixth anniversary of the
execution in Manchester of Allen, Larkin and O'Brien.

On the night before these, our brothers, were hanged, a howling mob of
the scum of that English city held orgy around the prison walls and made
right hideous, as well as profaned, the last hours of The Three by the
singing of indecent songs and the shouting of blasphemous insults at the
faith of the Irish rebels who had dared to outrage the majesty of
England. To that English mob the words 'Irish Rebel' summed up
everything hateful and odious. At these words their worst passions were
aroused, and in their fury they behaved as only savages can behave when
a gallant foe is stricken down. To work their passions up to that point
the English Press exhausted every effort, and tapped every reservoir of
vitriolic denunciation and callous slander. The English public responded
to the call of the prostitutes of the Press with but few exceptions; one
of these few, Ernest Jones, the great Chartist, took up the thankless
task of defending the Irishmen, and thus completed a round of devotion
to the cause of Ireland begun in the stormy days of the Young
Irelanders.

But to the vast multitude -- as to that howling mob desecrating the last
hours of brave men by their ribald insults and loud-mouthed indecency --
the name of Irish rebel was like a red rag to a bull. *Forty-six years
ago!*

Forty-six years after that outrage a gathering of the democracy of
Manchester met together a few hundred yards away from the spot on which
stood Salford Jail. This gathering was at least three times as large as
that other mob of historic ill-fame. It was composed, not of the
degraded slum population, but of intelligent, educated, self-respecting
men and women -- the flower of the Manchester working class.

Again, the centre of attraction was the presence of Irish rebels. But
this gathering of the Manchester democracy roared out to these Irish
rebels of our day a welcome and a promise -- a welcome to them because
they had dared and suffered for democracy; a promise to do likewise if
the word was only given. To this latter-day gathering to be an Irish
working class rebel -- standing for all and more that the immortal three
had stood for -- was to possess a passport to their admiration and
esteem. So much had education accomplished -- so much and so far had the
toilers of England progressed towards a realisation of their true
position -- realising at last that they are not citizens, but helots and
slaves of an Empire.

Are we saying too much when we say that this welcome accorded last
Sunday to Larkin and to Connolly at these magnificent gatherings of over
25,000 people went far to wipe out the bad memories of the past, and to
make it more possible for the two democracies to understand each other
-- and understanding, to co-operate together in the march of their own
class emancipation?

On Sunday there will be a procession through the streets of Dublin to
commemorate that martyrdom. We trust that every member of the Transport
Union and its sister organisation, the Irish Women Workers' Union, will
be in their allotted place in that procession. No excuse can be taken
for absence. There are bodies allotted places in that procession whose
every public act is a negation of what the Fenians stood for, but no
murmur should be allowed against the desecration of their presence. At
other times and other places, that question must be raised. But upon
that day let our reproach be the reproach of our silence in their
presence.

It is our duty to show the world that neither the friendship of the
English nor their hatred can turn the Irish democracy from their resolve
to win for their country her right to be a free and independent Nation
enjoying a true Republican freedom.

The architects of that freedom will and must be the Irish working class.
Ours is the task to prepare them. While that preparation is going
forward we must take our place in every good and wise movement for the
upholding of the highest ideals born of the age-long struggle of our
people.

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
