---
layout: default
title: 
---
George V. Plekhanov 1905

### French Drama and Painting of the 18th Century

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written]{.info}: 1905\
[Source]{.info}: *Art and Society & Other Papers in Historical
Materialism*, 1974 Oriole Editions;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: Harrison Fluss for marxists.org, February 2008.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I.

There is no more remarkable confirmation of that principle of historical
materialism which holds that man's consciousness is determined by his
existence, than the history of primitive peoples. For proof of this
thesis we need only refer to Bücher's well-known work, *Arbeit und
Rhythmus. "*I have reached the conclusion," he writes, "that while in
the first stages of their development labor, music and poetry were
usually blended, labor was the predominant element, the others being
only of secondary importance." According to Bücher **"**the origin of
poetry must be sought in labor." ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ And no one familiar with
the literature of the subject will accuse him of stretching the point.
^[\[2\]](#n2)^ The critical objections which have been made by
specialists apply, not to his fundamental thesis, but only to certain
minor details. In the main, Bücher is undoubtedly correct.

However, his conclusions refer only to the origin of poetry. What shall
we say of poetry and art in general in their higher stages of social
development? Is there a discernible causal relationship between
existence and consciousness -- between the means of production and
economic relations in society, on the one hand, and art on the other;
and at what stage of development will it be best discovered?

In the following pages we shall attempt to answer this question on the
basis of the history of French art in the eighteenth century. Before
proceeding, however, a preliminary statement should be made.

From a sociological viewpoint, the outstanding characteristic of French
society in the eighteenth century was its *division into classes.* This
condition could not fail to influence the development of art. Let us
examine the theatre, for example.

On the medieval stage, in France as well as in the rest of western
Europe, the so-called "farces" occupied an important position. These
farces were written for, and performed by, the people; and they served
always to express the views and aspirations of the masses, and -- what
is especially noteworthy -- their dissatisfaction with the higher
estates. But during the reign of Louis XIII, the decline of the farce
sets in; it comes to be regarded as entertainment fit only for servants,
unworthy of refined taste, "not approved by nice people," as one French
writer expressed it in 1625. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^

Tragedy now replaces the farce. French tragedy, however, is quite remote
from the views, aspirations and dissatisfactions of the masses. It is an
aristocratic product, and expresses the views, tastes, and aspirations
of the higher estates. We shall soon see how profoundly the entire
character of tragedy was affected by its origin.

First, however, we wish to point out that in France at the time when
tragedy arose, the aristocracy served no productive function; it was
supported entirely by the economic activity of the third estate.
Obviously, works of art originating in this aristocratic society and
expressing its views and tastes could not fail to be influenced by this
situation. For example, it is known that in some of their songs the
inhabitants of New Zealand celebrate the cultivation of bananas. These
songs are often accompanied by a dance which *imitates the bodily
motions of the farmer tending his plants.* This illustrates clearly how
man's economic activities influence his art. It is also clear that *art
originating in the upper classes, who do not engage in productive work,
is not directly related to economic processes.*

Does this mean that in a society divided into classes, the causal
connection between man's consciousness and his existence is weakened?
No, not at all; for the very division of society into classes hinges
upon its economic development. And if art produced by the upper classes
bears no direct relationship to the productive processes of society,
that too, in the final analysis, is to be explained on economic grounds.
Historical materialism holds in this case as well. However, the
unmistakable causal connection between existence and
consciousness-between social relationships based upon "*labor"* on the
one hand, and art, on the other, is of course not quite so apparent
here; for in such a situation there are certain intermediate stages
which, by drawing upon themselves the investigator's entire attention,
usually constitute an obstacle to any true understanding of the
situation.

Having thus cleared the ground, we can now take up our subject proper.
First let us turn to tragedy.

Taine said that French tragedy appeared "at a period when a noble and
well-regulated monarchy under Louis XIV established the empire of
decorum and court-life, the 'pomp and circumstance' of society, and the
elegant domestic phrases of aristocracy. It disappeared when the social
rule of the nobility and the manners of the antechamber were swept away
by the Revolution." ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

This is quite true. But the historical process of the origin and decay,
particularly the latter, of classical French tragedy is much more
complex than the famous literary critic makes it out to be.

Let us study at closer range the form and essence of this literary
genre. As to form, we must first of all bear in mind the familiar
unities of classic tragedy -- which were later to become the subject of
the controversy, immortalized in the annals of French literature,
between the classicists and the romanticists. The theory of the unities
had been known in France since the Renaissance; but it was not until the
seventeenth century that they became the literary law and the rigid rule
of "good taste." "In 1620, when he wrote *Melite,"* says Lanson,
"Corneille had never heard of them." ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ In the early
thirties of the seventeenth century Mairet came forward as the champion
of the unities; his *Sophonisbe,* the first tragedy written according to
the "rules," was presented on the stage in 1634. In the controversy
evoked by this play, the opponents of the unities argued very much in
the manner of the romanticists. But the learned admirers of antiquity
took up the cudgels in defense of the three unities and they won an
unequivocal and enduring victory. To what did they owe their victory?
Surely not to their erudition, which could hardly move the public;
rather to the growing influence of the upper classes, who abominated the
naive formlessness of the earlier drama.

"The unities," continues Lanson, "offered an idea which appealed to
honest men: an imitation exactly equivalent to reality, and yet capable
of creating an illusion. Essentially they represented only as much stage
convention as could not be omitted in the representation of life\...Thus
acceptance of the unities was actually a triumph of realism over
imagination." ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ It was in fact the crystallization of
aristocratic taste, accompanied by the final establishment of the "noble
and benign monarchy," which made the victory possible. Subsequent
advances in stage technique would probably have made it possible to
imitate reality without adhering to the unities; but audiences came to
associate the unities with a whole series of other ideas which were near
and dear to them, and the theory thus attained an almost independent
value which seemed to rest upon the incontestable demands of good taste.
Later on, as we shall see, other social elements upheld the three
unities, and hence the theory was defended even by the enemies of the
aristocracy. The struggle against the unities became all but hopeless.
The romanticists in their battle to abolish them needed all their wit,
perseverance, and downright revolutionary ardor.

Having mentioned the subject of stage technique, we might add that the
aristocratic origin of French tragedy also had influence, among other
things, upon the art of the actor. We know, for example, that even today
French tragic actors have a rather stilted and artificial manner, which,
to one unaccustomed to it, is extremely unpleasant. No one who has seen
Sarah Bernhardt will gainsay this. French dramatic artists inherit this
affectedness from the time when classic tragedy held sway on the French
stage. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries polite society would
have been highly displeased if an actor had ventured to assume on the
stage that simplicity and naturalness which go to make up the bewitching
qualities of an Eleonore Duse, for example. Simplicity and naturalness
are opposed to every rule of aristocratic esthetics. "The French,"
writes Abbe du Bos, "do not depend upon dress alone for giving the
actors of tragedy a suitable dignity and grandeur. We insist likewise
upon their speaking in a tone of voice more elevated, graver, and more
sustained than that which is used in common conversation. All the little
negligences which custom authorizes in the pronunciation of familiar
discourse, are forbidden in our tragedies. 'Tis true this manner of
reciting is more troublesome than a pronunciation bordering upon
ordinary conversation; but, besides being more majestic, it is also more
advantageous for the spectators, who are better enabled thereby to
understand the verse\... . 'Tis requisite also, that the gestures of
tragic actors be exacter and nobler, their step and gait more grave, and
their countenance more serious than those of comic personages. In fine,
we insist upon tragic actors giving an air of grandeur and dignity to
whatsoever they do." ^[\[7\]](#n7)^ But why were tragic actors obliged
to give an air of grandeur and dignity? Because tragedy was the
spiritual child of aristocracy; its characters were confined to kings,
"heroes," and exalted personages generally, whose very position, as it
were, demanded that they give an air of "grandeur" and "dignity." Even a
highly talented actor could expect no applause from the audiences of
that day if his histrionics lacked the conventional amount of
aristocratic grandeur.

This is evidenced most clearly in French estimates of Shakespeare and
even, under French influence, English estimates of the great dramatist.
Hume warned against overrating Shakespeare's genius, since
disproportioned and misshapen things often appear more gigantic than
they really are. Shakespeare was good enough for his own time, but he
was ill-suited to a more refined audience. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ Pope deplored
Shakespeare's having written for the populace and not for men of the
world. Shakespeare would have written much better, he thought, had he
enjoyed the patronage of the king and the support of the court.
^[\[9\]](#n9)^ Even Voltaire, the literary precursor of a new epoch
hostile to the old order, many of whose tragedies were vehicles for his
philosophic ideas, bowed to the esthetic tastes of aristocratic society.
He considered Shakespeare a natural genius, but a *barbarian.* The
following estimate of *Hamlet* is characteristic:

"It is a gross and barbarous piece, and would never be borne by the
lowest rabble in France or Italy. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ \... The
grave-diggers make a grave for the poor girl \[Ophelia\] ; one asking
the other whether a woman who drowns herself ought to be interred in
holy ground: after which they sing ballads, worthy of their profession
and their manners; at the same time, throwing out the bones and skulls
of the dead upon the stage. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^\... In the first scene, for
instance, the guards says: "*Not a mouse stirring"* Yes, sir, a soldier
might make such an answer when in the barracks; but not upon the stage,
before the first persons of distinction, who express themselves nobly,
and before whom every one should express himself in like manner
^[\[12\]](#n12)^\... Imagine to yourself, gentle-men, Louis XIV in the
gallery at Versailles, surrounded by a brilliant court; and a ragged
blackguard making his way through the crowd of heroes, lofty personages,
and beauties composing the court, to propose their discarding Corneille,
Racine and Moliere, for a merry Andrew, that cuts jokes and is a good
tumbler: How do you think such a proposal would be received?"
^[\[13\]](#n13)^

These words provide a clue not only to the aristocratic origin of French
classic drama but also to the reasons for its decline. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^

*Mannerism* easily becomes *affectation;* and affectation precludes any
serious and profound dramatic treatment. Under the influence of class
prejudice, not only the treatment but even the choice of subject matter
was bound to suffer. Class conceptions of suitability clipped the wings
of art. In this connection the artistic requirements set by Marmontel
are very typical and instructive:

"A peaceful and enlightened nation in which every one feels himself
dutybound to adapt his ideas and emotions to social mores and usages, in
which the rules of decorum have become a Decalogue -- such a nation may
admit in its literature only such characters as are ennobled by their
environment and only such vices as are corrected by propriety."
^[\[15\]](#n15)^

Aristocratic ideals came to be the criterion in judging works of art.
This is reason enough for the decline of classic tragedy. It does not
explain, however, the appearance of a new dramatic genre on the French
stage. In the third decade of the eighteenth century we witness the
appearance of a new literary genre -- the so-called *comedie
larmoyante,* the sentimental comedy, which for a time was rather
popular. If consciousness can be explained on the basis of existence, if
the so-called spiritual development of man depends upon his economic
development, then eighteenth century economic life must provide an
explanation, among other things, of the appearance of the sentimental
comedy. Does it provide an explanation? It does; and furthermore a
partial analysis is already at hand. For instance, Hettner, in his
history of eighteenth century literature, proves our point; he ascribes
the rise of the sentimental comedy in France to the ascendancy of the
bourgeoisie. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ The ascendancy of the bourgeoisie,
however, like that of any other class, can be explained only on the
basis of the economic development of society; and Hettner, without
intending it or even realizing it, employs the materialistic
interpretation of history. Nor is Hettner an exception. Brunetiere in
*Les Epoques du Theatre Frangaise,* further reveals the causal
dependence we are seeking:

"\... with the collapse of Law's Mississippi Bubble -- to go back no
further -- the aristocracy, as every one knows, loses ground steadily.
All that a class can do to discredit, it hastens to do\... . But above
all, it grows poorer, while the bourgeoisie, the third estate, grows
richer, assumes\^ greater importance, *acquires a new consciousness of
its rights. Inequalities become more glaring, abuses more unendurable.*
Hearts 'overflow with hatred,' as a poet is soon to say, and 'hunger for
justice' -- or equality, to be exact\... What possibility that with such
a means of propaganda and action at their disposal as the theatre, they
would not put it to good use? or that they would not regard as serious,
even tragic, those inequalities that had been a source of amusement to
the author of *he Bourgeois Gentilhomme* and *Georges Dandin?* But above
all, what possibility that this bourgeoisie, already triumphant, would
resign itself to seeing the center of the stage forever monopolized by
emperors and kings; and that the first use to which they would put their
savings would not have been to order their own portrait?"
^[\[17\]](#n17)^

*The sentimental comedy, then, portrayed the French bourgeoisie of the
eighteenth century.* So much is true. Indeed, it is generally known as
middle-class drama. But Brunetiere's idea, although essentially correct,
is too general and therefore ambiguous. We shall attempt to develop this
idea in greater detail. Brunetiere contends that the bourgeoisie would
not have resigned itself to seeing the center of the stage forever
monopolized by emperors and kings. From the above quotation this seems
reasonable, but hardly convincing. Only a study of the psychology of
certain literary figures of the time makes the matter a certainty. One
of these is Beaumarchais, the gifted author of several sentimental
comedies. What was his reaction to having emperors and kings forever
monopolize the center of the stage?

Emphatically and passionately Beaumarchais reviled the aristocratic
tradition. He ridiculed the custom of having kings and noble-men the
heroes of tragedy, and the middle classes the butt of comedy. "Depict
the middle classes crushed and miserable? None of that! One must show
them only to scoff at them! The citizenry ridiculous and royalty unhappy
-- there's the whole theatre for you!" ^[\[18\]](#n18)^

This mordant irony from an important ideologist of the third estate
confirms Brunetiere's contention.

Beaumarchais, however, not only appeals for honesty in depicting the
"crushed" bourgeoisie. He also opposes the custom of drawing upon the
legends and history of antiquity for the subjects of "serious" drama.
"Of what interest to me, peace-loving subject of an eighteenth century
monarchy, are revolutions in Athens or Rome? What real interest can I
have in the death of a Peloponnesian tyrant? Or in the sacrifice of a
young princess in Aulis? There is nothing in all that that I can see,
not the slightest moral applicable to me." ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

The choosing of legendary heroes was simply a means of expressing
enthusiasm for antiquity, an enthusiasm which was the ideological
reflection of a great struggle. This was the struggle between feudalism
and a new rising order. The love of antiquity which marked the
Renaissance continued into the age of Louis XIV, which, of course, has
often been compared with the age of Augustus. But when rebellion stirred
the bourgeoisie, when hatred and "longing for justice" filled their
hearts and minds, their enthusiasm for legendary heroes -- in former
years fully shared by their cultivated representatives -- seemed
inopportune, and the annals of ancient history scarcely instructive.
"The man of the third estate" then became the hero of middle-class
drama: more or less idealized by the bourgeois ideologists of the
period, the accuracy of the "portrait" naturally suffered.

To proceed: the real creator of French middle-class drama is Nivelle de
la Chaussee. What do we find in his numerous works? Protests against
various aspects of aristocratic psychology, attacks on aristocratic
prejudices, or vices if you will. His contemporaries valued mainly the
morality which pervades all of his plays; ^[\[20\]](#n20)^ even in this
respect the sentimental comedy remains true to its origin.

It is commonly recognized that in endeavoring to "portray" the middle
class in their dramas, the apologists of the French bourgeoisie did not
show any great originality. They did not invent middle class drama; they
merely imported it from England. In England this dramatic genre had
developed at the end of the seventeenth century as a reaction from the
extreme moral looseness which had previously ruled the stage, reflecting
the moral decay of the aristocracy. The bourgeoisie, who had risen in
armed rebellion against the nobility, had demanded comedy "worthy of
Christians"; and henceforth preached their own morality. French literary
innovators, who as a rule borrowed freely from the English everything
corresponding to the attitude and sentiments of their own rebellious
bourgeoisie, introduced also this feature of the middle-class drama. (As
early as 1773 Louis-Sebastien Mercier pronounced the theatre "the
strongest and most effective means of providing the human mind with
powerful weapons, and of enlightening the whole people at a single
stroke." ^[\[21\]](#n21)^) This is one of the secrets of their success,
and it will help us to understand something which seems incomprehensible
at first glance. French middle-class drama, which by the second half of
the eighteenth century has apparently become well established,
disappears, succumbing to classic tragedy -- something one would not
expect.

We are going to see presently how this strange phenomenon is to be
explained; but let us first note the following: Diderot, who, as an
ardent pioneer, was unrivalled in his enthusiasm for bourgeois drama (he
even tried his hand at it: *Le Fils Naturel* 1757, and *Le Fere de
Famille,* 1758), demanded that the drama present men not as
characterizations, but as representatives of social positions. The
objection was raised that social position in no way determines the man.
"What," he was asked, "is a judge as such (*le juge en sot*)? What is a
merchant as such (*le negociant en soi*)?" This argument, however, was
based on a complete misunderstanding of Diderot's position. Diderot was
not speaking of merchants or judges in the abstract, but of the merchant
of his day, and particularly of the judge of that period. The judge of
that period, in fact, furnished a good deal of illuminating and lively
stage material, as the comedy, *he Mariage de Figaro* so delightfully
proves. Diderot's demand was simply a reflection of the revolutionary
aspirations of the French bourgeoisie of that period.

Strangely enough, however, it was the revolutionary character of these
aspirations that prevented middle-class drama from quite submerging
classic tragedy in France. An aristocratic product, classic tragedy
dominated the French stage as long as the power of the aristocracy went
unchallenged -- power restricted only by the feudal monarchy. (These
restrictions themselves, let it be understood, were the historical fruit
of a long and bitter class struggle in France.) When the bourgeoisie
rebelled and challenged the power of the aristocracy, the old literary
standards began to seem inadequate and the old theatre not sufficiently
"instructive." Thus there arose alongside the decaying classic tragedy
the drama of the bourgeoisie. In *le drame bourgeois,* the "man of the
middle class" sets up his morality in opposition to the utter depravity
of the aristocracy. Preaching, however, could not solve the social
contradictions that cried for solution in France. The problem was not
the destruction of aristocratic vices but of the aristocracy itself.
This was impossible, of course, without a severe struggle. Now a
*paterfamilias,* with all his stolid respectability and middle-class
morality, obviously could never serve as the prototype of the aroused
and heroic fighter. The literary portrait of the middle class could not
inspire valor. And the enemies of the old regime acutely felt the need
for valor; they realized that the bourgeois morale of the third estate
must be developed. Where could the prototypes of such heroism be found?
Why, where the heroes of an earlier literary tradition had been found --
in antiquity!

Thus there arose a new enthusiasm. No longer did the enemies of the
aristocracy inquire, like Beaumarchais: "Of what interest to me,
peace-loving subject of an eighteenth century monarchy, are revolutions
in Athens or Rome?" Once again Greek and Roman history captured the
interest of the public. This interest, however, was now of quite a
different character. If the young bourgeois ideologists were suddenly
interested in "the sacrifice of a young princess in Aulis," it was
primarily with a view to "fighting superstition"; if their attention was
attracted by "the death of a Peloponnesian tyrant," it was not so much
the psychological as the political significance of the event which gave
them pause. Moreover it was no longer the Age of Augustus but rather the
republican heroes of Plutarch that fired their enthusiasm. Plutarch
became the Bible of these young bourgeois, as testified by Madame
Roland's memoirs, for instance. And indeed it was this enthusiasm for
the republican heroes in particular which revived classical interest in
general. The entire body of French art of that period derived *its*
peculiar character from the new vogue of imitating antiquity. We are
going to see later what deep traces it left on the history of French
painting. For the present, however, we wish merely to note that the new
vogue diverted the interest of the public away from dull middle-class
drama and postponed for a long time the end of classic drama.

French as well as foreign historians of literature and art have often
been puzzled by the fact that the revolutionaries who fought for and in
the great French revolution remained literary conservatives.
^[\[22\]](#n22)^ Why did classicism lose its hold so long after the fall
of the old regime ? ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ The truth is that these innovators
were conservative only superficially. For although the form of tragedy
did not change, its essence did.

For example let us take Saurin's tragedy, *Spartacus,* which appeared in
1760. The hero of this play is filled with longing for liberty. For the
sake of his great ideal he even foregoes marrying the girl he loves; his
conversation constantly revolves around freedom and love of mankind. One
had to be anything but a literary conservative either to write or to
applaud tragedies such as this. Into the old literary bottle had been
poured a new and revolutionary wine.

Tragedies like those by Saurin and Lemierre (Cf. his *Guillaume Tell*)
fulfill one of Diderot's revolutionary demands: they present men not as
characterizations but as representatives of social positions; and
especially do they express the revolutionary social aspirations of that
period. And if this new wine was poured into old bottles, it must be
remembered that those bottles were an ancient legacy. The widespread
enthusiasm for antiquity was a remarkable but characteristic symptom of
the new social temper. Side by side with this new kind of classic
tragedy there appeared the bourgeois drama, that dramatized morality, as
Beaumarchais approvingly termed it. But it was too colorless, too dull,
too conservative in subject matter.

Middle-class drama, despite its origin in the revolutionary temper of
the French bourgeoisie, failed as an adequate medium of expression for
its revolutionary aspirations. It gave a literary portrait in which
certain transitory contemporary characteristics of the original were
well reproduced, but when the original no longer bore these
characteristics, and when these characteristics ceased to be agreeable,
the public lost interest in the portrait. And that is all. Classic
tragedy lived on to the time when the French bourgeoisie finally
triumphed over the defenders of the old regime, and even after
enthusiasm for the republican heroes of antiquity had lost every social
significance. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^

But when the time came, middle-class drama burst into new life. After
some minor changes corresponding to the new social status of the
bourgeoisie, it established itself definitely and securely on the French
stage. Even those who refuse to recognize the close relationship between
romantic drama and middle-class drama of the eighteenth century agree
that the works of the younger Dumas represent the true middle-class
drama of the nineteenth century.

Social psychology is expressed in the art and esthetics of a given
period. But in the psychology of a society divided into classes many
things are bound to seem incomprehensible and paradoxical if we ignore
-- as idealist historians do, despite the better legacy of the
middle-class science of history -- the reciprocal relationships of
classes and the meaning of the class struggle.

### II.

Let us now leave the theatre and turn to another aspect of French art,
namely *painting.*

Under the impact of social influences with which we are now familiar,
the development of French painting paralleled that of French drama.
Hettner's just observation that Diderot's sentimental comedy is nothing
but genre painting transferred to the stage shows that he, too, had
noted this fact. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^

In the age of Louis XIV, when feudal monarchy reached its apex, French
painting had much in common with classic tragedy. "Grandeur" and
"dignity" characterized both; and painting, like drama, also chose its
heroes from among the mighty of the earth. Charles Le Brun, that arbiter
of artistic taste, painted only *one* figure, Louis XIV, whom he always
arrayed in ancient costume.

His famous series "The Wars of Alexander," which truly deserve the
attention of the visitor to the Louvre, was painted after the 1667
campaign in Flanders, a campaign which brought glory to the French
monarchy. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ The series was dedicated to the *roi soleil
--* Louis XIV. These pictures gripped the imagination of the ruling
class, because they harmonized so well with the contemporary spirit,
which aspired to "grandeur," fame and victories. A. Genevay writes that
Le Brun "was incontestably the greatest and most complete
personification of art in his time; no one better understood-and
depicted-the age in which he lived; never was an artist more deeply
imbued with the majesty of his king, with the magnificence of his reign,
with his every thought; Le Brun's works were an everlasting and
brilliant apotheosis." ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ The France of that day was
wholly absorbed in her king. Thus the public, standing before the
pictures of Alexander, applauded their own monarch, Louis XIV.

The profound impression created at the time by Le Brun's work is well
summed up in Etienne Carnot's glowing tribute: "*Que tu brille, Le Brun,
d'une lurniere pure!"* But everything dies away, everything changes. He
who climbs to the summit eventually descends. The decline of the French
feudal monarchy commenced, as we know, during the life of Louis XIV and
continued unabated down to the Revolution. The *roi soleil,* who was
wont to say, "*L'etat, c'est moil"* was, in his own fashion, interested
in the greatness of France. But Louis XV, who did not relinquish a
single claim to the prerogatives of an absolute monarch, thought only of
pleasure; and practically the entire aristocratic clique which
surrounded him thought of nothing else either. The reign of Louis XV was
one long insatiable hunt for pleasure, an age of merrily going to hell.
And yet, gross though the pleasures of those profligate aristocrats
usually were, polite society of that period was distinguished by extreme
elegance and refinement of taste, which made France "the arbiter of
fashion." This elegant and refined taste was reflected in the esthetic
ideals of the time. "When to the age of Louis XIV there succeeded the
age of Louis XV \... artistic ideals descended from the majestic to the
charming. Everywhere there prevailed a refined elegance, a delicate
voluptuousness." ^[\[28\]](#n28)^ These ideals are best expressed in the
painting of Boucher.

"Voluptuousness is Boucher's whole ideal," we read further on in the
book just quoted; "it is all the soul his painting has\... . The Venus
of whom he dreams and paints is a purely physical Venus."
^[\[29\]](#n29)^ This is quite true, and his contemporaries understood
Boucher only too well. In 1740 his friend Piron, addressing Madame
Pompadour,

speaks for the famous painter:

I seek only, in all truth, Elegance, grace, beauty, Sweetness, charm and
gaiety; In a word, only that which breathes Of playfulness and pleasure:
All with not too much of liberty, Surrounded by the veil demanded By
scrupulous decorum. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^

What an excellent characterization of Boucher, whose muse was an elegant
sensuality, which pervades all of his pictures. Many of them are now in
the Louvre; and whoever is interested to discover the essential
difference between the aristocratic monarchy of Louis XIV and that of
Louis XV will do well to compare Boucher's work with that of Le Brun;
such a comparison will be far more instructive than volumes of abstract
historical disquisitions. The same tremendous success met by Le Brun in
his time also greeted Boucher. It has been justly remarked that young
French painters of Boucher's time who went to Rome to perfect their art
went there keeping his works in their mind's eye, and came back
influenced not by the Renaissance masters but by Boucher himself.
Boucher's influence, however, did not last long. With the revolutionary
movement of the French middle class, the better critics turned against
him.

As early as 1753 Grimm condemns him in his *Correspondance Litteraire.
"*Boucher is not strong in the masculine," he says. ^[\[31\]](#n31)^ In
truth, the "masculine" in Boucher's pictures is represented principally
by cupids, which, of course, had no connection whatsoever with the
revolutionary aspirations of the period. Diderot, in his *Salons,* goes
even further in attacking Boucher. "Degradation of taste, of color, of
composition, of character, of expression, of design, have followed step
by step the depravity of the time." ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ According to
Diderot, "Boucher ceased to be an artist the moment he was appointed
court painter to the king." ^[\[33\]](#n33)^ The cupid figures mentioned
above come in for a special share of Diderot's denunciation. The
passionate Encyclopedist remarks rather unexpectedly that in the
enormous collection of cupid figures there is not a single one
approximating a real child, one that might "study his lessons, read,
write, or press hemp." ^[\[34\]](#n34)^ This criticism, which resembles
somewhat the objections made by our own D. I. Pisarev to *Evgeni
Onegin,* causes many modern French critics to shrug their shoulders.
These gentlemen maintain that it is not proper for cupids to "press
hemp"; and they are right. What they do not realize, however, is that
Diderot's naive indignation over the "little immoral satyrs"
^[\[35\]](#n35)^ gave vent to the class hatred of the then industrious
bourgeoisie for the idle pleasure of the wastrel aristocracy. Moreover,
even that which constituted Boucher's unquestionable strength -- his
*feminine --* did not appeal to Diderot. "For a time he liked to paint
girls. But what kind of girls? Elegant representatives of the
demi-monde." ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ These representatives of the demi-monde
were in their own way very beautiful; but their beauty did not appeal to
the ideologists of the third estate; it repelled them rather. This type
of beauty appealed only to the aristocracy, or to those members of the
third estate who were under the influence of the aristocracy and had
assimilated its taste. "Here is your painter and mine," says Diderot,
speaking of Greuze, "the first among us to dare give morality to art."
^[\[37\]](#n37)^ This approval is as characteristic of Diderot -- and
also of the enlightened section of the middle class ^[\[38\]](#n38)^- as
his bitter criticism of the despised Boucher.

Greuze was indeed an extremely moral painter. If the middle-class plays
of Nivelle de la Chaussee, Beaumarchais, Sedaine and others were
dramatized morality, Greuze's pictures may be called painted morality.
In these pictures the *paterfamilias* occupies the place of honor; he
figures in the most varied yet always sentimental situations, and excels
in all those domestic virtues so appropriate to middle-class drama. This
patriarch is certainly very honorable; but he takes no political
attitude. He merely stands there like a "personified reproach" before
the wanton and immoral aristocracy. And that is as it should be, for his
creator did not intend to go beyond a "reproach." Greuze is far from
being a revolutionary. He does not aim to destroy the old order, but
merely to improve it morally. He looks upon the French clergy as the
guardian of religion and morality; the French priests are the spiritual
fathers of all citizens. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^

Meanwhile the spirit of revolutionary dissatisfaction is beginning to
penetrate into the world of French artists. In the fifties of the
eighteenth century a student is expelled from the French academy in Rome
because he refuses to fast. In 1767 another student, the architect
Adrian Mouton, is similarly treated for the same offense; the sculptor
Claude Monod joins Mouton and he too is expelled from the academy.
Public opinion in Paris is decidedly with Mouton. He brings suit against
the director of the Roman institution; the court finds the director
guilty and orders him to pay 20,000 lire to Mouton.

The social temperature keeps rising; and the stronger the grip of the
revolutionary spirit upon the third estate the cooler their enthusiasm
for genre painting, that sentimental comedy in oils. This change of
attitude among the most progressive element of the day brought about a
transformation of their artistic tastes -- just as it brought about a
transformation of their literary tastes -- and genre painting in the
manner of Greuze, until recently an object of widespread enthusiasm,
^[\[40\]](#n40)^ is overshadowed by the revolutionary work of David and
his school.

As a member of the Convention in later years, David told the assembly:
"The sole function of the arts has been to cater to the tastes and whims
of a few sybarites whose pockets are stuffed with gold; and the guild
members \[the name David gives to the academicians\] persecute men of
talent and everybody who comes to them with ideas of pure philosophy and
morality." David felt that art should serve the people and the Republic.
This same David, however, was a firm adherent of classicism. His
artistic activity put new life into decaying classicism, and prolonged
its rule for decades. David furnishes the best proof that at the end of
the eighteenth century French classicism was conservative-and, if you
will, reactionary -- only in form. In essence, however, it was
thoroughly imbued with revolutionary spirit. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^ In this
respect one of David's most characteristic and remarkable pictures is
his "Brutus." The bodies of Brutus's children, who have just been
executed for their part in monarchistic plotting, are being borne by
lictors. His wife and daughter are in tears, but he sits austere and
unshaken; and one can see that for this man the good of the republic is
the highest law. Brutus also is a paterfamilias. *But a paterfamilias
who has become a citizen.* His morality is the political morality of a
revolutionary. He shows us how far bourgeois France has travelled since
the time when Diderot extolled Greuze because of the moral tendency of
his work. ^[\[42\]](#n42)^ Exhibited in 1789, in the year of the great
revolutionary earthquake, "Brutus" had an overwhelming success. It gave
expression to that which had become the deepest, the most urgent need of
existence, social life in France. Ernest Chesneau is quite correct in
stating, in his book on French schools of painting:

David mirrored perfectly the sentiments of the nation, which applauded
on seeing its own reflection; the people's enthusiasm was enhanced as
they admired the works of a man who depicted heroes whom they chose for
models. Hence the facility with which there was effected in art a
revolution comparable to the revolution being accomplished in social
customs and in the social structure. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^

It must not be supposed that the change introduced by David applied
merely to choice of subject. If it did, we could not justifiably speak
of a revolution.

No, the great wind of the approaching revolution completely swept away
the old relationship of the artist to his subject. The agreeable-ness
and mannerism of the old school -- the Vanloos, for example -- gave way
to the severe simplicity of the artists of the new school. The
weaknesses, too, of the new artists can be explained in terms of the
attitude then prevailing. For example, David was criticized on the
ground that the figures in his paintings resemble statues; and it must
be admitted that this is a justifiable reproach. But David's models were
chosen from antiquity, and in modern times sculpture appears to have
been the dominant art of the ancients. David was further accused of not
having a great imagination; and this criticism also is justified. David
himself admitted that with him reason predominated. Reason, however,
predominated with every representative of the revolutionary movement of
that period. And not only of that period: reason finds fertile ground,
and accordingly flourishes, in every civilized country undergoing a
period of development in which the social structure tends to decay, and
representatives of new social trends subject the old ones to their
criticism. Reason was no less developed among the French in the
eighteenth century than it was among the Greeks in the time of Socrates.
Not without cause did the German romanticists attack the tendency of
Euripides, for instance, to philosophize. Reason is the product of the
struggle of the new against the old, and at the same time it is also a
weapon. Reason predominated with every great Jacobin. There is no cause
for thinking that the Hamlets have a monopoly on reason.
^[\[44\]](#n44)^

Having explained the social causes which produced the David school, it
will now be easy to discuss its subsequent decay. Here again we find
something which we have already found in literature. After the
revolution, when the goal had been reached, the French bourgeoisie lost
its enthusiasm for the republican heroes of antiquity; and it looked
upon classicism, therefore, in an altogether different light. Classicism
suddenly seemed cold and remote. (Exactly what it had become!) The great
revolutionary spirit, which had lent such attraction to classicism, now
left it, and there remained only its shell-all the surface tricks of
artistic creation, now of use to no class-strange, inconvenient, and no
longer appropriate to the new aspirations and esthetic tendencies
produced by the new social relationships. The portrayal of ancient gods
and heroes now becomes an occupation fit only for old pedants; and so it
is quite natural that the younger generation of artists are not lured by
it. The dissatisfaction with classicism, the striving to strike out new
paths, is already noticeable in the work of David's own pupils -- Gros,
for instance. Their teacher reminds them of the old ideal, but in vain;
and in vain do they themselves fight their own impulses. Intellectual
trends change irresistibly with the changed ways of the world. The
Restoration, however, delays the triumphant march of the bourgeoisie and
even threatens to halt it altogether. For this reason the bourgeoisie
cannot make up its mind to part company with the "decree of Lycurgus."
This decree, which in a measure puts new life into the old political
ideals, also supports them in painting. Already we find Gericault
painting the future, already does romanticism knock at the door.

We are anticipating, however. At some future date we shall discuss the
decay of classicism. Now we should like to outline briefly how the
revolutionary catastrophe was reflected in the esthetic views of the
time.

### III.

The struggle against the aristocracy, which is making its last stand,
creates a loathing of aristocratic taste and tradition. We read, for
instance in "La Chronique de Paris" of January, 1790: "All our social
graces, our courtesy and gallantry, all our expressions of mutual
esteem, devotion and submissiveness, must be thrown out of our language.
These things all smack too much of the old regime." Two years later "Les
Annales Patriotiques" declares: "Manners and the rules of decorum were
invented in the days of servitude; they are superstitions that must be
swept away by the winds of Liberty and Equality." The same periodical
rules that "we must not raise our hats unless we feel warm, or are
addressing ourselves to a gathering. The habit of greeting other persons
should be given up; for this habit also dates from the time of
servitude. Moreover, expressions like 'I have the honor,' 'Will you do
me the honor?' and similar ones should be stricken from our vocabulary,
should be forgotten. In closing a letter one should not say: 'Your very
humble servant.' All such expressions, which have been handed down from
the old regime, are not worthy of free men. One should write: 'I am your
fellow citizen' or 'your brother' or 'your comrade' or, finally, 'your
equal'."

Citizen Chalier dedicated to the Convention a whole treatise on manners,
in which he severely condemns the old aristocratic courtesy. He
maintains that too much attention to the neatness of one's clothes is
aristocratic and foolish. "And Sunday dress is a downright crime; it is
theft perpetrated against the state." According to Chalier, everyone
must use the familiar form of address *tu, "*for by using the familiar
form of address we add the finishing touch to the destruction of the
insolent and tyrannous old regime." Chalier's treatise was manifestly
effective. On November 8, 1793, the Convention ordered all public
officials to use the pronoun *tu* in their mutual relations. I. Lebon, a
member of the Convention, a confirmed democrat and fiery revolutionary,
received from his mother an expensive suit of clothes as a gift. To
avoid offending her he accepted the gift, but his conscience troubled
him; and he wrote to his brother as follows:

"For ten nights I have hardly slept owing to this unfortunate suit of
clothes. I, a *philosophe,* a friend of humanity, to clothe myself so
richly, while thousands of my fellow-men are dying of hunger in
miserable tatters. How can I, with all that splendor, enter their modest
dwellings in future, to sympathize with them in their adversity? How can
I plead any longer the cause of the poor? How can I protest against the
thievery of the rich, when I myself imitate their luxury and their
sumptuousness\... These thoughts pursue me constantly." ^[\[45\]](#n45)^

And this is by no means an isolated instance. A suit of clothes in those
days became a matter of conscience, as it was in Russia in the period of
the so-called nihilism, and for similar reasons. "Le Courier de
l'Egalite" of January, 1795 considered it disgraceful to have two suits
of clothes while the soldiers who were defending the independence of
republican France had nothing whatsoever to wear. At this time the
famous "Pere Duchene" proclaims that fashion establishments should be
turned into workshops, that coachmakers should make only freight wagons,
goldsmiths should become locksmiths, and cafes where idlers were wont to
gather should be put at the disposal of workers for their meetings.
^[\[46\]](#n46)^

Such being the mores, it is quite easy to understand that art, too, went
to extremes in its negation of every old esthetic tradition of the
aristocracy.

The theatre, which, as we have seen, in the period immediately preceding
the revolution served the third estate as a weapon in the struggle
against the old regime, now ridicules unrestrainedly the priesthood and
the aristocracy. In 1790 the play, *La Liberte Conquise, ou le
Despotisme Renverse* (Freedom Won, or Despotism Overthrown) meets with
great success. The public joins the chorus in singing: "Aristocrats, you
are vanquished.\"47 The vanquished aristocrats, however, rush to see
those tragedies which remind them of the good old days: *Cinna,
Athalie,* etc. In November, 1790, at a presentation of Voltaire's
*Brutus,* the aristocratic boxes resound with "Long live the King" and
the democratic galleries with "Long live the people." In 1793 the
Carmagnole is danced on the stage and the King ^[\[47\]](#n47)^ and
emigres ridiculed. In the words of the de Goncourts, which provide the
data for this period, the theatre is *sans-culottes.* The actors poke
fun at the pompous manners of the actors of an earlier period; they
behave quite freely; they climb in through windows instead of coming
through the door, etc. The de Goncourts tell how an actor, during the
presentation of *Le Faux Savant,* came on the stage through the chimney
flue instead of through the door. If the story is not true, it surely
might have been.

There is nothing surprising in the fact that the theatre was
*sans-culottise* throughout the Revolution, since the Revolution, for a
time, gave power to the *sans-culottes.* It is, however, important for
us to ascertain the fact that the theatre, both during the Revolution as
well as in the period preceding it, was an actual reflection of society,
with its contradictions and the class struggle which they caused. If in
the good old days, when, according to Marmontel, the rules of decorum
had become a decalogue, the theatre represented the mutual relationships
of individuals, now, with the *sans-culottes* in power, the ideal of
Marie-Joseph Chenier was realized. Chenier maintained that the theatre
must instill in the bourgeoisie an aversion for superstition, hatred of
oppression, and love of freedom. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^

The ideal of the period demanded of every citizen strenuous and
uninterrupted labor for the common weal, so much so that his esthetic
requirements could not play an important role in the totality of his
intellectual demands. The citizen of that great period showed, above
all, enthusiasm for the poetry of *action,* for the beauty of heroism in
a citizen. This attitude often gave a peculiar character to the esthetic
judgments of French "patriots." The de Goncourts tell us that a member
of the jury chosen to judge works of art in the 1793 Salon, a certain
Fleuriot, regretted that the bas reliefs competing for the prize were
not sufficiently imbued with the great principles of the Revolution.
"And besides," inquires Fleuriot, "what sort of men are these who occupy
themselves with sculpture while their brothers shed their blood for our
country? My opinion is that there should be no prize." Hassenfratz,
another member of the jury, said: "I am going to speak frankly: all the
talent of an artist is in his heart; that which is acquired by the hand
is insignificant." To a certain Neveu, who ventured the remark that one
must consider workmanship and expression (with reference to sculpture),
Hassenfratz retorted: "Citizen Neveu, workmanship is nothing. We must
not judge workmanship." It was decided not to give out any prize for
sculpture. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ In the course of the debates over the
paintings this same Hassenfratz demonstrated, in a most fiery manner,
that the best painters were those artist citizens who were fighting at
the front for liberty. In his zeal he even expressed the conviction that
painting required simply a ruler and a compass. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ During
the session dealing with architecture a certain Dufourny expressed the
view that monuments should be as simple as a citizen's virtue. There was
no need of superfluous ornamentation. Architecture would have to be
regenerated by geometry. ^[\[50\]](#n50)^

There is no doubt that we are here dealing with a monstrous
exaggeration. We are at a point beyond reason, even for those days of
extreme conclusions from once-accepted premises. And it is not difficult
to ridicule such logic, as the de Goncourts do. *Yet it would be
absolutely incorrect to assume that the revolutionary period was
therefore unfavorable to art.* The esthetic requirements of the nation
were not suppressed. On the contrary, the great social movement, which
gave the nation a clear sense of its new dignity, also gave a tremendous
impulse to the development of these requirements. One need only visit in
Paris the Musee Carnavalet to be convinced of this. The collections of
that interesting museum, which are dedicated to the revolutionary
period, furnish definite proof that when art became *sans-culottes* it
was not destroyed, nor did it cease to be art. All that happened was
that it became permeated with a new spirit. Just as the morality of the
French "patriot" of that time was primarily political morality, his art
was primarily political art. This indicates that a citizen of that day-a
citizen, of course, worthy of the name-was indifferent, or almost
indifferent, to works of art which did not express some political idea
of significance to him. ^[\[51\]](#n51)^ Let no one say that such art
must be barren. That would be a mistake. The unparalleled art of the
ancient Greeks was in large measure such a political art. Nor is this
true of Greek art alone. French art during the age of Louis XIV likewise
served political ideas, which nevertheless did not keep it from
flourishing. As for French art of the revolutionary period, the
*sans-culottes* led it in a direction which aristocratic art could not:
art became the concern of the whole nation.

The numerous holidays, processions and celebrations which took place at
the time furnish the surest testimony and proof of the *sans-culottes*
esthetics. But this testimony is very often disregarded.
^[\[52\]](#n52)^

Owing to the historical changes of that epoch, however, art for the
whole nation had no firm social basis. The bloody reaction of the ninth
Thermidor soon put an end to the power of the *sans-culottes* and opened
up a new era in politics; it also introduced a new epoch in art-an epoch
that gave expression to the aspirations and esthetics of the new upper
class, the bourgeoisie, which had now become intrenched. We do not
intend at this time to discuss this new period; it deserves a
thoroughgoing investigation. But we must, however, summarize what has
gone before. We shall then arrive at certain conclusions which confirm
the following principles:

In the first place, the statement that art as well as literature is a
reflection of life, though true enough, is vague. In order to understand
exactly how art reflects life we must grasp the mechanics of the latter.
Among civilized nations, however, the class struggle is one of the most
important springs in life's mechanism. When this spring has been
investigated, when the class struggle is taken into consideration and
its various phases studied, we shall be able, in a measure, to explain
to our own satisfaction the intellectual history of a civilized society.
Its intellectual development reflects the history of its classes, which
in turn reflects their struggles.

In the second place, Kant states that esthetic pleasure is
disinterested, and that any judgment of the beautiful into which there
enters even the slightest interest is biased and not a purely esthetic
judgment. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^

This is true when applied to an individual. If, for instance, I like a
picture because I can sell it advantageously, my judgment, of course, is
not a purely esthetic judgment. But it is a different matter if the
question is approached from a social viewpoint. Investigation of the
development of art among primitive peoples has shown that social man
first approaches things and phenomena from the point of view of utility,
and only later does his reaction to some of them become esthetic.
^[\[54\]](#n54)^ This places the history of art in a new light. Not
every useful object, of course, seems beautiful to social man. But there
is no doubt that *only that which is useful will seem to him beautiful;*
in other words, only that which may be of importance to him in his
struggle for existence, against nature, or against another social man.
This does not mean that a social man's utilitarian view is *identical*
with his esthetic view. By no means! Utility is perceived by reason;
beauty by intuition. The sphere of the first is *interest;* of the
second, instinct. Furthermore -- and we must keep this in mind -- the
sphere of intuition is far larger than that of reason. Thus when social
man uses that which seems to him beautiful, he is almost never aware of
its utility, which is nevertheless connected with his idea of the
object. ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ In the majority of cases the utility can only
be discovered with the help of scientific analysis. The most important
characteristic of esthetic pleasure is its indirectness. And yet there
is utility in the beautiful. It lies, however, at the basis of esthetic
enjoyment (we are here dealing not with individuals but with *social*
man); otherwise the object would not seem beautiful.

The objection may be made that the color of an object pleases an
individual regardless of whether the object is significant in his
struggle for existence. Without going into any detailed analysis, I
shall only call attention to Fechner's remark: "The color red pleases
us, let us say, when we see it in the cheeks of a young and beautiful
woman. But what impression would the same color create if we saw it, not
in her cheeks, but on her nose?"

We observe here a sound analogy to *morals.* That which social man finds
useful is far from being moral. But only that which is useful to his
development is morally significant to him. Man does not exist for
morality, but morality for man.

Similarly we can say that man does not exist for beauty, but beauty for
man. This is utilitarianism in the wider sense, however-that is, in the
sense of the useful, not to individual, but to society -- tribe, race or
class.

But for the very reason that we consider not the individual, but society
(tribe, race, class) we also find place for Kant's view. *Without a
doubt, esthetic judgment takes for granted the absence of each and every
utilitarian consideration of the individual expressing such judgment.*
And in this instance we have a complete analogy to moral judgments. If I
regard a given action as moral because it is useful to me, I have no
moral instinct. ^[\[56\]](#n56)^

### Notes

[[1.]{#n1}]{.info} Karl Bucher: *Arbeit und Rhythmus,* Leipzig: Teubner:
1899 (2nd ed.).

[[2.]{#n2}]{.info} Referring to early decorative art, Moritz Homes
states that it could have developed only on the basis of industrial
activity, and that in those communities where industrial activity is
unknown, e.g., the Vedas in Ceylon, no decorative art has arisen. Cf.
*Urgeschichte der bildenden Kunst in Europa,* p. 38, Vienna:
Holtzhausen: 1898. Thus, his conclusion fully concurs with that of
Biicher, quoted above.

[[3.]{#n3}]{.info} Cf. L. Petit de Julleville: *La Comed'ie et les
Moeurs en France au Moyen Age,* p. 344, Paris: Cerf: 1886.

[[4.]{#n4}]{.info} H. Taine: "The Philosophy of Art" in *Lectures on
Art,* translated by John Durand, First Series, p. 32, New York: Holt:
1896. -- *Ed.*

[[5.]{#n5}]{.info} Gustave Lanson: *Histoire de la Litterattire
Francaise,* p. 420, Paris: Ha-chette: 1912 (19th. ed.) -- *Ed.*

[[6.]{#n6}]{.info} *ibid.,* pp. 421-4-22. -- *Ed.*

[[7.]{#n7}]{.info} Jean-Baptiste du Bos: *Critical Reflections on
Poetry, Painting and Music,* translated by Thomas Nugent, Vol. I, pp.
341-342, London: Nourse: 1748. -- *Ed.*

[[8.]{#n8}]{.info} David Hume: *History of England,* Appendix to the
Reign of James I, Edinburgh, 1754. Hume thinks "there may remain a
suspicion that we overrate, if possible, the greatness of the genius
\[of Shakespeare\], in the same manner\^ as bodies often appear more
gigantic on account of their being dis-proportioned and misshapen." He
considers him, as Voltaire did, a prodigy, given the time when he lived
and his total want of "any instruction"; but "if represented as a poet
capable of furnishing a proper entertainment to a refined or intelligent
audience, we must abate much of this eulogy." -- *Ed.*

[[9.]{#n9}]{.info} Alexander Pope: *Works,* edited by J. Warton, Vol. X,
p. 398, "Preface to the Works of Shakespeare," London, 1822. Pope
deplored that Shakespeare had composed his plays in view of "the people
and writ, at first, without the patronage from the better sort," and
further on he adds: "Yet it must be observed, that when his performances
had merited the protection of his prince, and when the encouragement of
the court had succeeded to that of the town, the works of his riper
years are manifestly raised above those of his former." -- *Ed.*

[[10.]{#n10}]{.info} Voltaire: "Ancient and Modern Tragedy" in *Works,*
Vol. XIX, Part I, pp. 115-141, Akron, Ohio: St Hubert Guild: 1901.
Plekhanov does not quote the latter part of this sentence. -- *Ed.*

[[11.]{#n11}]{.info} Voltaire: *A Letter from M de Voltaire to the
French Academy,* read on the festival of St Louis, August 25, 1776.
Translated into English in "Le Magazin du Monde," Paris, November, 1776,
pp. 81-91, 153-156. Quotation from p. 85. -- *Ed.*

[[12.]{#n12}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 90. -- *Ed.*

[[13.]{#n13}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 156. -- *Ed.*

[[14.]{#n14}]{.info} We note in passing that it was this view of
Voltaire's that repelled Lessing, the consistent ideologist of the
German middle class, as shown by Franz Mehring in his *Lessing-Legende.*

[[15.]{#n15}]{.info} Jean-Frangois Marmontel: "Essai sur le Gout" and
"Reflexions sur la Tragedie" in *Oeuvres Completes,* Vol. IV, Part I,
pp. 3-47, and Vol. VII, Part I, pp. 333-352, Paris: Berlin: 1819*. --
Ed.*

[[16.]{#n16}]{.info} Hermann Hettner: *Literaturgeschichte des
tachtzehnten Jahrhunderts,* 3 vols, in 5, Braunschweig, 1862-1872.

[[17.]{#n17}]{.info} Ferdinand Brunetiere: *Les Epoques du Theatre
Franqais.* p. 287, Paris: Hachette: 1906 (6th. ed.) -- *Ed.*

[[18.]{#n18}]{.info} P. A. C. de Beaumarchais: "Lettre Moderee sur la
Chute et la Critique du *Barbier de Seville"* in *Oewvres Completes,*
Vol. I, p. 365, Paris: Colin. 1809. -- *Ed.*

[[19.]{#n19}]{.info} P. A. C. de Beaumarchais: "Essai sur le Genre
Dramatique Serieux" in *cp. cit.,* pp. 17-18. Which brings to mind this
line from J. J. Rousseau: *Nouvelle Hiloise,* Second Part, Letter XVII:
"\... will someone tell me what is the earthly good of the tragedies of
Corneille, and what is the importance of Sertorius or Pompey to the
people of Paris?" -- *Ed.*

[[20.]{#n20}]{.info} D'Alembert says the following of Nivelle de la
Chaussee: "In his literary activity as well as in his private life he
held to the rule that the man whose wishes and aspirations correspond to
his means possesses wisdom." This is an apology for steadiness,
temperance, and thrift.

[[21.]{#n21}]{.info} Louis-Sebastien Mercier: *Du Thidtre ou Nowvel
Essai sur I'Art Dramati-que,* Amsterdam: Van Harrevelt: 1773.

[[22.]{#n22}]{.info} Cf. Karl Marx: *The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte,* pp. 13-14, New York: International Publishers: 1936,
particularly the following lines (quoted from Emile Burns's translation
in *Handbook of Marxism,* pp. 116-117): "The tradition of all the dead
generations weighs like an incubus on the brain of the living. And just
when they seem engaged in revolutionising themselves and things, in
creating something entirely new, precisely in such epochs of
revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past
to their service and borrow from them names, battle slogans and costumes
in order to present the new scene of world history in this time-honoured
disguise and this borrowed language. Thus Luther donned the mask of the
Apostle Paul, the Revolution of 1789-1814 draped itself alternately as
the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, etc." -- *Ed.*

[[23.]{#n23}]{.info} See e.g., Louis Gonse: *La Sculpture et Ita Gravure
en France au XIX Steele,* p. 4, Paris, 1892. Gonse considers it a very
interesting aspect. See also Haton Springer: *Geschichte der bildenden
Kilnste im neunzehnsten Jahrhundert,* p.206, Leipzig, 1858: "The Great
Revolution in France, which in every other respect exerted such immense
influence, hardly, if at all, touched art."

[[24.]{#n24}]{.info} "The decree of Lycurgus, who hardly gave them a
thought, protected the unities," writes Petit de Julleville in *Le
Theatre en France,* p. 334. One could not put it better. But the
bourgeois ideologists saw no reactionary threat in this decree. They
looked upon it as revolutionary middle class virtue *vertu*)*.*

[[25.]{#n25}]{.info} See footnote 16.

[[26.]{#n26}]{.info} The successful siege of Tournay lasted only two
days-the siege of Armen-tieres, Fumes, and Courtrai also only a short
time. Lille was taken in nine days. Cf. Henry Jouin: *Charles Le Brun et
les Arts sous Louis XIV,* Paris: Imprimerie Nationale: 1889.

[[27.]{#n27}]{.info} A. Genevay: Le *Style Louis XIV. Charles Le Brun,
Decorateur,* pp. 1-2, Paris: Rouan: 1886 (Bibliotheque de l'Art).

[[28.]{#n28}]{.info} Edmond and Jules de Goncourt: *L'Art du Dix
Huilieme Siecle,* Vol. I, pp. 135-136, Paris: A. Quantin: 1880 (3rd.
ed.)

[[29.]{#n29}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 145.

[[30.]{#n30}]{.info} Paul Mantz: *Francois Boucher. Lemoyne et Natoire,*
p. 109, Paris: A, Quantin: 1880. Quoted from Alexis Piron: *Oeuvres
Completes,* Vol. VIII, p. 160, Paris, *1776. -- Ed.*

[[31.]{#n31}]{.info} Cf. F. M. Grimm and Denis Diderot: *Correspondance
Litteraire,* Vol. I, p. 357, Paris: Gamier: 1877-1882. Grimm says that
Boucher's "color is never male"; and later, Vol. IX, p. 59: "He used to
be called the painter of the graces, but his graces were mannered\... .
One could have called him the Fontenelle of painting: Boucher had
Fontenelle's sumptuousness, affectation, preciosity, and factitious
grace."

[[32.]{#n32}]{.info} Denis Diderot: "Salon de 1765-Boucher" in
*Oeuvres,* Vol. VIII, p. 114, Paris, 1821. -- *Ed.*

[[33.]{#n33}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 115. -- *Ed.*

[[34.]{#n34}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 116. -- *Ed.*

[[35.]{#n35}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 116. -- *Ed.*

[[36.]{#n36}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 116. -- *Ed.*

[[37.]{#n37}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 243. -- *Ed.*

[[38.]{#n38}]{.info} Edmond and Jules de Goncourt: *op. cit.,* Vol. I,
p. 293.

[[39.]{#n39}]{.info} Cf. Greuze: *Lettre a MM les Cures* in "Journal de
Paris," #339, pp. 141-143, Paris, December 5, 1786. -- *Ed.*

[[40.]{#n40}]{.info} Greuze's "Pere de Famille" was exhibited in 1775,
and his "Accordee de Village" in 1761.

[[41.]{#n41}]{.info} Andre Fontainas: *Histoire de la Peinture Tranqaise
au XIX Sifole,* pp. 12-13, Paris: Mercure de France: 1906 (3rd. ed.)

[[42.]{#n42}]{.info} "Brutus" is now in the Louvre.

[[43.]{#n43}]{.info} Ernest Chesneau: *Les Chefs d'Ecole,* p. 18, Paris:
Didier: 1864 (new ed.) -- *Ed.*

[[44.]{#n44}]{.info} Hence many cogent objections could be made against
the view expressed by Turgenev in his famous essay "Hamlet and Don
Quixote." \[Available in the English translation of William A. Drake in
M. J. Benardete and Angel Flores: *The Anatomy of Don Quixote,* pp.
98-120, Ithaca, N. Y.: The Dragon Press: 1932. Cf. Pavel I. Novitsky:
*Cervantes and "Don Quixote,"* particularly pp. 19 ff., New York:
Critics Group: 1936. -- *Ed*.\]

[[45.]{#n45}]{.info} Edmond and Jules de Goncourt: *Histoire de la
Societe Francaise pendant la Revolution,* pp. 354-355, Paris:
Charpentier: 1880 (new ed.) -- *Ed.*

[[46.]{#n46}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 353. -- *Ed.*

[[47.]{#n47}]{.info} *ibid.,* pp. 167-168. -- Ed.

[[48.]{#n48}]{.info} Marie-Joseph Chenier: "Epitre Dedicatoire a la
Nation Frangaise" in *Oeuvres,* Vol. I, pp. 183-190, Paris: Guillaume:
1826. -- *Ed.*

[[49.]{#n49}]{.info} Goncourt: *op. cit.,* pp. 346-347. -- *Ed.*

[[50.]{#n50}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 348. -- *Ed.*

[[51.]{#n51}]{.info} *ibid.,* p. 349. -- *Ed.*

[[52.]{#n52}]{.info} The word "political" is here used in its broadest
sense, as when we say that every class struggle is a political struggle.

[[53.]{#n53}]{.info} Cf. Maurice Dreyfous: *Les Arts et les Artistes
pendant la Periode Re-volutionaire* (*1789-1795*)*,* Chapter VII "L'Art
des Corteges," pp. 408 ff., Paris: Paclot: 1906.

[[54.]{#n54}]{.info} Immanuel Kant: "Kritik der Urtheilskraft" in
*Werke,* Vol. IV, Leipzig: Modes & Baumann: 1836-1839. -- *Ed.*

[[55.]{#n55}]{.info} "\... All objects of ornamentation originally had a
utilitarian function\... . Among Indians it is observable that the
useful and the ornamental coexist harmoniously, and we have every reason
to assume that the former are of earlier origin." Karl von den Steinen:
*Unter den Naturvolkern Central-Brasiliens,* p. 174, Berlin: D. Reimer:
1894.

[[56.]{#n56}]{.info} By "object" we mean not only material things but
also natural phenomena, human emotions and human relationships.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm) \| [Literary Criticism
Section](../../../subject/art/lit_crit/index.htm)
