---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1905

### Translator's Preface to the Second Edition of Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp.64-83;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

According to the Soviet editors: 'The second edition of Friedrich
Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy*,
translated into Russian by Plekhanov, was issued in Geneva in 1905. The
first Russian edition was published in 1892.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Much water has flowed under the bridges since the first Russian edition
of this pamphlet appeared. In the Preface to that edition, I said that
the triumphant reactionaries in our country were donning philosophical
robes and that for the struggle against this reaction the Russian
socialists would inevitably have to study philosophy. My premonition was
entirely confirmed by subsequent events. The Russian socialists -- and I
had and have in mind the Social-Democrats -- had indeed to take up
philosophy. But as they took it up very late and, to use a popular
expression, were not exactly *pulling together*, the results have not
been particularly gratifying. At times one almost regretted that books
on philosophy had ever fallen into the hands of our comrades, because
they were unable to take a critical attitude to the authors they were
studying and finished by themselves falling under the influence of these
authors. Since contemporary philosophy, not only in Russia but in the
West too, bears the imprint of reaction, its reactionary content found
its way into the heads of revolutionaries giving rise to the utmost
confusion which sometimes received the bombastic title of *criticism of
Marx* and sometimes bore the more modest name of *combination of
Marxism* with the philosophical views of one or other of the bourgeois
ideologists (neo-Kantians, Mach, Avenarius and others). There is not the
slightest doubt that *Marxism* can be combined with anything, even with
*spiritualism*; the whole question is *how* this may be done. Even the
least intelligent person cannot answer this otherwise than by pointing
to *eclecticism*. With the aid of eclecticism one may 'combine' anything
with everything that comes into one's head. But eclecticism never
produced anything good either in theory or in practice. Fichte said: 'To
philosophise means not to act; to act means not to philosophise', and
this is quite true. However, it is no less true to say that only a
consistently thinking person is capable of being consistent in his
activity. And for us who claim the honour to represent the most
revolutionary class that has at any time appeared on the historical
scene, consistency is obligatory under pain of treachery to our cause.

What is behind the desire to combine Marxism now with one, now with
another of the bourgeois ideologies?

First of all *fashion*.

Nekrasov says about one of his heroes:

What the latest book tells him\
Lies upmost in his heart.

Such heroes can always be found; they make their way into every camp.
Unfortunately, we meet them in ours too.

We had a crop of them in the second half of the nineties, when for many
and many of our 'intellectuals' the 'latest book' lying 'upmost in the
heart' was Marxism itself. It seemed as though such 'intellectuals' had
been deliberately created by history in order to promote the
'combination' of Marxism with other 'latest books'. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ We
have no regrets for them; they were empty-headed people anyway.

But it is a pity that more serious comrades, too, often feel the urge to
'combine'. The explanation here is not the craze for fashion. Here we
have something which, though very harmful and regrettable in itself,
reveals the presence of good intentions.

Imagine that a particular comrade feels the need to work out for himself
an orderly world-outlook; this comrade has mastered -- more or less well
-- the philosophical-*historical* aspect of Marx's teaching, but the
strictly *philosophical* aspect of this teaching is still obscure and
inaccessible to him. In the circumstances, he decides that this aspect
of Marx's teaching has still *not* been '*worked out*', and he sets
about '*working it out*' himself. When he is engaged on this -- not very
easy -- task, some representative of bourgeois 'criticism' turns up and
appears to bring at least a little semblance of order where nothing but
chaos had hitherto seemed to prevail. Our inquisitive comrade, who is
inadequately prepared and insufficiently independent in his search for
philosophical truth, easily succumbs to the influence of this bourgeois
'critic'. And lo, we have a ready-made 'combiner'. His intentions were
good, but they turned out badly.

No, whatever our opponents may say, one thing is indisputable: the
efforts to 'combine' the theory of Marx with other theories which, to
use a German expression, are a slap in the face for that theory, reveal
a striving to achieve an orderly world-outlook, but at the same time
they expose a *weakness of thought, an inability strictly and
consistently to adhere to one fundamental principle.* In other words, an
inability to comprehend Marx.

How can one help this sad state of affairs? I do not see any other way
than to disseminate the correct view of the philosophy of Marx and
Engels. And in this respect, I think the present pamphlet can do very
much.

More than once I myself have heard the question: why cannot historical
materialism be combined with the transcendental idealism of Kant, the
empirio-criticism of Avenarius, the philosophy of Mach, and so on? I
have always replied to this in almost the same terms I shall use now. As
regards Kant, my comments (see page 95) show how it is utterly
impossible to 'combine' the philosophical doctrine of Kant with the
theory of development. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ The views of Mach and Avenarius,
which are the latest variety of Hume's philosophy, are no more capable
of being combined with the theory of development than is Kant's
philosophy. To hold consistently those views is to arrive at
*solipsism*, that is to say, to a denial of the existence of all people
apart from oneself. Don't think we are joking, reader. Although Mach
protests energetically against the identification of his philosophy with
Berkeley's ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ subjective idealism, he thereby demonstrates
only his own inconsistency. If bodies or things are only mental symbols
of our sensations (more exactly, of groups, complexes of sensations) and
if they do not exist outside our consciousness -- and such is Mach's
theory -- subjective idealism and solipsism can be rejected only by
means of a howling inconsistency. It is not for nothing that one of
Mach's pupils, Hans Cornelius, in his book *Einleitung in die
Philosophie* (MÃ¼nchen, 1903), comes close to solipsism. He states (page
322) that science cannot, either affirmatively or negatively, resolve
for man the question: is there any kind of psychical life apart from
one's own? This is incontestable from the point of view of Machism; but
if I still have doubts about the existence of psychical life alien to
myself, if, as we have seen, bodies generally are only the symbols of
sensations, all that remains is to become reconciled to solipsism,
which, however, Cornelius does not venture to do.

It should be said that Mach does not consider Cornelius to be a pupil of
his, but of Avenarius. This is not surprising, since there is very much
in common between the views of Mach on one hand and Avenarius on the
other, as Mach himself admits. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ The question which Fichte
described as the *plurality of individuals* is the major difficulty both
for the philosophy of Avenarius and the philosophy of Mach and one which
neither can cope with otherwise than by admitting the truth of
materialism or landing in the impasse of solipsism. This must be obvious
to every thinking person who takes the trouble to read, for instance,
Avenarius' *The Human Concept of the World* ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ of which a
Russian translation has been published.

It is self-evident that only a follower of Poprishchin ^[\[6\]](#n6)^
could 'combine' solipsism with any other (not only the materialist) view
of history.

The contemporary theory of development, of which our own explanation of
history is a part, finds firm ground for itself *only* in materialism;
and it is no wonder, therefore, that the founders of scientific
socialism *took materialism seriously*, as Engels expressed it, applying
it consistently in all the branches of knowledge which had hitherto been
the strongholds of idealism.

And please note that it is not only *scientific* socialism which is
closely linked with materialism. *Utopian* socialism, which liked to
flirt with idealism and even with religion, must also be recognised as a
legitimate offspring of materialism, as is clear from the first appendix
to this pamphlet (*Karl Marx on French Materialism of the Eighteenth
Century*): ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

Just as *Cartesian* materialism passes into *natural science proper*,
the other trend of French materialism leads directly to *socialism* and
*communism*.

There is no need for any great penetration to see from the teaching of
materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual endowment of
men, the omnipotence of experience, habit and education, and the
influence of environment on man, the great significance of industry, the
justification of enjoyment, etc, how necessarily materialism is
connected with communism and socialism. If man draws all his knowledge,
sensation, etc, from the world of the senses and the experience gained
in it, then what has to be done is to arrange the empirical world in
such a way that man experiences and becomes accustomed to what is truly
human in it and that he becomes aware of himself as man. If correctly
understood interest is the principle of all morality, man's private
interest must be made to coincide with the interest of humanity. If man
is unfree in the materialistic sense, that is, is free not through the
negative power to avoid this or that, but through the positive power to
assert his true individuality, crime must not be punished in the
individual, but the anti-social sources of crime must be destroyed, and
each man must be given social scope for the vital manifestation of his
being. If man is shaped by environment, his environment must be made
human. If man is social by nature, he will develop his true nature only
in society, and the power of his nature must be measured not by the
power of the separate individual but by the power of society.

These and similar propositions are to be found almost literally even in
the oldest French materialists. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

Marx then goes on to reveal the kinship of the various utopian schools
of France and Britain with materialism.

However, those who are endeavouring to 'combine' Marxism with this or
that variety of more or less consistent idealism pay not the slightest
attention to all this. And it is unfortunate, the more so indeed that
'there is no need for any great penetration' to grasp the thorough
inconsistency of all these attempts at combination.

But how should one understand *materialism*? Right to the present day
people are still arguing a lot about it. Engels says:

Thus the question of the relation of thinking to being -- the paramount
question of the whole of philosophy -- has, no less than all religion,
its roots in the narrow-minded and ignorant notions of savagery. But
this question could for the first time be put forward in its whole
acuteness, could achieve its full significance, only after humanity in
Europe had awakened from the long hibernation of the Christian Middle
Ages. The question of the position of thinking in relation to being, a
question which, by the way, had played a great part also in the
scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the question: which is primary, spirit
or nature? -- that question, in relation to the church, was sharpened
into this: Did God create the world or has the world been in existence
eternally?

The answers which the philosophers gave to this question split them into
two great camps. Those who asserted the primacy of spirit to nature and,
therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or
other -- and among the philosophers, Hegel, for example, this creation
often becomes still more intricate and impossible than in Christianity
-- comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded nature as
primary, belong to the various schools of materialism.

These two expressions, idealism and materialism, originally signify
nothing else but this; and here too they are not used in any other
sense. What confusion arises when some other meaning is put into them
will be seen below. ^[\[9\]](#n9)^

Thus the most important distinguishing feature of materialism is that it
does away with the *dualism of spirit and matter, god and nature*, and
deems nature to be the basis of all those phenomena which the primitive
hunting tribes could not explain without reference to the activity of
*souls, spirits.* To the opponents of materialism, who for the most part
have only the most absurd notions of it, it seems that Engels wrongly
defined the essence of materialism and that, in fact, materialism
*reduces psychic phenomena to material phenomena.* This is why they were
greatly surprised when, in my dispute with Mr Bernstein, I listed
*Spinoza* among the materialists. But for proof of the correctness of
Engels' definition of materialism, suffice it to quote some extracts
from the writings of the eighteenth-century materialists.

Let us not go beyond the confines of nature (*demeurons dans la nature*)
when we wish to apprehend natural phenomena \[says the author of the
celebrated work *Le bon sens puisÃ© dans la nature* (Holbach\]), and let
us ignore causes that are too subtle to act upon our senses;
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ let us be convinced that by going beyond the confines
of nature we shall never solve the problems nature places before us.
^[\[11\]](#n11)^

Holbach expresses himself in exactly the same way in another, better
known work, *SystÃ¨me de la nature*, which I shall not quote precisely
because it is better known. I shall be content to indicate that the
passage dealing with the question we are interested in will be found in
Chapter 6 of Volume 2 of this work (page 146 of the London 1781
edition).

HelvÃ©tius hold the same point of view:

Man \[he said\] is the work of nature; he is in nature; he is governed
by its laws; he cannot free himself from it; he cannot go outside it
even in thought\... For a being formed by nature, nothing exists outside
the great whole of which he himself is a part\... Beings supposed to be
above nature and distinct from it are chimeras \[and so forth\].
^[\[12\]](#n12)^

True, there have been materialists who acknowledged the existence of God
and regarded nature as his creation. One of these was Joseph Priestley.
^[\[13\]](#n13)^ But the celebrated naturalist's faith was a simple
theological appendage to his materialist teaching, the basic principle
of which was the conception that man is the creation of nature and that
'the corporeal and mental faculties inherent in the same substance,
grow, ripen, and decay together'. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ This substance is
*matter*, as Priestley repeats more than once in this and others of his
works. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

Feuerbach justly remarks that the substance which Spinoza refers to
theologically as God, on closer examination (*bei Lichte besehen*),
proves to be nature. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ This is just as true as another of
Feuerbach's remarks: 'The secret, the true meaning of Spinoza's
philosophy is Nature.' ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ This is precisely why Spinoza,
in spite of the theological covering to his fundamental philosophical
conception, must he considered a materialist. This was appreciated by
Diderot who, as may be seen from his article 'Spinosiste', in Volume 15
of the *EncyclopÃ©die*, counted himself and those who held similar views
as modern Spinozists (*spinosistes modernes*). When 'Marx's critics'
uttered their unanimous gasp of surprise at the declaration I made in
the course of my debate with Mr Bernstein that the materialism of Marx
and Engels was a kind of Spinozism (*eine Art Spinosismus*), they were
simply betraying their own amazing ignorance. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ To be
able to grasp this thought more easily, one should, firstly, remember
that Marx and Engels passed through Feuerbach's philosophy and,
secondly, try to elucidate what exactly it is that distinguishes
Feuerbach's philosophy from Spinoza's. Anyone who can understand the
above will soon see that in his basic view on the relation of being to
thinking, Feuerbach is Spinoza who has ceased to call nature god and has
been through Hegel's school.

Let us go on. If, as we have seen, Priestley taught that matter is
capable of *sensation* and *thought*, it is clear from this that
*materialism in no way tries to reduce all psychical phenomena to the
motion of matter*, as its adversaries contend. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^ To the
materialist, sensation and thought, consciousness, are the internal
state of matter in motion. But none of the materialists who have left
their mark on the history of philosophical thought has ever '*reduced*'
consciousness to *motion*, or *explained* one by the other. When the
materialists maintained that there is no need to devise a special
substance -- the soul -- to explain psychical phenomena, and that matter
is capable of 'sensation and thought', this property of matter seemed to
them just as basic and therefore inexplicable as motion. Thus, for
example, La Mettrie, whose teaching is usually described as the most
crude variety of materialism, stated categorically that he considered
motion to be the same 'mystery of nature' as consciousness.
^[\[20\]](#n20)^ Besides, different materialists had different views of
matter's ability to possess consciousness. Some of them, for example,
Priestley and, apparently, Holbach (who did not, however, express
himself quite definitely) believed that consciousness arises in moving
matter only in those cases where it is organised in a certain fashion.
Others -- Spinoza, La Mettrie, Diderot -- thought that matter always
possesses consciousness, although it only reaches a significant degree
of intensity when organised in a certain way. The celebrated Haeckel is
now known to hold this view. As to the general question of whether
matter has the ability to 'think', hardly any conscientious naturalist
would place himself in difficulty by answering it negatively. The
'agnostic' Huxley wrote in his book on Hume: 'Surely no one who is
cognisant of the facts of the case, nowadays, doubts that the roots of
psychology lie in the physiology of the nervous system.'
^[\[21\]](#n21)^ This is exactly what the materialists say and Engels is
perfectly correct in this pamphlet when he calls agnosticism simply
shamefaced materialism. Contemporary psycho-physiology is thoroughly
saturated with the spirit of materialism. True, some
psycho-physiologists evade having to draw materialist conclusions by
relying on the doctrine of *concomitance* of psychical and physical
phenomena. But in this case, the stating of concomitance is but a means
of discovering the causal connection of phenomena, as was expounded
already by Alexander Bain. ^[\[22\]](#n22)^

Now let us consider another aspect of the matter. The philosophy of Marx
and Engels is not just a *materialist* philosophy. It is *dialectical
materialism.* It is objected to this teaching, firstly, that dialectics
will not stand criticism and, secondly, that materialism is incompatible
with dialectics. Let us consider these objections.

The reader will no doubt remember that Mr Bernstein attributed what he
called the errors of Marx and Engels to the harmful influence of
dialectics. There is a formula in common logic: 'yea -- yea and nay --
nay'. Dialectics transforms this into its direct opposite: 'yea -- nay
and nay -- yea'. Mr Bernstein did not like this latter 'formula' and
declared that it could lead one into the most dangerous logical
temptations and errors. And probably the great majority of so-called
educated readers agreed with him, since the formula: 'yea -- nay and nay
-- yea' evidently contradicts sharply the basic, fixed laws of thought.
We shall have to examine this aspect of the matter here.

There are said to be three 'basic laws of thought': 1) the law of
identity; 2) the law of contradiction; 3) the law of excluded middle.

*The law of identity* (*principium identitatis*) runs: A is A (*omne
subjectum est predicatum sui*) or, otherwise, A equals A.

*The law of contradiction* -- *A is not non-A* -- is only the negative
form of the first law.

*According to the law of excluded middle* (*principium exclusi tertii*)
two contradictory propositions excluding one another cannot both be
wrong. Indeed, A is either B or non-B; the truth of one of the
propositions unerringly signifies the falsity of the other and vice
versa. There is not and cannot be a middle here.

Ãberweg remarks that the law of contradiction and the law of excluded
middle can be combined in the following rule of logic: *each fully
defined question* -- *always understood in the same fully defined sense*
-- *of whether a particular predicate belongs to a particular subject
must be answered either yea or nay and cannot be answered both yea and
nay.* ^[\[23\]](#n23)^

It is difficult to raise any objection to the truth of this rule. But if
it is true, then the formula '*yea* -- *nay* and *nay* -- *yea*' seems
altogether unsound; we can only ridicule it like Mr Bernstein, and throw
up our hands in dismay as to why such undoubtedly profound thinkers as
Heraclitus, Hegel and Marx could find it more satisfactory than the
formula '*yea* -- *yea* and *nay* -- *nay*' which has a firm basis in
the above-mentioned basic laws of thought.

This conclusion, a fatal one for dialectics, is apparently irrefutable.
But before we accept it, let us consider another aspect of the matter.

The basis of all natural phenomena is matter in motion. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^
But what is motion? It is an obvious contradiction. If you were asked:
is a body in motion in a given place at a given time, even with the best
intentions in the world you would not be able to reply according to
Ãberweg's rule, that is, the formula '*yea* -- *yea* and *nay* --
*nay*'. A body in motion *is* in a given place and *at the same time is
not in it.* ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ It can be judged only by the formula '*yea*
-- *nay* and *nay* -- *yea.*' It is therefore an irrefutable witness in
favour of the '*logic of contradiction*', and he who refuses to be
reconciled to this logic must declare along with the ancient Zeno that
motion is no more than an illusion of the senses. This is evidently not
understood by our compatriot Mr NG, who is also a very firm opponent of
dialectics but, unfortunately, not a very serious one. He says that if a
body in motion, with *all* its parts:

\... is in one place, its simultaneous presence in another place is a
manifest appearance out of nothing, for whence could it get to another
place? From the first place? But the body has still not left the first
place.

But, he continues, if we assume that the body *with not all* its parts
is in a given place at a given time, do not the different parts of a
body which is at rest also occupy different places in space?
^[\[26\]](#n26)^

Very good, though very old. However, what do Mr NG's arguments prove?
*They prove that motion is impossible.* Splendid; here, too, we shall
not argue, but we remind Mr NG of Aristotle's remark which is daily and
invariably justified by natural science, that by negating motion we make
all study of nature impossible. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ Was that what Mr NG
wanted? Was that the wish of the 'literary monthly' which printed his
profound work? If neither one nor the other wished to negate motion,
they should have understood that, by warming up the 'aporia' of Zeno
they left themselves with no alternative but to recognise that motion is
contradiction in action, that is to say, to admit precisely what Mr NG
wanted to refute. Well, some 'critics'!

However, we ask all those who do not deny motion: what should we think
of that '*basic law*' *of thought* which contradicts the *basic fact of
being?* Should we not approach it\... with some circumspection?

It looks as if we are now faced with an unexpected choice: *either* to
acknowledge the 'basic laws' of formal logic and negate motion, or, on
the contrary, to acknowledge motion and negate those laws. It is a
rather unpleasant choice. Is there no way round it?

Matter in motion lies at the basis of all natural phenomena. Motion is
contradiction. It must be judged dialectically, that is to say, as Mr
Bernstein would put, it, by the formula: '*yea -- nay* and *nay --
yea*'. Therefore we must admit that so long as we are speaking about
this basis of all phenomena, we are in the domain of '*the logic of
contradiction*'. But the molecules of matter in motion, joining one with
the other, form certain *combinations*, things, objects. Such
combinations are distinguished by the greater or lesser degree of their
stability, exist for a more or less prolonged period, and then pass
away, with others taking their place: only the motion of matter is
eternal, while matter itself is the indestructible substance. But once a
certain temporary combination of matter has taken place as the result of
its eternal motion, and as long as that combination has not yet passed
away in consequence of this motion, we have to resolve the question of
its existence in the affirmative. So that if someone points at the
planet Venus and asks if it exists, we shall say without hesitation:
*yes*. And if we are then asked: do witches exist, we should just as
resolutely reply: *no*. What does this mean? It means that when we are
speaking about individual objects we are obliged to judge them according
to Ãberweg's above-mentioned rule and generally be guided by the 'basic
laws' of thought. *This* domain is governed by Mr Bernstein's favourite
formula: '*yea* -- *yea* and *nay* -- *nay*.' ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

Nonetheless, even here the powers of that worthy formula are not
unlimited. A definite answer must be given to the question of the
existence of an object *already in being.* But if this object is *as yet
only coming into being*, one might sometimes be justified in hesitating
to answer. When half of a man's hair has fallen out we may say he is
bald. But just try to determine exactly at what point falling hair
becomes baldness.

Every definite question as to whether a particular property is part of a
particular object must be answered *either yea or nay.* That is
indisputable. But how should one reply where the object *is changing*,
when it *is already shedding* the particular property or *is still only
acquiring it?* Needless to say, a definite answer is demanded here too;
but the point is that it will be definite only if it is based on the
formula '*yea* -- *nay* and *nay* -- *yea*'. It is impossible to answer
the question according to the Ãberweg formula: '*either yea or nay*'.

Of course, it may be objected that the property *being shed* has not
*yet* ceased to exist, and the property *being acquired already* exists,
and therefore it is possible and obligatory to give a definite answer
according to the formula '*either yea or nay*', even when the object is
in a *state of change.* However, this is wrong. The young man on whose
chin 'down' has appeared is certainly beginning to grow a beard, but
this still does not give us the right to call him bearded. Down on the
chin is not yet a beard, although it is *changing into a beard.* To
become *qualitative* a change must reach a certain *quantitative limit.*
Whoever forgets this loses precisely the power to express *definite*
judgements on the properties of objects.

'Everything is fluid, everything changes', said the ancient Ephesian
thinker. The combinations we call objects are in a state of constant --
more or less rapid -- *change*. In so far as the combinations concerned
remain *particular combinations*, we must judge them by the formula
'*yea* -- *yea* and *nay* -- *nay*'. But in so far as they *change* and
*cease to exist* as such we must turn to the *logic of contradiction*;
we must declare, while risking the disapproval of Messrs Bernstein, NG
and others of their metaphysical brethren: '*Both yea and nay; they
exist and they do not exist*.'

*Just as rest is a particular case of motion, so thought, according to
the rules of formal logic (conforming to the 'basic laws*' *of thought)
is a particular case of dialectical thought.*

It was said of Cratylus, one of Plato's teachers, that he did not agree
even with Heraclitus who had declared: 'We cannot enter the same stream
twice.' Cratylus asserted that we cannot do so even once; while we enter
the stream it is already changing, becoming *another stream.* In such
judgements, it is as though the element of *determinate being* is being
replaced by the element of *becoming*. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ This is a misuse
of dialectics, not a correct application of the dialectical method.
Hegel remarked: '*Das Etwas ist die erste Negation der Negation.*' ('The
Something is the first negation of the negation.') ^[\[30\]](#n30)^

Those of our critics who have not completely lost touch with
philosophical literature, like to cite Trendelenburg who is supposed to
have shattered completely all the arguments in favour of dialectics. But
these gentlemen have evidently read Trendelenburg badly, if they have
read him at all. They have forgotten -- if it was ever known to them,
which I strongly doubt -- the following trifle. Trendelenburg
acknowledges that the *principium contradictionis* is *applicable not to
motion but only to those objects that are created by motion*.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^ He is right. But motion does not only *create* objects.
As we have said, it *constantly changes them.* That is why the *logic of
motion* ('the logic of contradiction') never loses its sovereignty over
the objects created by motion, so that while paying due tribute to the
'basic laws' of formal logic we must remember that their significance is
limited to the extent that they do not hinder us from also giving proper
recognition to dialectics. This is how the matter actually stood with
Trendelenburg, although he did not draw the appropriate logical
conclusions from the principle that he himself stated -- *an extremely
important one for the scientific theory of cognition.*

In passing, we shall add here that there are very many useful remarks
scattered throughout Trendelenburg's *Logische Untersuchungen* which
speak not against us but in our favour. This may seem strange, but it
can be very simply explained by the very simple circumstance that
Trendelenburg, strictly speaking, was combating *idealist* dialectics.
For instance, he diagnosed the weakness of dialectics as that it
'asserts the spontaneous motion of pure thought which is at the same
time the self-generation of being' \['*behauptet\... eine Selbstbewegung
des reinen Gedankens, die zugleich die Selbsterzeugung des Seins
ist*'\]. ^[\[32\]](#n32)^

This is indeed a very great mistake. But who can fail to realise that
this weakness is peculiar only to idealist dialectics? Who does not know
that when Marx wanted to place dialectics 'the right way up' he began by
correcting this fundamental error which had grown from its old idealist
roots? Another example. Trendelenburg says that to Hegel motion is
indeed the basis of that logic which apparently does not require any
presuppositions to justify it. ^[\[33\]](#n33)^ This again is perfectly
true; but once again it is an argument in favour of *materialist*
dialectics. A third and the most interesting example. According to
Trendelenburg, it is wrong to think that to Hegel nature was only
applied logic. Just the contrary. Hegel's logic is by no means the
result of pure thought; it was created by preliminary abstraction from
nature (*eine antizipierte Abstraktion der Natur*). In Hegel's
dialectics almost everything is drawn from experience, and if experience
could take from dialectics all that dialectics has borrowed from
experience, dialectics would indeed be left with a beggar's staff.
^[\[34\]](#n34)^ That is so, exactly so! But then that is just what
Hegel's pupils said when they rebelled against his idealism and went
over to the camp of *materialism*.

I could adduce many more similar examples but that would only distract
me from my subject. I simply wished to show our critics that it would
probably have been better for them not to have cited Trendelenburg at
all in their fight with us.

To proceed. I said that motion is contradiction in action and that
therefore the 'basic laws' of formal logic are inapplicable to it. In
order that this proposition should not give rise to misunderstandings, a
qualification is needed. When we are confronted with the question of the
transition from one type of motion to another -- say, from mechanical
motion to heat -- we also have to reason in accordance with Ãberweg's
basic rule. This type of motion is *either* heat *or* mechanical motion
*or*, etc. That is clear. But if this is so, the basic laws of formal
logic are *applicable* within certain limits *also to motion.* It
follows once more that dialectics does not abrogate formal logic, but
simply deprives its laws of the *absolute significance* attached to them
by the metaphysicians.

If the reader has followed attentively what has been said above, he
should have no difficulty in understanding how little 'value' there is
in the now oft-repeated idea that *dialectics is irreconcilable with
materialism*. ^[\[35\]](#n35)^ On the contrary, *the foundation of our
dialectics is the materialist conception* of nature. Our dialectics is
based on materialism and would collapse were materialism to collapse.
And vice versa: the *materialist theory of cognition* would be
incomplete, one-sided -- more than that, it would be *impossible*
without dialectics.

With Hegel, *dialectics* coincides *with metaphysics*; with us
*dialectics* rests upon the *study of nature.*

With Hegel, the demiurgos of the real world, to use one of Marx's
expressions, is the *Absolute Idea.* For us, the absolute idea is only
an *abstraction from motion* which gives rise to all *combinations and
conditions of matter.*

With Hegel, thought moves forward as a consequence of the revelation and
solution of the *contradictions* within *conceptions*. According to our
-- *materialist* -- teaching, the contradictions within conceptions are
only the reflections, *translated into the language of thought*, of the
contradictions within *phenomena* due to the contradictory nature of
their common basis, that is to say, *motion*.

With Hegel, the course of things is determined by the course of ideas.
With us the course of *ideas* is explained by the course of *things, the
course of thought by the course of life.*

Materialism puts dialectics 'the right way up' and thereby removes the
mystical veil in which Hegel had it wrapped. By the very fact of this it
brings to light the *revolutionary character* of dialectics.

Marx wrote:

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, because
it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In
its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and
its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension and
affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same
time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its
inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed
\[to be exact: which has emerged, become -- *gewordene* -- GP\] social
form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its
transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets
nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and
revolutionary. ^[\[36\]](#n36)^

That materialist dialectics is an abomination to the through and through
reactionary bourgeoisie is in the nature of things; but that even people
who sincerely sympathise with revolutionary socialism sometimes turn
their backs on dialectics is both ridiculous and extremely sad; it is
the height of nonsense.

After all I have said, it seems to me that I can afford to shrug my
shoulders at the astonishing invention of Mr NG who attributes to us the
principle of a '*dual organisation* of mind', a principle which,
according to him, is the 'premise' which can alone make our 'dialectical
logic the least bit plausible'. ^[\[37\]](#n37)^ Well, well! Our
implausible critic has indeed found a mare's nest!

Now we must turn our attention to something else. We know already that
Ãberweg was right -- and to what extent he was right -- in demanding
that logically thinking people give definite answers to definite
questions as to whether a particular property belongs to a particular
object. But suppose we are dealing, not with a *simple* object, but with
a *complex* one which unites in itself *directly opposing phenomena*
possessing directly opposing properties. Is Ãberweg's rule applicable to
such an object? No, Ãberweg himself, who is just as decided an opponent
of Hegel's dialectics as Trendelenburg, finds that this has to be
considered in accordance with another rule, namely, the *combination of
opposites* (*principium coincidentiae oppositorum*). But the vast
majority of the phenomena that are the concern of natural science and
social science belong to the list of 'objects' of exactly this type: the
most directly opposed phenomena are combined in the most simple clot of
protoplasm, in the life of the most undeveloped society. Consequently,
the dialectical method must occupy an important place in natural science
and social science. From the moment such a place was allocated to the
dialectical method in these sciences they have made enormous advances.

Would you like to know, reader, how dialectics won its spurs in biology?
Recall the disputes about what constituted *species* which were aroused
by the appearance of the theory of transformism. Darwin and his
supporters were of the opinion that the various species of one and the
same genus of animals or plants were none other than the variously
developed descendants of one and the same original form. Besides this,
in accordance with the theory of development, all genera of one and the
same succession also stem from one common form and the same must be said
of all successions of one and the same class. Darwin's opponents, on the
other hand, took the contrary view that all animal and vegetable species
are completely independent of one another and that only individuals
belonging to one and the same species come from a common form. The same
conception of species had already been expressed by Linnaeus who said:
'There are as many species as were originally created by the Supreme
Being.' This is a purely metaphysical view, since metaphysics perceives
that things and ideas 'are isolated, are to be considered one after the
other and apart from each other, are objects of investigation fixed,
rigid, given once for all' (Engels). Dialectics, on the other hand,
comprehends things and ideas, in Engels' own words, 'in their essential
connection, concatenation, motion, origin and ending'. ^[\[38\]](#n38)^
This conception has been an integral part of biology since Darwin's time
and will always remain so no matter what corrections are introduced into
the theory of transformism by the further development of science.

To comprehend the great significance of dialectics in *sociology*, it is
sufficient to recall how *socialism* was transformed from a *utopia* to
a *science*.

The utopian socialists held the abstract point of view of human nature
and judged social phenomena by the formula 'yea -- yea and nay -- nay'.
Property *either* conforms *or does not* conform to human nature; a
monogamic family *either* conforms *or does not* conform to human
nature, and so on and so forth. Since human nature was supposed to be
*unchangeable*, socialists had the right to expect that among all the
*possible* social systems there would be one which corresponded to human
nature *more than all the others.* Hence arose the endeavours to find
this *best system*, that is to say, *one* that conformed most to human
nature. Each founder of a school *thought he had discovered such a
system*; each proposed *his own utopia.* Marx introduced the dialectical
method into socialism and thus converted it into a *science*, dealing a
mortal blow at *utopianism*. Marx does not appeal to human nature; he
knows of no social institutions that *either* conform *or do not*
conform to human nature. In his *Poverty of Philosophy* we find the
following remarkable and characteristic rebuke to Proudhon: 'M Proudhon
does not know that all history is nothing but a continuous
transformation of human nature.' ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ In *Capital*, Marx
says: 'By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he \[man\]
at the same time changes his own nature.' ^[\[40\]](#n40)^ This is the
dialectical point of view, shedding quite new light on questions of
social life. Take the issue of private property. The Utopians wrote and
argued much among themselves and with the economists about whether
private property must exist, that is to say, whether it conforms to
human nature. Marx put the question on a concrete basis. He stated that
*the forms of property and property relations are conditioned by the
development of the productive forces.* To one stage of the development
of these forces corresponds one form; to another stage another form --
but there is not and cannot be an *absolute decision* since everything
is fluid, everything changes; 'wisdom becomes madness, bliss --
torment'. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^

Hegel said: 'Contradiction leads forward.' Science finds splendid
confirmation of this dialectical view in the *class struggle*, without
consideration of which nothing can be understood of the development of
the social and spiritual life of *class* society.

Why then is the 'logic of contradiction' which, as we have seen, is the
reflection of the eternal process of motion in the human mind, called
*dialectics*? To avoid a protracted discussion on the matter, I shall
quote from Cuno Fischer:

Human life may be compared with dialogue in this respect, that with age
and experience our views of people and things are gradually transformed,
like the opinions of the disputants in the course of a debate which is
fruitful and rich in ideas. It is this spontaneous and necessary
transformation of our views of life and the world which actually
constitutes experience\... That is why Hegel, in comparing the course of
development of consciousness with the course of philosophical debate,
called it by the name *dialectic*, or dialectical motion. This
expression had already been adopted by Plato, Aristotle and Kant in a
sense important and distinctive to each of them, but in no system did it
receive such a comprehensive significance as in Hegel's.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^

There are many, too, who do not understand either why views such as
those of Linnaeus on animal and vegetable species, for example, are
described as *metaphysical*. Apparently these words -- *metaphysics,
metaphysical* -- mean something quite different. We shall try to explain
this as well.

What is *metaphysics*? What is its subject?

Its subject is the so-called *unconditional* (the absolute). And what is
the main distinctive feature of the *unconditional*? *Immutability.*
This is not surprising, since the *unconditional* is not dependent on
changing circumstances (*conditions*) of time and place, which alter the
ultimate objects accessible to us. That is why it does not change. What
then is the most distinctive feature of those concepts which have been
and are used by the people described in the language of dialectics as
metaphysicians? This also is their *immutability*, as we noted in the
example of Linnaeus' teaching on species. In their own way, these
concepts are *unconditional*, too. So their nature is identical with
that of the *unconditional*, the subject matter of metaphysics. *That is
why* Hegel described as *metaphysical* all those concepts which are
elaborated (to use his own words) *by reason*, that is to say, which are
accepted as immutable and are isolated from one another by an impassable
gulf. The late Nikolai Mikhailovsky thought that Engels was the *first
writer* to use the terms '*metaphysical*' and '*dialectical*' in the
sense we now know. But this is wrong. These terms were originally used
by Hegel. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^

I shall probably be told that Hegel had his own metaphysics. I do not
deny this: he had. But *his metaphysics* merged with *dialectics*, and
in dialectics there is nothing immutable, everything is in motion,
everything changes.

When I sat down to write this preface, I had intended to say something
about Mr Berdyaev's review in the journal *Voprosy Zhizni*
^[\[44\]](#n44)^ of Engels' *Anti-DÃ¼hring*, a Russian translation of
which has recently been published. Now I realise I cannot carry out this
intention for want of space. I cannot say that I am very sorry about it;
Mr Berdyaev's review will convince only those readers who are already
convinced and whom, therefore, there was no need to convince. Mr
Berdyaev's own opinions, however, *do not* deserve attention. Spinoza
said of Bacon that he *did not prove* his opinions; he only *described
them.* The same might be said of Berdyaev, if his method of presenting
his thoughts would not be better described by the word *decree*. But
when such a thinker as Bacon describes, or, for that matter, decrees,
his views, much exceptionally valuable material will be found in his
descriptions and decrees. And when such a muddle-head as Mr Berdyaev
takes to issuing decrees, absolutely nothing instructive will come of
them.

But wait\... It is clear from Mr Berdyaev's decrees where, according to
his practical reason, the main weakness of Engels' world-outlook lies.
It lies in this, that it impedes the transformation of *social*
democracy into *bourgeois* democracy. And that is very interesting; so
we shall put it on record.

Chexbres sur Vevey\
4 July 1905

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} The reference is to the 'legal Marxists' -- liberal
bourgeois, who in the 1890s came out in the Russian legal press under
the banner of Marxism. 'Legal Marxism' by its character was akin to
Bernsteinianism -- Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp.449-61 -- Editor.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} *Die Analyse der Empfindungen* (fourth edition),
pp.282-83.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} See, in the above-mentioned book, the chapter headed
'Mein VerhÃ¤ltnis zu R Avenarius und anderen Forschern', p.38.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} One German writer remarks that for empirio-criticism
*experience* is only an object of investigation and not a means of
knowledge. If this is right, there is no point in opposing
empirio-criticism to materialism, and to argue whether it is destined to
replace materialism is a sheer waste of time.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Poprishchin: a character from Gogol's story *Notes of
a Madman --* Editor.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} The supplement mentioned is an excerpt from Marx and
Engels' *The Holy Family*, Chapter 6, item 'Critical Battle Against
French Materialism' -- Editor.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), pp.130-31 -- Editor.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p.346 -- Editor.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Note that Holbach calls everything that acts on our
senses matter.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} I am quoting from the Paris edition of 'the first
year of the Republic'.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} 'Le vrai sens du systÃ¨me de la nature', Chapter 1
of *De la Nature.*

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} See his *Disquisitions Relating to Matter and
Spirit*, in Volume 1 of the Birmingham edition, 1782. There God is
declared to be 'our Maker' (p.139), the 'All in all' (p.143), and so on.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} Ibid, p.69.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} 'Matter being capable of the property of sensation
or thought' (*The History of the Philosophical Doctrine Concerning the
Origin of the Soul\...* in the first volume of the same edition of his
*Works*, p.400).

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} *Werke*, Volume 4, p.380.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} Ibid, p.391.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} I was asked by objection: what does *a kind of*
Spinozism mean. This is easy to answer: in Marx and Engels as well as in
Diderot, Spinozism was freed of its theological exterior. That is all.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} See, for example, Lasswitz, *Die Lehre Kant*'s *von
der IdealilÃ¤t des Raumes und der Zeit* (Berlin, 1883), p.9.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} *Oeuvres philosophiques de Monsieur de La-Mettrie*,
Volume 1 (Amsterdam, 1764), pp.69, 73.

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} See p.181 of the French translation of this book
\[TH Huxley, *Thomas Hume* (London, 1879), p.80\].

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} *Mind and Body*, Russian translation of the sixth
English edition (Kiev, 1884), pp.24-25.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} *System der Logik* (Bonn, 1874), p.219.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} I am speaking of the *objective* side of phenomena.
'Une volition est, pour le cerveau un mouvement d'un certain systÃ¨me de
fibres. Dans l'Ã¢me c'est ce qu'elle Ã©prouve en consÃ©quence du mouvement
des fibres\...' (Robinet, *De la Nature*, Volume 1, Chapter 23, part 4).
\['For the brain, volition is the movement of a certain system of
fibres; in the soul it is what it feels as a result of the movement of
the fibres.'\] Cf Feuerbach's: 'Was fÃ¼r mich oder subjectiv ein rein
geistiger\... Akt, ist *an sich* oder objectiv ein materieller,
sinnlicher.' (*Werke*, Volume 2, p.350). \['What for me or subjectively
is a purely spiritual act\..., is in itself or objectively a material
sentient act.'\]

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} Even the most decided opponents of the dialectical
method were compelled to recognise this. 'Die Bewegung', says A
Trendelenburg, 'die vermÃ¶ge ihres Begriffs an demselben Punkte zugleich
ist und nicht ist.' (*Logische Untersuchungen*, Volume 1 (Leipzig,
1870), p.189) ('Motion, which by virtue of its own concept is and is not
simultaneously at one and the same point.'\] It is almost superfluous to
remark here, as Ãberweg has already done, that Trendelenburg should have
said '*matter in motion*' rather than '*motion*'.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} 'Materialism and Dialectical Logic', *Russkoye
Bogatstvo*, July 1889, pp.94, 96. \[*Russkoye Bogatstvo* (*Russian
Wealth*): a monthly magazine published in St Petersburg from 1876 to
1918. From the early 1890s it became an organ of the liberal Narodniks
under the editorship of NK Mikhailovsky. The journal distorted and
falsified Marxism and came out against the Social-Democrats and in
defence of revisionism -- Editor.\]

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} *Metaphysics*, I, VII, 59.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} *Historical judgements* of the kind, as indicated
by Ãberweg (in *Logik*, p.196): was Plato born in the year 429, or 428,
or 427 BC must also be answered according to this formula. This reminds
me of the amusing reply made by a young Russian revolutionary who
arrived in Geneva, if I am not mistaken, in 1882. He had to give the
police some information about himself. 'Where were you born?', asked the
friend who was arranging the matter, the late NI Zhukovsky. 'In various
gubernias', replied the overcautious 'conspirator' evasively. Zhukovsky
flared up and exclaimed: 'Nobody will believe that, my friend!' And here
even the most zealous advocate of the dialectical method would agree
with him.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} I retain here the terms used by N Lossky in his
translation of the book on Hegel by Cuno Fischer: Dasein -- *determinate
being*; Werden -- *becoming*.

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} *Werke*, Volume 3, p.114.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} *Logische Untersuchungen*, Volume 2 (third edition,
Leipzig, 1870), p.175.

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} *Logische Untersuchungen*, Volume 1 (third edition,
Leipzig, 1870), p.36.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} Ibid, p.42.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} Ibid, pp.78-79.

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} 'It seems to us that materialism and dialectical
logic are elements which may be considered incompatible
philosophically', said the profound Mr NG (*Russkoye Bogatstvo*, June
1889, p.59).

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} See Preface to the Second German edition of
*Capital*. \[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p.29 --
Editor.\]

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} *Russkoye Bogatstvo*, June 1889, p.64. Parmenides
in his polemic with Heraclitus' pupils called them *two-headed
philosophers* to whom many things appear in dual form: as existing and
as non-existing. Mr NG now advances as a philosophical principle that
which for Parmenides was a display of polemical guile. What progress we
are making, 'God help us', in the 'first questions' of philosophy!

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} Frederick Engels, *Anti-DÃ¼hring* (Moscow, 1975),
pp.29-30 -- Editor.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} *MisÃ¨re de la Philosophie* (new edition, Paris,
1890), p.204. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p.192 -- Editor.\]

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} *Das Kapital*, third edition, pp.155-56. \[Karl
Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p.173 -- Editor.\]

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} Goethe, *Faust*, Part One, Scene Four -- Editor.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} *Hegel: His Life and Works*, Half Volume 1
(translated by NO Lossky, St Petersburg), p.308.

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} See p.81 of the First Volume of his *Great
Encyclopaedia.* \[Plekhanov is referring here to Hegel's *EncyklopÃ¤die
der philosophischen Wissenschaften in Grundrisse* (*Encyclopaedia of
Philosophical Sciences*) -- Editor.\]

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} See N Berdyaev, 'A Diary of a Publicist: Catechism
of Marxism', *Voprosy Zhizni* \[*Life*'s *Problems*\], no 2, 1915 --
Editor.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)

1
