Karl Marx: The Civil War in France

> ::: border
> ## The First Address^[\[1\]](publication-notes.htm#a1)^ July 23, 1870
>
> ### \[The Beginning of the Franco-Prussian War\]
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
>  
>
> In the [Inaugural Address](../../1864/10/27.htm) of the [International
> Working Men's Association](../../1864/iwma/index.htm), of November
> 1864, we said:
>
> "If the emancipation of the working classes requires their fraternal
> concurrence, how are they to fulfill that great mission with a foreign
> policy in pursuit of criminal designs, playing upon national
> prejudices, and squandering in piratical wars the people's blood and
> treasure?"
>
> We defined the foreign policy aimed at by the International in these
> words:
>
> "Vindicate the simple laws of morals and justice, which ought to
> govern the relations of private individuals, as the laws paramount of
> the intercourse of nations."
>
> No wonder that Louis Bonaparte, who usurped power by exploiting the
> war of classes in France, and perpetuated it by periodical wars
> abroad, should, from the first, have treated the International as a
> dangerous foe. On the eve of the plebiscite^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^ he
> ordered a raid on the members of the Administrative Committee of the
> International Working Men's Association throughout France, at Paris,
> Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles, Brest, etc., on the pretext that the
> International was a secret society dabbling in a *complot* for his
> assassination, a pretext soon after exposed in its full absurdity by
> his own judges. What was the real crime of the French branches of the
> International? They told the French people publicly and emphatically
> that voting the plebiscite was voting despotism at home and war
> abroad. It has been, in fact, their work that in all the great towns,
> in all the industrial centres of France, the working class rose like
> one man to reject the plebiscite. Unfortunately, the balance was
> turned by the heavy ignorance of the rural districts. The stock
> exchanges, the cabinets, the ruling classes, and the press of Europe
> celebrated the plebiscite as a signal victory of the French emperor
> over the French working class; and it was the signal for the
> assassination, not of an individual, but of nations.
>
> The war plot of July \[19\] 1870^[\[B\]](#B){#Bb}^ is but an amended
> edition of the *coup d'etat* of December 1851. At first view, the
> thing seemed so absurd that France would not believe in its real good
> earnest. It rather believed the deputy denouncing the ministerial war
> talk as a mere stock-jobbing trick. When, on July 15, war was at last
> officially announced to the *Corps Legislatif*, the whole Opposition
> refused to vote the preliminary subsidies -- even
> [Thiers](../../../../../glossary/people/t/h.htm#thiers-louis-adolphe)
> branded it as "detestable"; all the independent journals of Paris
> condemned it, and, wonderful to relate, the provincial press joined in
> almost unanimously.
>
> Meanwhile, the Paris members of the International had again set to
> work. In the *Reveil* of July 12, they published their manifesto "to
> the Workmen of all Nations," from which we extract the following few
> passages:
>
> "Once more," they say, "on the pretext of European equilibrium, of
> national honor, the peace of the world is menaced by political
> ambitions. French, German, Spanish workmen! Let our voices unite in
> one cry of reprobation against war!
>
> \[\...\]
>
> "War for a question of preponderance or a dynasty can, in the eyes of
> workmen, be nothing but a criminal absurdity. In answer to the warlike
> proclamations of those who exempt themselves from the blood tax, and
> find in public misfortunes a source of fresh speculations, we protest,
> we who want peace, labor, and liberty!
>
> \[\...\]
>
> "Brothers in Germany! Our division would only result in the complete
> triumph of the despotism on both sides of the Rhine\...
>
> "Workmen of all countries! Whatever may for the present become of our
> common efforts, we, the members of the International Working Men's
> Association, who know of no frontiers, we send you, as a pledge of
> indissoluble solidarity, the good wishes and the salutations of the
> workmen of France."
>
> This manifesto of our Paris section was followed by numerous similar
> French addresses, of which we can here only quote the declaration of
> Neuilly-sur-Seine, published in the *Marseillaise* of July 22:
>
> "The war, is it just? No! The war, is it national? No! It is merely
> dynastic. In the name of humanity, or democracy, and the true
> interests of France, we adhere completely and energetically to the
> protestation of the International against the war."
>
> These protestations expressed the true sentiments of the French
> working people, as was soon shown by a curious incident. The [Band of
> the 10th of
> December](../../../../../glossary/orgs/d/e.htm#december-10-society),
> first organized under the presidency of Louis Bonaparte, having been
> masqueraded into *blouses* [\[i.e., to appear as common workers\]
> ]{.context}and let loose on the streets of Paris, there to perform the
> contortions of war fever, the real workmen of the Faubourgs
> [\[suburbs, workers' districts\]]{.context} came forward with public
> peace demonstrations so overwhelming that Pietri, the Prefect of
> Police, thought it prudent to stop at once all further street
> politics, on the plea that the real Paris people had given sufficient
> vent to their pent-up patriotism and exuberant war enthusiasm.
>
> Whatever may be the incidents of Louis Bonaparte's war with Prussia,
> the death-knell of the Second Empire has already sounded at Paris. It
> will end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not forget that it is
> the governments and the ruling classes of Europe who enabled Louis
> Bonaparte to play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the Restored
> Empire.
>
> On the German side, the war is a war of defence; but who put Germany
> to the necessity of defending herself? Who enabled Louis Bonaparte to
> wage war upon her? Prussia! It was Bismarck who conspired with that
> very same Louis Bonaparte for the purpose of crushing popular
> opposition at home, and annexing Germany to the Hohenzollern dynasty.
> If the battle of Sadowa had been lost instead of being won, French
> battalions would have overrun Germany as the allies of Prussia. After
> her victory, did Prussia dream one moment of opposing a free Germany
> to an enslaved France? Just the contrary. While carefully preserving
> all the native beauties of her old system, she super-added all the
> tricks of the Second Empire, its real despotism, and its mock
> democratism, its political shams and its financial jobs, its
> high-flown talk and its low *legerdemains*. The Bonapartist regime,
> which till then only flourished on one side of the Rhine, had now got
> its counterfeit on the other. From such a state of things, what else
> could result but war?
>
> If the German working class allows the present war to lose its
> strictly defensive character and to degenerate into a war against the
> French people, victory of defeat will prove alike disastrous. All the
> miseries that befell Germany after her wars of independence will
> revive with accumulated intensity.
>
> The principles of the International are, however, too widely spread
> and too firmly rooted amongst the German working class to apprehend
> such a sad consummation. The voices of the French workmen had
> re-echoed from Germany. A mass meeting of workmen, held at Brunswick
> on July 16, expressed its full concurrence with the Paris manifesto,
> spurned the idea of national antagonism to France, and wound up its
> resolutions with these words:
>
> "We are the enemies of all wars, but above all of dynastic wars. \...
> With deep sorrow and grief we are forced to undergo a defensive war as
> an unavoidable evil; but we call, at the same time, upon the whole
> German working class to render the recurrence of such an immense
> social misfortune impossible by vindicating for the peoples themselves
> the power to decide on peace and war, and making them masters of their
> own destinies."
>
> At Chemnitz, a meeting of delegates, representing 50,000 Saxon
> workmen, adopted unanimously a resolution to this effect:
>
> "In the name of German Democracy, and especially of the workmen
> forming the Democratic Socialist Party, we declare the present war to
> be exclusively dynastic\.... We are happy to grasp the fraternal hand
> stretched out to us by the workmen of France\.... Mindful of the
> watchword of the International Working Men's Association: Proletarians
> of all countries, unite, we shall never forget that the workmen of all
> countries are our friends and the despots of all countries our
> enemies."
>
> The Berlin branch of the International has also replied to the Paris
> manifesto:
>
> "We," they say, "join with heart and hand your protestation\....
> Solemnly, we promise that neither the sound of the trumpets, nor the
> roar of the cannon, neither victory nor defeat, shall divert us from
> our common work for the union of the children of toil of all
> countries."
>
> Be it so!
>
> In the background of this suicidal strike looms the dark figure of
> Russia. It is an ominous sign that the signal for the present war
> should have been given at the moment when the Moscovite government had
> just finished its strategic lines of railway and was already massing
> troops in the direction of the Prut.^[\[C\]](#C){#Cb}^ Whatever
> sympathy the Germans may justly claim in a war of defense against
> Bonapartist aggression, they would forfeit at once by allowing the
> Prussian government to call for, or accept the help of, the
> [Cossack](../../../../../glossary/terms/c/o.htm#cossacks). Let them
> remember that after their war of independence against the first
> Napoleon, Germany lay for generations prostrate at the feet of the
> tsar.
>
> The English working class stretch the hand of fellowship to the French
> and German working people. They feel deeply convinced that whatever
> turn the impending horrid war may take, the alliance of the working
> classes of all countries will ultimately kill war. The very fact that
> while official France and Germany are rushing into a fratricidal feud,
> the workmen of France and Germany send each other messages of peace
> and goodwill; this great fact, unparalleled in the history of the
> past, opens the vista of a brighter future. It proves that in contrast
> to old society, with its economical miseries and its political
> delirium, a new society is springing up, whose International rule will
> be *Peace*, because its national ruler will be everywhere the same --
> Labour! The pioneer of that new society is the International Working
> Men's Association.
>
>  
>
> Chapter 2: [\[Prussian Occupation of France\]](ch02.htm)
>
>  
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> ^[\[A\]](#Ab){#A}^ A plebiscite is a direct vote by an electorate of a
> nation to decide a question of national importance, such as
> governmental policy. Conducted by Napoleon III in May 1870 the
> questions were so worded that it was impossible to express disapproval
> of the policy of the Second Empire without declaring opposition to all
> democratic reforms for the working class. The sections of the First
> International in France argued that their members should not
> participate in the vote. On the eve of the plebiscite members of the
> Paris Federation were arrested on a charge of conspiring against
> Napoleon III. This pretext was further used by the government to
> launch a campaign of persecution of the members of the International
> throughout France. At the trial of the Paris Federation members (June
> 22 to July 5, 1870), the charge of conspiracy was clearly exposed as
> without any basis. Nevertheless a number of the International's
> members were sentenced to imprisonment based solely on their
> socialistic beliefs. The working class of France responded to these
> political persecutions with mass protests.
>
> ^[\[B\]](#Bb){#B}^ The date when Napoleon III declared war on
> [Prussia](../../../../../glossary/places/p/r.htm#prussia).
>
> ^[\[C\]](#Cb){#C}^ The river Prut, rising in the southwestern Ukraine
> and flowing southeast, forming part of the border between Roumania
> (within an autonomous part of Austria-Hungary) and Russia (later to
> join the river Danube). *Length:* 853 kilometers.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Table of Contents: [The Civil War in France](index.htm)
>
>  
> :::
