Karl Marx: The Civil War in France

> ::: border
> ## The Second Address^[\[2\]](publication-notes.htm#a2)^ September 9, 1870
>
> ### \[Prussian Occupation of France\]
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
>  
>
> In our [first manifesto](ch01.htm) of the 23rd of July, we said:
>
>  
>
> "The death-knell of the Second Empire has already sounded at Paris. It
> will end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not forget that it is
> the governments and the ruling classes of Europe who enabled Louis
> Bonaparte to play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the Restored
> Empire."
>
> Thus, even before war operations had actually set in, we treated the
> Bonapartist bubble as a thing of the past.
>
> If we were not mistaken as to the vitality of the Second Empire, we
> were not wrong in our apprehension lest the German war should "lose
> its strictly defensive character and degenerate into a war against the
> French people." The war of defense ended, in point of fact, with the
> surrender of Louis Bonaparte, the [Sedan
> capitulation](../../../../../glossary/events/s/e.htm#sedan-battle),
> and the proclamation of the republic at Paris. But long before these
> events, the very moment that the utter rottenness of the imperialist
> arms became evident, the Prussian military *camarilla* had resolved
> upon conquest. There lay an ugly obstacle in their way -- \[Prussian\]
> King William's own proclamations at the commencement of the war.
>
> In a speech from the throne to the North German Diet, he had solemnly
> declared to make war upon the emperor of the French and not upon the
> French nation, where he said:
>
> "The Emperor Napoleon having made by land and sea an attack on the
> German nation, which desired and still desires to live in peace with
> the French people, I have assumed the command of the German armies to
> repel his aggression, and I have been led by military events to cross
> the frontiers of France."
>
> Not content to assert the defensive character of the war by the
> statement that he only assumed the command of the German armies "to
> repel aggression\", he added that he was only "led by military events"
> to cross the frontiers of France. A defensive war does, of course, not
> exclude offensive operations, dictated by military events.
>
> Thus, the pious king stood pledged before France and the world to a
> strictly defensive war. How to release him from his solemn pledge? The
> stage managers had to exhibit him as reluctantly yielding to the
> irresistible behest of the German nation. They at once gave the cue to
> the liberal German middle class, with its professors, its capitalists,
> its aldermen, and its penmen. That middle class, which, in its
> struggles for civil liberty, had, from 1846 to 1870, been exhibiting
> an unexampled spectacle of irresolution, incapacity and cowardice,
> felt, of course, highly delighted to bestride the European scene as
> the roaring lion of German patriotism. It re-vindicated its civic
> independence by affecting to force upon the Prussian government the
> secret designs of that same government. It does penance for its
> long-continued, and almost religious, faith in Louis Bonaparte's
> infallibility, but shouting for the dismemberment of the French
> republic. Let us, for a moment, listen to the special pleadings of
> those stout-hearted patriots!
>
> They dare not pretend that the people of Alsace and Lorraine pant for
> the German embrace; quite the contrary. To punish their French
> patriotism, Strasbourg, a town with an independent citadel commanding
> it, has for six days been wantonly and fiendishly bombarded by
> "German" explosive shells, setting it on fire, and killing great
> numbers of its defenceless inhabitants! Yet, the soil of those
> provinces once upon a time belonged to the whilom German
> empire.^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^ Hence, it seems, the soil and the human
> beings grown on it must be confiscated as imprescriptible German
> property. If the map of Europe is to be re-made in the antiquary's
> vein, let us by no means forget that the Elector of Brandenburg, for
> his Prussian dominions, was the vassal of the Polish
> republic.^[\[B\]](#B){#Bb}^
>
> The more knowing patriots, however, require Alsace and the
> German-speaking Lorraine as a "material guarantee" against French
> aggression. As this contemptible plea has bewildered many weak-minded
> people, we are bound to enter more fully upon it.
>
> There is no doubt that the general configuration of Alsace, as
> compared with the opposite bank of the Rhine, and the presence of a
> large fortified town like Strasbourg, about halfway between Basle and
> Germersheim, very much favour a French invasion of South Germany,
> while they offer peculiar difficulties to an invasion of France from
> South Germany. There is, further, no doubt that the addition of Alsace
> and German-speaking Lorraine would give South Germany a much stronger
> frontier, inasmuch as she would then be the master of the crest of the
> Vosges mountains in its whole length, and of the fortresses which
> cover its northern passes. If Metz were annexed as well, France would
> certainly for the moment be deprived of her two principal bases of
> operation against Germany, but that would not prevent her from
> concentrating a fresh one at Nancy or Verdun. While Germany owns
> Coblenz, Mayence [\[i.e., Mainz\]]{.context}, Germersheim, Rastatt,
> and Ulm, all bases of operation against France, and plentifully made
> use of in this war, with what show of fair play can she begrudge
> France Strasbourg and Metz, the only two fortresses of any importance
> she has on that side? Moreover, Strasbourg endangers South Germany
> only while South Germany is a separate power from North Germany. From
> 1792 to 1795, South Germany was never invaded from that direction,
> because Prussia was a party to the war against the French Revolution;
> but as soon as Prussia made a peace of her own^[\[C\]](#C){#Cb}^ in
> 1795, and left the South to shift for itself, the invasions of South
> Germany with Strasbourg as a base began and continued till 1809. The
> fact is, a *united* Germany can always render Strasbourg and any
> French army in Alsace innocuous by concentrating all her troops, as
> was done in the present war, between Saarlouis and Landau, and
> advancing, or accepting battle, on the line of road between Mayence
> and Metz. While the mass of the German troops is stationed there, any
> French army advancing from Strasbourg into South Germany would be
> outflanked, and have its communication threatened. If the present
> campaign has proved anything, it is the facility of invading France
> from Germany.
>
> But, in good faith, is it not altogether an absurdity and an
> anachronism to make military considerations the principle by which the
> boundaries of nations are to be fixed? If this rule were to prevail,
> Austria would still be entitled to Venetia and the line of the
> Minicio, and France to the line of the Rhine, in order to protect
> Paris, which lies certainly more open to an attack from the northeast
> than Berlin does from the southwest. If limits are to be fixed by
> military interests, there will be no end to claims, because every
> military line is necessarily faulty, and may be improved by annexing
> some more outlying territory; and, moreover, they can never be fixed
> finally and fairly, because they always must be imposed by the
> conqueror upon the conquered, and consequently carry within them the
> seed of fresh wars.
>
> Such is the lesson of all history.
>
> Thus with nations as with individuals. To deprive them of the power of
> offence, you must deprive them of the means of defence. You must not
> only garrote, but murder. If every conqueror took "material
> guarantees\" for breaking the sinews of a nation, the first Napoleon
> did so by the [Tilsit
> Treaty](../../../../../glossary/events/t/i.htm#tilsit-treaty), and the
> way he executed it against Prussia and the rest of Germany. Yet, a few
> years later, his gigantic power split like a rotten reed upon the
> German people. What are the "material guarantees" Prussia, in her
> wildest dreams, can or dare imposes upon France, compared to the
> "material guarantees" the first Napoleon had wrenched from herself?
> The result will not prove the less disastrous. History will measure
> its retribution, not by the intensity of the square miles conquered
> from France, but by the intensity of the crime of reviving, in the
> second half of the 19th century, *the policy of conquest!*
>
> But, say the mouthpieces of Teutonic \[German\] patriotism, you must
> not confound Germans with Frenchmen. What *we* want is not glory, but
> safety. The Germans are an essentially peaceful people. In their sober
> guardianship, conquest itself changes from a condition of future war
> into a pledge of perpetual peace. Of course, it is not Germans that
> invaded France in 1792, for the sublime purpose of bayonetting the
> revolution of the 18th century. It is not Germans that befouled their
> hands by the subjugation of Italy, the oppressions of Hungary, and the
> dismemberment of Poland. Their present military system, which divides
> the whole able-bodied male population into two parts -- one standing
> army on service, and another standing army on furlough, both equally
> bound in passive obedience to rulers by divine right -- such a
> military system is, of course, "a material guarantee," for keeping the
> peace and the ultimate goal of civilizing tendencies! In Germany, as
> everywhere else, the sycophants of the powers that be poison the
> popular mind by the incense of mendacious self-praise.
>
> Indignant as they pretend to be at the sight of French fortresses in
> Metz and Strasbourg, those German patriots see no harm in the vast
> system of Moscovite fortifications at Warsaw, Modlin, and Ivangorod
> [\[All strongholds of the Russian Empire\] ]{.inote}. While gloating
> at the terrors of imperialist invasion, they blink at the infamy of
> autocratic tutelage.
>
> As in 1865, promises were exchanged between Gorchakov and Bismarck. As
> Louis Bonaparte flattered himself that the War of 1866, resulting in
> the common exhaustion of Austria and Prussia, would make him the
> supreme arbiter of Germany, so Alexander \[II of Russia\] flattered
> himself that the War of 1870, resulting in the common exhaustion of
> Germany and France, would make him the supreme arbiter of the Western
> continent. As the Second Empire thought the North German Confederation
> incompatible with its existence, so autocratic Russia must think
> herself endangered by a German empire under Prussian leadership. Such
> is the law of the old political system. Within its pale the gain of
> one state is the loss of the other. The tsar's paramount influence
> over Europe roots in his traditional hold on Germany. At a moment when
> in Russia herself volcanic social agencies threaten to shake the very
> base of autocracy, could the tsar afford to bear with such a loss of
> foreign prestige? Already the Moscovite journals repeat the language
> of the Bonapartist journals of the War of 1866. Do the Teuton patriots
> really believe that liberty and peace will be guaranteed to Germany by
> forcing France into the arms of Russia? If the fortune of her arms,
> the arrogance of success, and dynastic intrigue lead Germany to a
> dismemberment of French territory, there will then only remain two
> courses open to her. []{#Db}She must at all risks become the *avowed*
> tool of Russian aggrandizement, or, after some short respite, make
> again ready for another "defensive" war, not one of those new-fangled
> "localized" wars, but a *war of races* -- a war with the Slavonic and
> Roman races.^[\[D\]](#D)^
>
> The German working class have resolutely supported the war, which it
> was not in their power to prevent, as a war for German independence
> and the liberation of France and Europe from that pestilential
> incubus, the Second Empire. It was the German workmen who, together
> with the rural laborers, furnished the sinews and muscles of heroic
> hosts, leaving behind their half-starved families. Decimated by the
> battles abroad, they will be once more decimated by misery at home. In
> their turn, they are now coming forward to ask for "guarantees" --
> guarantees that their immense sacrifices have not been bought in vain,
> that they have conquered liberty, that the victory over the
> imperialist armies will not, as in 1815, be turned into the defeat of
> the German people^[\[E\]](#E){#Eb}^; and, as the first of these
> guarantees, they claim an *honorable peace for France*, and the
> *recognition of the French republic*.
>
> The Central Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workmen's Party
> issued, on September 5, a manifesto, energetically insisting upon
> these guarantees.
>
>  
>
> "We," they say, "protest against the annexation of Alsace and
> Lorraine. And we are conscious of speaking in the name of the German
> working class. In the common interest of France and Germany, in the
> interest of western civilization against eastern barbarism, the German
> workmen will not patiently tolerate the annexation of Alsace and
> Lorraine\.... We shall faithfully stand by our fellow workmen in all
> countries for the common international cause of the proletariat!"
>
> Unfortunately, we cannot feel sanguine of their immediate success. If
> the French workmen amidst peace failed to stop the aggressor, are the
> German workmen more likely to stop the victor amidst the clamour of
> arms? The German workmen's manifesto demands the extradition of Louis
> Bonaparte as a common felon to the French republic. Their rulers are,
> on the contrary, already trying hard to restore him to the
> Tuileries^[\[F\]](#F){#Fb}^ as the best man to ruin France. However
> that may be, history will prove that the German working class are not
> made of the same malleable stuff as the German middle class. They will
> do their duty.
>
> Like them, we hail the advent of the republic in France, but at the
> same time we labor under misgivings which we hope will prove
> groundless. That republic has not subverted the throne, but only taken
> its place, become vacant. It has been proclaimed, not as a social
> conquest, but as a national measure of defence. It is in the hands of
> a Provisional Government composed partly of notorious
> [Orleanists](../../../../../glossary/orgs/o/r.htm#orleanists), partly
> of middle class republicans, upon some of whom the insurrection of
> [June
> 1848](../../../../../glossary/events/j/u.htm#june-insurrection-1848)
> has left its indelible stigma. The division of labor amongst the
> members of that government looks awkward. The Orleanists have seized
> the strongholds of the army and the police, while to the professed
> republicans have fallen the talking departments. Some of their acts go
> far to show that they have inherited from the empire, not only ruins,
> but also its dread of the working class. If eventual impossibilities
> are, in wild phraseology, promised in the name of the republic, is it
> not with a view to prepare the cry for a "possible" government? Is the
> republic, by some of its middle class undertakers, not intended to
> serve as a mere stop-gap and bridge over an Orleanist restoration?
>
> The French working class moves, therefore, under circumstances of
> extreme difficulty. Any attempt at upsetting the new government in the
> present crisis, when the enemy is almost knocking at the doors of
> Paris, would be a desperate folly. The French workmen must perform
> their duties as citizens; but, at the same time, they must not allow
> themselves to be swayed by the national *souvenirs* of 1792, as the
> French peasant allowed themselves to be deluded by the national
> *souvenirs* of the First Empire. They have not to recapitulate the
> past, but to build up the future. Let them calmly and resolutely
> improve the opportunities of republican liberty, for the work of their
> own class organization. It will gift them with fresh herculean powers
> for the regeneration of France, and our common task -- the
> emancipation of labor. Upon their energies and wisdom hinges the fate
> of the republic.
>
> The English workmen have already taken measures to overcome, by a
> wholesome pressure from without, the reluctance of their government to
> recognize the French republic.^[\[G\]](#G){#Gb}^ The present
> dilatoriness of the British government is probably intended to atone
> for the Anti-Jacobin war \[1792\] and the former indecent haste in
> sanctioning the coup d'etat.^[\[H\]](#H){#Hb}^ The English workmen
> call also upon their government to oppose by all its power the
> dismemberment of France, which a part of the English press is
> shameless enough to howl for. It is the same press that for 20 years
> deified Louis Bonaparte as the providence of Europe, that frantically
> cheered on the slaveholders' rebellion.^[\[I\]](#I){#Ib}^ Now, as
> then, it drudges for the slaveholder.
>
> Let the sections of the International Working Men's Association in
> every country stir the working classes to action. If they forsake
> their duty, if they remain passive, the present tremendous war will be
> but the harbinger of still deadlier international feuds, and lead in
> every nation to a renewed triumph over the workman by the lords of the
> sword, of the soil, and of capital.
>
> Vive la Republique!
>
>  
>
> Chapter 3: [\[France Capitulates & the Government of
> Thiers\]](ch03.htm)
>
>  
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> ^[\[A\]](#Ab){#A}^ The Holy Roman Empire of the German nation, founded
> in the 10th century and constituting a union of feudal principalities
> and free towns which recognized the supreme of authority of an
> emperor.
>
> ^[\[B\]](#Bb){#B}^ In 1618 the Electorate of Brandenburg united with
> the Prussian Dutchy (East Prussia), which had been formed early in the
> 16th century out of the Teutonic Order possessions and which was still
> a feudal vessel of the Kingdom of Poland. The Elector of Brandenburg,
> a Prussian Duke at the same time, remained a Polish vassal until 1657
> when, taking advantage of Poland's difficulties in the war against
> Sweden, he secured sovereign rights to Prussian possessions.
>
> ^[\[C\]](#Cb){#C}^ The Treaty of Basle concluded by Prussia, a member
> of the first anti-French coalition of the European states, with the
> French Republic on April 5, 1795.
>
> ^[\[D\]](#Db){#D}^ Marx's clear assessment of Germany's historical
> position took some time to completely fulfill itself, but when it did
> Germany's war on races occurred in full force.
>
> ^[\[E\]](#Eb){#E}^ Marx refers here to the triumph of feudal reaction
> in Germany after the downfall of Napoleon. The feudalist unity of
> Germany was restored, the feudal-monarchist system was established in
> the German states, which retained all the privileges of the nobility
> and intensified the semi-feudal exploitation of the peasantry.
>
> ^[\[F\]](#Fb){#F}^ The *Tuileries Palace* in Paris, a residence of
> Napoleon III.
>
> ^[\[G\]](#Gb){#G}^ Campaigns by English workers to secure recognition
> of the French Republic proclaimed on Sept. 4, 1870. On Sept. 5 a
> series of meetings and demonstrations began in London and other big
> cities, at which resolutions and petitions were passed demanding that
> the British Government immediately recognize the French Republic. The
> General Council of the First International took a direct part in the
> organization of this movement.
>
> ^[\[H\]](#Hb){#H}^ Marx is alluding to England's active part in
> forming a coalition of feudal monarchies which started a war against
> revolutionary France in 1792, and also to the fact that the English
> oligarchy was the first in Europe to recognize the Bonapartist regime
> in France, established as a result of the coup d'etat, by Louis
> Bonaparte on December 2, 1851.
>
> ^[\[I\]](#Ib){#I}^ During the American Civil War (1861-65) between the
> industrial North and the slave-owning South, the English bourgeois
> press took the side of the South.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Table of Contents: [The Civil War in France](index.htm)
>
>  
> :::
