Karl Marx: The Civil War in France

> ::: border
> ## The Third Address May, 1871
>
> ### \[Paris Workers' Revolution & Thiers' Reactionary Massacres\]
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
>  
>
> Armed Paris was the only serious obstacle in the way of the
> counter-revolutionary conspiracy. Paris was, therefore, to be
> disarmed.
>
> On this point, the Bordeaux Assembly \[National Assembly\] was
> sincerity itself. If the roaring rant of its Rurals had not been
> audible enough, the surrender of Paris by Thiers to the tender mercies
> of the triumvirate of Vinoy the *Decembriseur*, Valentin the
> Bonapartist *gendarme*, and Aurelles de Paladine the Jesuit general,
> would have cut off even the last subterfuge of doubt.
>
> But while insultingly exhibiting the true purpose of the disarmament
> of Paris, the conspirators asked her to lay down her arms on a pretext
> which was the most glaring, the most barefaced of lies. The artillery
> of the Paris National Guard, said Thiers, belonged to the state, and
> to the state it must be returned. The fact was this: From the very day
> of the capitulation, by which Bismarck's prisoners had signed the
> surrender of France, but reserved to themselves a numerous bodyguard
> for the express purpose of cowing Paris, Paris stood on the watch. The
> National Guard reorganized themselves and entrusted their supreme
> control to a Central Committee elected by their whole body, save some
> fragments of the old Bonapartist formations. On the eve of the
> entrance of the Prussians into Paris, the Central Committee took
> measures for the removal to Montmartre, Belleville, and La Villette,
> of the cannon and *mitrailleuses* treacherously abandoned by the
> *capitulards* in and about the very quarters the Prussians were to
> occupy. That artillery had been furnished by the subscriptions of the
> National Guard. As their private property, it was officially
> recognized in the capitulation of January 28, and on that very title
> exempted from the general surrender, into the hands of the conqueror,
> or arms belonging to the government. And Thiers was so utterly
> destitute of even the flimsiest pretext for initiating the war against
> Paris, that he had to resort to the flagrant lie of the artillery of
> the National Guard being state property!
>
> The seizure of her artillery was evidently but to serve as the
> preliminary to the general disarmament of Paris, and, therefore, of
> the Revolution of September 4. But that revolution had become the
> legal status of France. The republic, its work, was recognized by the
> conqueror in the terms of the capitulation. After the capitulation, it
> was acknowledged by all foreign powers, and in its name, the National
> Assembly had been summoned. The Paris working men's revolution of
> September 4 was the only legal title of the National Assembly seated
> at Bordeaux, and of its executive. Without it, the National Assembly
> would at once have to give way to the *Corps Legislatif* elected in
> 1869 by universal suffrage under French, not under Prussian, rule, and
> forcibly dispersed by the arm of the revolution. Thiers and his
> ticket-of-leave men would have had to capitulate for safe conducts
> signed by Louis Bonaparte, to save them from a voyage to
> Cayenne^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^. The National Assembly, with its power of
> attorney to settle the terms of peace with Prussia, was but an
> incident of that revolution, the true embodiment of which was still
> armed Paris, which had initiated it, undergone for it a five-months'
> siege, with its horrors of famine, and made her prolonged resistance,
> despite Trochu's plan, the basis of an obstinate war of defence in the
> provinces. And Paris was now either to lay down her arms at the
> insulting behest of the rebellious slaveholders of Bordeaux, and
> acknowledge that her Revolution of September 4 meant nothing but a
> simple transfer of power from Louis Bonaparte to his royal rivals; or
> she had to stand forward as the self-sacrificing champion of France,
> whose salvation from ruin and whose regeneration were impossible
> without the revolutionary overthrow of the political and social
> conditions that had engendered the Second Empire, and under its
> fostering care, matured into utter rottenness. Paris, emaciated by a
> five-months' famine, did not hesitate one moment. She heroically
> resolved to run all the hazards of a resistance against French
> conspirators, even with Prussian cannon frowning upon her from her own
> forts. Still, in its abhorrence of the civil war into which Paris was
> to be goaded, the Central Committee continued to persist in a merely
> defensive attitude, despite the provocations of the Assembly, the
> usurpations of the Executive, and the menacing concentration of troops
> in and around Paris.
>
> Thiers opened the civil war by sending Vinoy, at the head of a
> multitude of *sergents-de-ville*, and some regiments of the line, upon
> a nocturnal expedition against Montmartre, there to seize, by
> surprise, the artillery of the National Guard. It is well known how
> this attempt broke down before the resistance of the National Guard
> and the fraternization of the line with the people. Aurelles de
> Paldine had printed beforehand his bulletin of victory, and Thiers
> held ready the placards announcing his measures of coup d'etat. Now
> these had to be replaced by Thiers' appeals, imparting his magnanimous
> resolve to leave the National Guard in the possession of their arms,
> with which, he said, he felt sure they would rally round the
> government against the rebels. Out of 300,000 National guards, only
> 300 responded to this summons to rally around little Thiers against
> themselves. The glorious working men's Revolution of March 18 took
> undisputed sway of Paris. The Central Committee was its provisional
> government. Europe seemed, for a moment, to doubt whether its recent
> sensational performances of state and war had any reality in them, or
> whether they were the dreams of a long bygone past.
>
> From March 18 to the entrance of the Versailles troops into Paris, the
> proletarian revolution remained so free from the acts of violence in
> which the revolutions -- and still more the counter-revolutions -- of
> the "better classes" abound, that no facts were left to its opponents
> to cry out about, but the executions of Generals Lecomte and Clement
> Thomas, and the affair of the Place Vendome.
>
> One of the Bonapartist officers engaged in the nocturnal attempt
> against Montmartre, General Lecomte, had four times ordered the 81st
> line regiment to fire at an unarmed gathering in the Place Pigalle,
> and on their refusal fiercely insulted them. Instead of shooting women
> and children, his own men shot him. The inveterate habits acquired by
> the soldiery under the training of the enemies of the working class
> are, of course, not likely to change the very moment these soldiers
> change sides. The same men executed Clement Thomas.
>
> "General" Clement Thomas, a malcontent ex-quartermaster-sergeant, had,
> in the latter times of Louis Philippe's reign, enlisted at the office
> of the republican newspaper *Le National*, there to serve in the
> double capacity of responsible man-of-straw (*gerant responsable*) and
> of duelling bully to that very combative journal. After the February
> Revolution, the men of the *National* having got into power, they
> metamorphosed this old quarter-master-sergeant into a general on the
> eve of the butchery of June -- of which he, like Jules Favre, was one
> of the sinister plotters, and became one of the most dastardly
> executioners. Then he and his generalship disappeared for a long time,
> to again rise to the surface on November 1, 1870. The day before, the
> Government of National Defence, caught at the Hotel de Ville, had
> solemnly pledged their parole to Blanqui, Flourens, and other
> representatives of the working class, to abdicate their usurped power
> into the hands of a commune to be freely elected by
> Paris.^[\[B\]](#B){#Bb}^ Instead of keeping their word, they let loose
> on Paris the Bretons of Trochu, who now replaced the Corsicans of
> Bonaparte.^[\[C\]](#C){#Cb}^ General Tamisier alone, refusing to sully
> his name by such a breach of faith, resigned the
> commandership-in-chief of the National Guard, and in his place Clement
> Thomas for once became again a general. During the whole of his tenure
> of command, he made war, not upon the Prussians, but upon the Paris
> National Guard. He prevented their general armament, pitted the
> bourgeois battalions against the working men's battalions, weeded out
> officers hostile to Trochu's "plan," and disbanded, under the stigma
> of cowardice, the very same proletarian battalions whose heroism has
> now astonished their most inveterate enemies. Clement Thomas felt
> quite proud of having reconquered his June pre-eminence as the
> personal enemy of the working class of Paris. Only a few days before
> March 18, he laid before the War Minister, Leflo, a plan of his own
> for "finishing off *la fine fleur* \[the cream\] of the Paris
> canaille." After Vinoy's rout, he must needs appear upon the scene of
> action in the quality of an amateur spy. The Central Committee and the
> Paris working men were as much responsible for the killing of Clement
> Thomas and Lecomte as the Princess of Wales for the fate of the people
> crushed to death on the day of her entrance into London.
>
> The massacre of unarmed citizens in Place Vendome is a myth which M.
> Thiers and the Rurals persistently ignored in the Assembly, entrusting
> its propagation exclusively to the servants' hall of European
> journalism. "The men of order," the reactionists of Paris, trembled at
> the victory of March 18. To them, it was the signal of popular
> retribution at last arriving. The ghosts of the victims assassinated
> at their hands from the days of June 1848, down to January 22,
> 1871,^[\[D\]](#D){#Db}^ arose before their faces. Their panic was
> their only punishment. Even the *sergents-de-ville*, instead of being
> disarmed and locked up, as ought to have been done, had the gates of
> Paris flung open wide for their safe retreat to Versailles. The men of
> order were left not only unharmed, but allowed to rally and quietly
> seize more than one stronghold in the very centre of Paris. This
> indulgence of the Central Committee -- this magnanimity of the armed
> working men -- so strangely at variance with the habits of the "Party
> of Order," the latter misinterpreted as mere symptoms of conscious
> weakness. Hence their silly plan to try, under the cloak of an unarmed
> demonstration, what Vinoy had failed to perform with his cannon and
> *mitrailleuses*. On March 22, a riotous mob of swells started from the
> quarters of luxury, all the *petits creves* in their ranks, and at
> their head the notorious familiars of the empire -- the Heeckeren,
> Coetlogon, Henri de Pene, etc. Under the cowardly pretence of a
> pacific demonstration, this rabble, secretly armed with the weapons of
> the bravo [\[i.e. hired assassin\]]{.context}, fell into marching
> order, ill-treated and disarmed the detached patrols and sentries of
> the National Guard they met with on their progress, and, on debouching
> from the Rue de la Paix, with the cry of "Down with the Central
> Committee! Down with the assassins! The National Assembly forever!"
> attempted to break through the line drawn up there, and thus to carry
> by surprise the headquarters of the National Guard in the Place
> Vendome. In reply to their pistol-shots, the regular *sommations* (the
> French equivalent of the English Riot Act)^[\[E\]](#E){#Eb}^ were
> made, and, proving ineffective, fire was commanded by the general
> \[Bergeret\] of the National Guard. One volley dispersed into wild
> flight the silly coxcombs, who expected that the mere exhibition of
> their "respectability" would have the same effect upon the Revolution
> of Paris as Joshua's trumpets upon the walls of Jericho. The runaways
> left behind them two National Guards killed, nine severely wounded
> (among them a member of the Central Committee \[Maljournal\]), and the
> whole scene of their exploit strewn with revolvers, daggers, and
> sword-canes, in evidence of the "unarmed" character of their "pacific"
> demonstration. When, on June 13, 1849, the National Guard made a
> really pacific demonstration in protest against the felonious assault
> of French troops upon Rome, Changarnier, then general of the Party of
> Order, was acclaimed by the National Assembly, and especially by M.
> Thiers, as the savior of society, for having launched his troops from
> all sides upon these unarmed men, to shoot and sabre them down, and to
> trample them under their horses' feet. Paris, then was placed under a
> state of siege. Dufaure hurried through the Assembly new laws of
> repression. New arrests, new proscriptions -- a new reign of terror
> set in. But the lower orders manage these things otherwise. The
> Central Committee of 1871 simply ignored the heroes of the "pacific
> demonstration\"; so much so, that only two days later, they were
> enabled to muster under Admiral Saisset, for that *armed*
> demonstration, crowned by the famous stampede to Versailles. In their
> reluctance to continue the civil war opened by Thiers' burglarious
> attempt on Montmartre, the Central Committee made themselves, this
> time, guilty of a decisive mistake in not at once marching upon
> Versailles, then completely helpless, and thus putting an end to the
> conspiracies of Thiers and his Rurals. Instead of this, the Party of
> Order was again allowed to try its strength at the ballot box, on
> March 26, the day of the election of the Commune. Then, in the
> *mairies* of Paris, they exchanged bland words of conciliation with
> their too generous conquerors, muttering in their hearts solemn vows
> to exterminate them in due time.
>
> Now, look at the reverse of the medal. Thiers opened his second
> campaign against Paris in the beginning of April. The first batch of
> Parisian prisoners brought into Versailles was subjected to revolting
> atrocities, while Ernest Picard, with his hands in his trousers'
> pockets, strolled about jeering them, and while Mesdames Thiers and
> Favre, in the midst of their ladies of honor (?) applauded, from the
> balcony, the outrages of the Versailles mob. The captured soldiers of
> the line were massacred in cold blood; our brave friend, General
> Duval, the iron-founder, was shot without any form of trial. Galifet,
> the kept man of his wife, so notorious for her shameless exhibitions
> at the orgies of the Second Empire, boasted in a proclamation of
> having commanded the murder of a small troop of National Guards, with
> their captain and lieutenant, surprised and disarmed by his Chasseurs.
> Vinoy, the runaway, was appointed by Thiers, Grand Cross of the Legion
> of Honor, for his general order to shoot down every soldier of the
> line taken in the ranks of the Federals. Desmaret, the Gendarme, was
> decorated for the treacherous butcher-like chopping in pieces of the
> high-souled and chivalrous Flourens, who had saved the heads of the
> Government of Defence on October 31, 1870.^[\[F\]](#F){#Fb}^ "The
> encouraging particulars" of his assassination were triumphantly
> expatiated upon by Thiers in the National Assembly. With the elated
> vanity of a parliamentary Tom Thumb permitted to play the part of a
> Tamerlane, he denied the rebels the right of neutrality for
> ambulances. Nothing more horrid than that monkey allowed for a time to
> give full fling to his tigerish instincts, as foreseen by
> Voltaire.\[*Candide*, Ch. 22\](See [news articles](news.htm))
>
> After the decree of the Commune of April 7, ordering reprisals and
> declaring it to be the duty "to protect Paris against the cannibal
> exploits of the Versailles banditti, and to demand an eye for an eye,
> a tooth for a tooth," ^[\[G\]](#G){#Gb}^ Thiers did not stop the
> barbarous treatment of prisoners, moreover, insulting them in his
> bulletins as follows: "Never have more degraded countenances of a
> degraded democracy met the afflicted gazes of honest men" -- honest,
> like Thiers himself and his ministerial ticket-of-leave men. Still,
> the shooting of prisoners was suspended for a time. Hardly, however,
> had Thiers and his Decembrist generals [\[of the December 2, 1851 coup
> by Louis Bonaparte\]]{.context} become aware that the Communal decree
> of reprisals was but an empty threat, that even their gendarme spies
> caught in Paris under the disguise of National Guards, that even
> *sergents-de-ville*, taken with incendiary shells upon them, were
> spared -- when the wholesale shooting of prisoners was resumed and
> carried on uninterruptedly to the end. Houses to which National Guards
> had fled were surrounded by gendarmes, inundated with petroleum (which
> here occurs for the first time in this war), and then set fire to, the
> charred corpses being afterwards brought out by the ambulance of the
> Press at the Ternes. Four National Guards having surrendered to a
> troop of mounted Chasseurs at Belle Epine, on April 25, were
> afterwards shot down, one after another, by the captain, a worthy man
> of Gallifet's. One of his four victims, left for dead, Scheffer,
> crawled back to the Parisian outposts, and deposed to this fact before
> a commission of the Commune. When Tolain interpellated the War
> Minister upon the report of this commission, the Rurals drowned his
> voice and forbade Leflo to answer. It would be an insult to their
> "glorious" army to speak of its deeds. The flippant tone in which
> Thiers' bulletin announced the bayoneting of the Federals, surprised
> asleep at Moulin Saquet, and the wholesale fusillades at Clamart
> shocked the nerves even of the not over-sensitive London *Times*. But
> it would be ludicrous today to attempt recounting the merely
> preliminary atrocities committed by the bombarders of Paris and the
> fomenters of a slaveholders' rebellion protected by foreign invasion.
> Amidst all these horrors, Thiers, forgetful of his parliamentary
> laments on the terrible responsibility weighing down his dwarfish
> shoulders, boasts in his bulletins that *l'Assemblee siege
> paisiblement* (the Assembly continues meeting in peace), and proves by
> his constant carousals, now with Decembrist generals, now with German
> princes, that his digestion is not troubled in the least, not even by
> the ghosts of Lecomte and Clement Thomas.
>
>  
>
> Chapter 5: [\[The Paris Commune\]](ch05.htm)
>
>  
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> ^[\[A\]](#Ab){#A}^ A town in French Guiana (Northern South America),
> penal settlement and place of exile.
>
> ^[\[B\]](#Bb){#B}^ On October 31, 1870, upon the receipt of news that
> the Government of National Defense had decided to start negotiations
> with the Prussians, the Paris workers and revolutionary sections of
> the National Guard rose up in revolt. They seized the town hall and
> set up their revolutionary government -- the Committee of Public
> Safety, headed by Blanqui. Under pressure from the workers the
> Government of National Defense promised to resign and schedule
> national elections to the Commune for November 1. The government then,
> with the aid of some loyal battalions of the National Guard, seized
> the town hall by force of arms and re-established its domination.
>
> ^[\[C\]](#Cb){#C}^ *Bretons* -- Breton Mobile Guard which Trochu used
> as gendarmes to put down the revolutionary movement in Paris.\
> *Corsicans* -- constituted a considerable part of the gendarmes corps
> during the Second Empire.
>
> ^[\[D\]](#Db){#D}^ On January 22, 1871, the Paris proletariat and the
> National Guards held a revolutionary demonstration initiated by the
> Blanquists. They demanded the overthrow of the government and the
> establishment of a Commune. By order of the Government of National
> Defense, the Breton Mobile Guard, which was defending the town hall,
> opened fire on the demonstrators. After massacring the workers, the
> government began preparations to surrender Paris to the Germans.
>
> ^[\[E\]](#Eb){#E}^ Sommations (a preliminary demand to disburse) --
> under the laws of most bourgeois states, this demand is repeated three
> times, following which the armed police are entitled to resort to
> force. *The Riot Act* was introduced in England in 1715. It prohibited
> "rebel gatherings" of more than 12 people in a group, giving the
> authorities the right to use force if the crowd did not disperse
> within an hour after the reading out of the sommations three times.
>
> ^[\[F\]](#Fb){#F}^ On October 31, Flourens prevented the members of
> the Government of National Defense from being shot, as had been
> demanded by one of the insurrectionists.
>
> ^[\[G\]](#Gb){#G}^ A reference to the decree on hostages adopted by
> the Commune on April 5, 1871. (Marx gives the date of its publication
> in the English press.) Under this decree, all persons found guilty of
> being in contact with Versailles were declared hostages. By this
> decree the Commune sought to prevent Communards from being shot by the
> Versaillists.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Table of Contents: [The Civil War in France](index.htm)
>
>  
> :::
