Karl Marx: The Civil War in France

> ::: border
> ## The Third Address May, 1871
>
> ### \[The Fall of Paris\]
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
>  
>
> The first attempt of the slaveholders' conspiracy to put down Paris by
> getting the Prussians to occupy it was frustrated by Bismarck's
> refusal.
>
> The second attempt, that of March 18, ended in the rout of the army
> and the flight to Versailles of the government, which ordered the
> whole administration to break up and follow in its track.
>
> By the semblance of peace negotiations with Paris, Thiers found the
> time to prepare for war against it. But where to find an army? The
> remnants of the line regiments were weak in number and unsafe in
> character. His urgent appeal to the provinces to succour Versailles,
> by their National Guards and volunteers, met with a flat refusal.
> Brittany alone furnished a handful of *Chouans*^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^
> fighting under a white flag, every one of them wearing on his breast
> the heart of Jesus in white cloth, and shouting "Vive le Roi!" (Long
> live the King!)
>
> Thiers was, therefore, compelled to collect, in hot haste, a motley
> crew, composed of sailors, marines, Pontifical Zouaves, Valentin's
> gendarmes, and Pietri's *sergents-de-ville* and *mouchards*. This
> army, however, would have been ridiculously ineffective without the
> instalments of imperialist war prisoners, which Bismarck granted in
> numbers just sufficient to keep the civil war a-going, and keep the
> Versailles government in abject dependence on Prussia. During the war
> itself, the Versailles police had to look after the Versailles army,
> while the gendarmes had to drag it on by exposing themselves at all
> posts of danger. The forts which fell were not taken, but bought. The
> heroism of the Federals convinced Thiers that the resistance of Paris
> was not to be broken by his own strategic genius and the bayonets at
> his disposal.
>
> Meanwhile, his relations with the provinces became more and more
> difficult. Not one single address of approval came in to gladden
> Thiers and his Rurals. Quite the contrary. Deputations and addresses
> demanding, in a tone anything but respectful, conciliation with Paris
> on the basis of the unequivocal recognition of the republic, the
> acknowledgment of the Communal liberties, and the dissolution of the
> National Assembly, whose mandate was extinct, poured in from all
> sides, and in such numbers that Dufaure, Thiers' Minister of Justice,
> in his circular of April 23 to the public prosecutors, commanded them
> to treat "the cry of conciliation" as a crime! In regard, however, of
> the hopeless prospect held out by his campaign, Thiers resolved to
> shift his tactics by ordering, all over the country, municipal
> elections to take place on April 30, on the basis of the new municipal
> law dictated by himself to the National Assembly. What with the
> intrigues of his prefects, what with police intimidation, he felt
> quite sanguine of imparting, by the verdict of the provinces, to the
> National Assembly that moral power it had never possessed, and of
> getting at last from the provinces the physical force required for the
> conquest of Paris.
>
> His bandit-warfare against Paris, exalted in his own bulletins, and
> the attempts of his ministers at the establishment, throughout France,
> of a reign of terror, Thiers was from the beginning anxious to
> accompany with a little by-play of conciliation, which had to serve
> more than one purpose. It was to dupe the provinces, to inveigle the
> middle class elements in Paris, and above all, to afford the professed
> republicans in the National Assembly the opportunity of hiding their
> treason against Paris behind their faith in Thiers.
>
> On March 21, when still without an army, he had declared to the
> Assembly: "Come what may, I will not send an army to Paris."
>
> On March 27, he rose again: "I have found the republic an accomplished
> fact, and I am firmly resolved to maintain it."
>
> In reality, he put down the revolution at Lyons and
> Marseilles^[\[B\]](#B){#Bb}^ in the name of the republic, while the
> roars of his Rurals drowned the very mention of his name at
> Versailles. After this exploit, he toned down the "accomplished fact"
> into a hypothetical fact. The Orleans princes, whom he had cautiously
> warned off Bordeaux, were now, in flagrant breach of the law,
> permitted to intrigue at Dreux. The concessions held out by Thiers in
> his interminable interviews with the delegates from Paris and the
> provinces, although constantly varied in tone and color, according to
> time and circumstances, did in fact never come to more than the
> prospective restriction of revenge to the "handful of criminals
> implicated in the murder of Lecomte and Clement Thomas," on the
> well-understood premise that Paris and France were unreservedly to
> accept M. Thiers himself as the best of possible Republics, as he, in
> 1830, had done with Louis Philippe, and in 1849 under Louis
> Bonaparte's presidency. While out of office, he made a fortune by
> pleading for the Paris capitalists, and made political capital by
> pleading against the laws he had himself originated. He now hurried
> through the National Assembly not only a set of repressive laws which
> were, after the fall of Paris, to extirpate the last remnants of
> republican liberty in France; he foreshadowed the fate of Paris by
> abridging what was for him the too slow procedure of
> courts-martial,^[\[C\]](#C){#Cb}^ and by a new-fangled, Draconic code
> of deportation. The Revolution of 1848, abolishing the penalty of
> death for political crimes, had replaced it by deportation. Louis
> Bonaparte did not dare, at least not in theory, to re-establish the
> regime of the guillotine. The Rural Assembly, not yet bold enough even
> to hint that the Parisians were not rebels, but assassins, had
> therefore to confine its prospective vengeance against Paris to
> Dufaure's new code of deportation. Under all these circumstances,
> Thiers himself could not have gone on with his comedy of conciliation,
> had it not, as he intended it to do, drawn forth shrieks of rage from
> the Rurals, whose ruminating mind did neither understand the play, nor
> its necessities of hypocrisy, tergiversation, and procrastination.
>
> In sight of the impending municipal elections of April 30, Thiers
> enacted one of his great conciliation scenes on April 27. Amidst a
> flood of sentiment rhetoric, he exclaimed from the tribune of the
> Assembly:
>
> "There exists no conspiracy against the republic but that of Paris,
> which compels us to shed French blood. I repeat it again and again.
> Let those impious arms fall from the hands which hold them, and
> chastisement will be arrested at once by an act of peace excluding
> only the small number of criminals."
>
> To the violent interruption of the Rurals, he replied:
>
> "Gentlemen, tell me, I implore you, am I wrong? Do you really regret
> that I could have stated the truth that the criminals are only a
> handful? Is it not fortunate in the midst of our misfortunes that
> those who have been capable to shed the blood of Clement Thomas and
> General Lecomte are but rare exceptions?"
>
> France, however, turned a deaf ear to what Thiers flattered himself to
> be a parliamentary siren's song. Out of 700,000 municipal councillors
> returned by the 35,000 communes still left to France, the united
> Legitimists, Orleanists, and Bonapartists did not carry 8,000.
>
> The supplementary elections which followed were still more decidedly
> hostile.
>
> Thus, instead of getting from the provinces the badly-needed physical
> force, the National Assembly lost even its last claim to moral force,
> that of being the expression of the universal suffrage of the country.
> To complete the discomfiture, the newly-chosen municipal councils of
> all the cities of France openly threatened the usurping Assembly at
> Versailles with a counter assembly at Bordeaux.
>
> Then the long-expected moment of decisive action had at last come for
> Bismarck. He peremptorily summoned Thiers to send to Frankfort
> plenipotentiaries for the definitive settlement of peace. In humble
> obedience to the call of his master, Thiers hastened to despatch his
> trusty Jules Favre, backed by Pouyer-Quertier. Pouyer-Quertier, an
> "eminent" Rouen cotton-spinner, a fervent and even servile partisan of
> the Second Empire, had never found any fault with it save its
> commercial treaty with England,^[\[D\]](#D){#Db}^ prejudicial to his
> own shop-interest. Hardly installed at Bordeaux as Thiers' Minister of
> Finance, he denounced that "unholy" treaty, hinted at its near
> abrogation, and had even the effrontery to try, although in vain
> (having counted without Bismarck), the immediate enforcement of the
> old protective duties against Alsace, where, he said, no previous
> international treaties stood in the way. This man who considered
> counter-revolution as a means to put down wages at Rouen, and the
> surrender of French provinces as a means to bring up the price of his
> wares in France, was he not *the one* predestined to be picked out by
> Thiers as the helpmate of Jules Favre in his last and crowning
> treason?
>
> On the arrival at Frankfurt of this exquisite pair of
> plenipotentiaries, bully Bismarck at once met them with the imperious
> alternative: Either the restoration of the empire or the unconditional
> acceptance of my own peace terms! These terms included a shortening of
> the intervals in which war indemnity was to be paid and the continued
> occupation of the Paris forts by Prussian troops until Bismarck should
> feel satisfied with the state of things in France; Prussia thus being
> recognized as the supreme arbiter in internal French politics! In
> return for this, he offered to let loose for the extermination of
> Paris the Bonapartist army, and to lend them the direct assistance of
> Emperor William's troops. He pledged his good faith by making payment
> of the first installment of the indemnity dependent on the
> "pacification" of Paris. Such bait was, of course, eagerly swallowed
> by Thiers and his plenipotentiaries. They signed the treaty of peace
> on May 10 and had it endorsed by the Versailles Assembly on the 18th.
>
> In the interval between the conclusion of peace and the arrival of the
> Bonapartist prisoners, Thiers felt the more bound to resume his comedy
> of conciliation, as his republican tools stood in sore need of a
> pretext for blinking their eyes at the preparations for the carnage of
> Paris. As late as May 18, he replied to a deputation of middle-class
> conciliators --
>
> "Whenever the insurgents will make up their minds for capitulation,
> the gates of Paris shall be flung wide open during a week for all
> except the murderers of Generals Clement Thomas and Lecomte."
>
> A few days afterwards, when violently interpellated on these promises
> by the Rurals, he refused to enter into any explanations; not,
> however, without giving them this significant hint:
>
> "I tell you there are impatient men amongst you, men who are in too
> great a hurry. They must have another eight days; at the end of these
> eight days there will be no more danger, and the task will be
> proportionate to their courage and to their capacities."
>
> As soon as MacMahon was able to assure him, that he could shortly
> enter Paris, Thiers declared to the Assembly that
>
> "he would enter Paris with the *laws* in his hands, and demand a full
> expiation from the wretches who had sacrificed the lives of soldiers
> and destroyed public monuments."
>
> As the moment of decision drew near, he said -- to the Assembly, "I
> shall be pitiless!" -- to Paris, that it was doomed; and to his
> Bonapartist bandits, that they had state licence to wreak vengeance
> upon Paris to their hearts' content.
>
> At last, when treachery had opened the gates of Paris to General
> Douai, on May 21, Thiers, on the 22nd, revealed to the Rurals the
> "goal" of his conciliation comedy, which they had so obstinately
> persisted in not understanding.
>
> "I told you a few days ago that we were approaching *our goal*; today
> I come to tell you *the goal* is reached. The victory of order,
> justice, and civilization is at last won!"
>
> So it was. The civilization and justice of bourgeois order comes out
> in its lurid light whenever the slaves and drudges of that order rise
> against their masters. Then this civilization and justice stand forth
> as undisguised savagery and lawless revenge. Each new crisis in the
> class struggle between the appropriator and the producer brings out
> this fact more glaringly. Even the atrocities of the bourgeois in June
> 1848 vanish before the infamy of 1871. The self-sacrificing heroism
> with which the population of Paris -- men, women, and children --
> fought for eight days after the entrance of the Versaillese, reflects
> as much the grandeur of their cause, as the infernal deeds of the
> soldiery reflect the innate spirit of that civilization, indeed, the
> great problem of which is how to get rid of the heaps of corpses it
> made after the battle was over!
>
> To find a parallel for the conduct of Thiers and his bloodhounds we
> must go back to the times of Sulla and the two Triumvirates of
> Rome.^[\[E\]](#E){#Eb}^ The same wholesale slaughter in cold blood;
> the same disregard, in massacre, of age and sex, the same system of
> torturing prisoners; the same proscriptions, but this time of a whole
> class; the same savage hunt after concealed leaders, lest one might
> escape; the same denunciations of political and private enemies; the
> same indifference for the butchery of entire strangers to the feud.
>
> There is but this difference: that the Romans had no *mitrailleuses*
> for the despatch, in the lump, of the proscribed, and that they had
> not "the law in their hands," nor on their lips the cry of
> "civilization."
>
> And after those horrors look upon the other still more hideous face of
> the bourgeois civilization as described by its own press!
>
> "With stray shots," writes the Paris correspondent of a London Tory
> paper, "still ringing in the distance, and unintended wounded wretches
> dying amid the tombstones of Pere la Chaise -- with 6,000
> terror-stricken insurgents wandering in an agony of despair in the
> labyrinth of the catacombs, and wretches hurried through the streets
> to be shot down in scores by the *mitrailleuse* -- it is revolting to
> see the cafes filled with the votaries of absinthe, billiards, and
> dominoes; female profligacy perambulating the boulevards, and the
> sound of revelry disturbing the night from the *cabinets particuliers*
> of fashionable restaurants."
>
> M. Edouard Herve writes in the *Journal de Paris*, a Versaillist
> journal pressed by the Commune:
>
> "The way in which the population of Paris \[!\] manifested its
> satisfaction yesterday was rather more than frivolous, and we fear it
> will grow worse as time progresses. Paris has now a *fete* day
> appearance, which is sadly out of place; and, unless we are to be
> called the *Parisiens de la decadence*, this sort of thing must come
> to an end."
>
> And then he quotes the passage from Tacitus:
>
> "Yet, on the morrow of that horrible struggle, even before it was
> completely over, Rome -- degraded and corrupt -- began once more to
> wallow in the voluptuous slough which was destroying its body and
> pulling its soul -- *alibi proelia et vulnera, alibi balnea
> popinoeque* \[here fights and wounds, there baths and restaurants\]."
>
> M. Herve only forgets to say that the "population of Paris" he speaks
> of is but the population of the Paris of M. Thiers -- the
> *francs-fileurs* returning in throngs from Versailles, Saint-Denis,
> Rueil, and Saint Germain -- the Paris of the "Decline."
>
> In all its bloody triumphs over the self-sacrificing champions of a
> new and better society, that nefarious civilization, based upon the
> enslavement of labor, drowns the moans of its victims in a hue-and-cry
> of calumny, reverberated by a world-wide echo. The serene working
> men's Paris of the Commune is suddenly changed into a pandemonium by
> the bloodhounds of "order."
>
> And what does this tremendous change prove to the bourgeois mind of
> all countries? Why, that the Commune has conspired against
> civilization! The Paris people die enthusiastically for the Commune in
> numbers unequally in any battle known to history. What does that
> prove? Why, that the Commune was not the people's own government but
> the usurpation of a handful of criminals! The women of Paris joyfully
> give up their lives at the barricades and on the place of execution.
> What does this prove? Why, that the demon of the Commune has changed
> them into Megaera and Hecates!
>
> The moderation of the Commune during the two months of undisputed sway
> is equalled only by the heroism of its defence.
>
> What does that prove? Why, that for months the Commune carefully hid,
> under a mask of moderation and humanity, the bloodthirstiness of its
> fiendish instincts to be let loose in the hour of its agony[!]{#art}
>
> The working men's Paris, in the act of its heroic self-holocaust,
> involved in its flames buildings and monuments. While tearing to
> pieces the living body of the proletariat, its rulers must no longer
> expect to return triumphantly into the intact architecture of their
> abodes. The government of Versailles cries, "Incendiarism!" and
> whispers this cue to all its agents, down to the remotest hamlet, to
> hunt up its enemies everywhere as suspect of professional
> incendiarism. The bourgeoisie of the whole world, which looks
> complacently upon the wholesale massacre after the battle, is
> convulsed by horror at the desecration of brick and mortar!
>
> When governments give state licences to their navies to "kill, *burn*,
> and destroy," is that licence for incendiarism? When the British
> troops wantonly set fire to the Capitol at Washington and to the
> summer palace of the Chinese emperor,^[\[F\]](#F){#Fb}^ was that
> incendiarism? When the Prussians not for military reasons, but out of
> the mere spite of revenge, burned down, by the help of petroleum,
> towns like Chateaudun and innumerable villages, was that incendiarism?
> When Thiers, during six weeks, bombarded Paris, under the pretext that
> he wanted to set fire to those houses only in which there were people,
> was that incendiarism? -- In war, fire is an arm as legitimate as any.
> Buildings held by the enemy are shelled to set them on fire. If their
> defenders have to retire, they themselves light the flames to prevent
> the attack from making use of the buildings. To be burned down has
> always been the inevitable fate of all buildings situated in the front
> of battle of all the regular armies of the world.
>
> But in the war of the enslaved against their enslavers, the only
> justifiable war in history, this is by no means to hold good! The
> Commune used fire strictly as a means of defence. They used it to stop
> up to the Versailles troops those long, straight avenues which
> Haussman had expressly opened to artillery-fire; they used it to cover
> their retreat, in the same way as the Versaillese, in their advance,
> used their shells which destroyed at least as many buildings as the
> fire of the Commune. It is a matter of dispute, even now, which
> buildings were set fire to by the defence, and which by the attack.
> And the defence resorted to fire only then when the Versailles troops
> had already commenced their wholesale murdering of prisoners.
>
> Besides, the Commune had, long before, given full public notice that
> if driven to extremities, they would bury themselves under the ruins
> of Paris, and make Paris a second Moscow, as the Government of
> National Defence, but only as a cloak for its treason, had promised to
> do. For this purpose Trochu had found them the petroleum. The Commune
> knew that its opponents cared nothing for the lives of the Paris
> people, but cared much for their own Paris buildings. And Thiers, on
> the other hand, had given them notice that he would be implacable in
> his vengeance. No sooner had he got his army ready on one side, and
> the Prussians shutting the trap on the other, than he proclaimed: "I
> shall be pitiless! The expiation will be complete, and justice will be
> stern!" If the acts of the Paris working men were vandalism, it was
> the vandalism of defence in despair, not the vandalism of triumph,
> like that which the Christians perpetrated upon the really priceless
> art treasures of heathen antiquity; and even that vandalism has been
> justified by the historian as an unavoidable and comparatively
> trifling concomitant to the titanic struggle between a new society
> arising and an old one breaking down. It was still less the vandalism
> of Haussman, razing historic Paris to make place for the Paris of the
> sightseer!
>
> But the execution by the Commune of the 64 hostages, with the
> Archbishop of Paris at their head! The bourgeoisie and its army, in
> June 1848, re-established a custom which had long disappeared from the
> practice of war -- the shooting of their defenceless prisoners. This
> brutal custom has since been more or less strictly adhered to by the
> suppressors of all popular commotions in Europe and India; thus
> proving that it constitutes a real "progress of civilization"!
>
> On the other hand, the Prussians in France, had re-established the
> practice of taking hostages -- innocent men, who, with their lives,
> were to answer to them for the acts of others. When Thiers, as we have
> seen, from the very beginning of the conflict, enforced the human
> practice of shooting down the Communal prisoners, the Commune, to
> protect their lives, was obliged to resort to the Prussian practice of
> securing hostages. The lives of the hostages have been forfeited over
> and over again by the continued shooting of prisoners on the part of
> the Versaillese. How could they be spared any longer after the carnage
> with which MacMahon's praetorians^[\[G\]](#G){#Gb}^ celebrated their
> entrance into Paris?
>
> Was even the last check upon the unscrupulous ferocity of bourgeois
> governments -- the taking of hostages -- to be made a mere sham of?
>
> The real murderer of Archbishop Darboy is Thiers. The Commune again
> and again had offered to exchange the archbishop, and ever so many
> priests in the bargain, against the single Blanqui, then in the hands
> of Thiers. Thiers obstinately refused. He knew that with Blanqui he
> would give the Commune a head; while the archbishop would serve his
> purpose best in the shape of a corpse.
>
> Thiers acted upon the precedent of Cavaignac. How, in June 1848, did
> not Cavaignac and his men of order raise shouts of horror by
> stigmatizing the insurgents as the assassins of Archbishop Affre! They
> knew perfectly well that the archbishop had been shot by the [soldiers
> of order](ch03.htm#F). M. Jacquemet, the archbishop's vicar-general,
> present on the spot, had immediately afterwards handed them in his
> evidence to that effect.
>
> All the chorus of calumny, which the Party of Order never fail, in
> their orgies of blood, to raise against their victims, only proves
> that the bourgeois of our days considers himself the legitimate
> successor to the baron of old, who thought every weapon in his own
> hand fair against the plebeian, while in the hands of the plebeian a
> weapon of any kind constituted in itself a crime.
>
> The conspiracy of the ruling class to break down the revolution by a
> civil war carried on under the patronage of the foreign invader -- a
> conspiracy which we have traced from the very 4th of September down to
> the entrance of MacMahon's praetorians through the gate of St. Cloud
> -- culminated in the carnage of Paris. Bismarck gloats over the ruins
> of Paris, in which he saw perhaps the first installment of that
> general destruction of great cities he had prayed for when still a
> simple Rural in the Prussian *Chambre introuvable* of
> 1849.^[\[H\]](#H){#Hb}^ He gloats over the cadavers of the Paris
> proletariat. For him, this is not only the extermination of
> revolution, but the extinction of France, now decapitated in reality,
> and by the French government itself. With the shallowness
> characteristic of all successful statesmen, he sees but the surface of
> this tremendous historic event. Whenever before has history exhibited
> the spectacle of a conqueror crowning his victory by turning into, not
> only the gendarme, but the hired bravo of the conquered government?
> There existed no war between Prussia and the Commune of Paris. On the
> contrary, the Commune had accepted the peace preliminaries, and
> Prussia had announced her neutrality. Prussia was, therefore, no
> belligerent. She acted the part of a bravo, a cowardly bravo, because
> incurring no danger; a hired bravo, because stipulating beforehand the
> payment of her blood-money of 500 millions on the fall of Paris. And
> thus, at last, came out the true character of the war, ordained by
> Providence, as a chastisement of godless and debauched France by pious
> and moral Germany! And this unparalleled breach of the law of nations,
> even as understood by the old-world lawyers, instead of arousing the
> "civilized" governments of Europe to declare the felonious Prussian
> government, the mere tool of the St. Petersburg Cabinet, an outlaw
> amongst nations, only incites them to consider whether the few victims
> who escape the double cordon around Paris are not to be given up to
> the hangman of Versailles!
>
> That, after the most tremendous war of modern times, the conquering
> and the conquered hosts should fraternize for the common massacre of
> the proletariat -- this unparalleled event does indicate, not, as
> Bismarck thinks, the final repression of a new society up heaving, but
> the crumbling into dust of bourgeois society. The highest heroic
> effort of which old society is still capable is national war; and this
> is now proved to be a mere governmental humbug, intended to defer the
> struggle of classes, and to be thrown aside as soon as that class
> struggle bursts out into civil war. Class rule is no longer able to
> disguise itself in a national uniform; the national governments are
> *one* as against the proletariat!
>
> After Whit-Sunday, 1871, there can be neither peace nor truce possible
> between the working men of France and the appropriators of their
> produce. The iron hand of a mercenary soldiery may keep for a time
> both classes tied down in common oppression. But the battle must break
> out again and again in ever-growing dimensions, and there can be no
> doubt as to who will be the victor in the end -- the appropriating
> few, or the immense working majority. And the French working class is
> only the advanced guard of the modern proletariat.
>
> While the European governments thus testify, before Paris, to the
> international character of class rule, they cry down the
> [International Working Men's
> Association](../../../../../glossary/orgs/i/n.htm#iwma) -- the
> international counter-organization of labor against the cosmopolitan
> conspiracy of capital -- as the head fountain of all these disasters.
> Thiers denounced it as the despot of labor, pretending to be its
> liberator. Picard ordered that all communications between the French
> Internationals and those abroad be cut off; Count Jaubert, Thiers'
> mummified accomplice of 1835, declares it the great problem of all
> civilized governments to weed it out. The Rurals roar against it, and
> the whole European press joins the chorus. An honorable French writer
> \[Robinet\], completely foreign to our Association, speaks as follows:
>
> "The members of the Central Committee of the National Guard, as well
> as the greater part of the members of the Commune, are the most
> active, intelligent, and energetic minds of the International Working
> Men's Association\... men who are thoroughly honest, sincere,
> intelligent, devoted, pure, and fanatical in the *good* sense of the
> word."
>
> The police-tinged bourgeois mind naturally figures to itself the
> International Working Men's Association as acting in the manner of a
> secret conspiracy, its central body ordering, from time to time,
> explosions in different countries. Our Association is, in fact,
> nothing but the international bond between the most advanced working
> men in the various countries of the civilized world. Wherever, in
> whatever shape, and under whatever conditions the class struggle
> obtains any consistency, it is but natural that members of our
> Association, should stand in the foreground. The soil out of which it
> grows is modern society itself. It cannot be stamped out by any amount
> of carnage. To stamp it out, the governments would have to stamp out
> the despotism of capital over labor -- the condition of their own
> parasitical existence.
>
> Working men's Paris, with its Commune, will be forever celebrated as
> the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are enshrined in
> the great heart of the working class. Its exterminators history has
> already nailed to that eternal pillory from which all the prayers of
> their priest will not avail to redeem them.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> The General Council
>
> M. J. Boon, Fred. Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, Caihil, Delayhaye, William
> Hales, A. Hermann, Kolb, Fred. Lessner, Lochner, T. P. Macdonnell,
> George Milner, Thomas Mottershead, Ch. Mills, Charles Murray, Pfander,
> Roach, Rochat, Ruhl, Sadler, A. Ser- Railler, Cowell Stepney, Alf.
> Taylor, William Townshend.
>
> Corresponding Secretaries:
>
> Eugene Dupont, For France Zevy Maurice, For Hungary Karl Marx, For
> Germany And Anton Zabicki, For Poland Holland James Cohen, For Denmark
> Fred. Engels, For Belgium And J.G. Eccarius, For The United Spain
> States Hermann Jung, For Switzerland P. Giovacchini, For Italy
>
> Hermann Jung, Chairman John Weston, Treasurer George Harris, Financial
> Secretary J. George Eccarius, General Secretary
>
> Office: 256 High Holborn Road, London, W.C., May 30, 1871
>
>  
>
> [Postscript by Engels](postscript.htm)
>
>  
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> ^[\[A\]](#Ab){#A}^ This name was given to the Versailles soldiers of
> royalist sympathies recruited in Brittany, by analogy with those who
> took part in the counter-revolutionary royalist insurrection in
> North-Western France during the French Revolution at the end of the
> 18th century.
>
> ^[\[B\]](#Bb){#B}^ Under the impact of the proletarian revolution in
> Paris which led to the establishment of the Commune, revolutionary
> mass actions of a similar nature took place in Lyons and Marseilles.
> However, these were brutally crushed by French government troops.
>
> ^[\[C\]](#Cb){#C}^ Under the law concerning the procedure of military
> courts, submitted by Dufaure to the National Assembly, it was ruled
> that cases were to be investigated and sentences carried out within 48
> hours.
>
> ^[\[D\]](#Db){#D}^ This trade treaty between England and France was
> concluded on January 23, 1860. Under its terms France was to abandon
> her prohibitive Customs policy and replace it by introducing new
> import duties. As result of the influx of English goods to France,
> competition in the home market dramatically increased, causing
> dissatisfaction among some French manufacturers.
>
> ^[\[E\]](#Eb){#E}^ This refers to the reign of terror and bloody
> repression in Ancient Rome at the various stages of the crisis of the
> slave-owning Roman Republic in the first century B.C.E. -- Sulla's
> dictatorship (in 82-79 B.C.E.), and the first and second triumvirates:
> Pompey, Caesar, Crassus (60-53) and Octavian, Antonius, Lepidus (43-36
> B.C.E.) respectively.
>
> ^[\[F\]](#Fb){#F}^ In August 1814, during the war between Britain and
> the United States, British troops seized Washington and burned the
> Capitol, the White House and other public buildings to the ground. In
> October 1860, during the war waged by Britain and France against China
> (the first of the Opium Wars), British and French troops pillaged and
> burned down the summer palace of the Chinese emperors near Beijing, a
> treasure-house of Chinese art and architecture.
>
> ^[\[G\]](#Gb){#G}^ In ancient Rome the privileged life-guards of the
> general or emperor; they constantly took part in internal
> disturbances. Later the word "praetorians" became the symbol of the
> mercenary, tyrannical nature of the militarists.
>
> ^[\[H\]](#Hb){#H}^ This is what Marx called the Prussian Assembly by
> analogy with the French [Chambre introuvable](ch03.htm#I). The
> Assembly elected in January and February 1849 consisted of two
> chambers: the first was a privileged aristocratic "chamber of the
> gentry\"; the composition of the second was determined by two-stage
> elections in which only the so-called "independent" Prussians took
> part. Elected to the second chamber, Bismarck became one of the
> leaders of the extremely reactionary Junker group.
>
> ------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
> Table of Contents: [The Civil War in France](index.htm)
>
>  
> :::
