---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Socialism and Nationalism

### (1897)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Shan Van Vocht**, January 1897\
Transcribed by *The Workers' Web ASCII Pamphlet Project* in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Ireland at the present time there are at work a variety of agencies
seeking to preserve the national sentiment in the hearts of the people.

These agencies, whether Irish Language movements, Literary Societies or
Commemoration Committees, are undoubtedly doing a work of lasting
benefit to this country in helping to save from extinction the precious
racial and national history, language and characteristics of our people.

Nevertheless, there is a danger that by too strict an adherence to their
present methods of propaganda, and consequent neglect of vital living
issues, they may only succeed in stereotyping our historical studies
into a worship of the past, or crystallising nationalism into a
tradition -- glorious and heroic indeed, but still only a tradition.

Now traditions may, and frequently do, provide materials for a glorious
martyrdom, but can never be strong enough to ride the storm of a
successful revolution.

If the national movement of our day is not merely to re-enact the old
sad tragedies of our past history, it must show itself capable of rising
to the exigencies of the moment.

It must demonstrate to the people of Ireland that our nationalism is not
merely a morbid idealising of the past, but is also capable of
formulating a distinct and definite answer to the problems of the
present and a political and economic creed capable of adjustment to the
wants of the future.

This concrete political and social ideal will best be supplied, I
believe, by the frank acceptance on the part of ail earnest nationalists
of the Republic as their goal.

Not a Republic, as in France, where a capitalist monarchy with an
elective head parodies the constitutional abortions of England, and in
open alliance with the Muscovite despotism brazenly flaunts its apostasy
to the traditions of the Revolution.

Not a Republic as in the United States, where the power of the purse has
established a new tyranny under the forms of freedom; where, one hundred
years after the feet of the last British red-coat polluted the streets
of Boston, British landlords and financiers impose upon American
citizens a servitude compared with which the tax of pre-Revolution days
was a mere trifle.

No! the Republic I would wish our fellow-countrymen to set before them
as their ideal should be of such a character that the mere mention of
its name would at all times serve as a beacon-light to the oppressed of
every land, at all times holding forth promise of freedom and
plenteousness as the reward of their efforts on its behalf.

To the tenant farmer, ground between landlordism on the one hand and
American competition on the other, as between the upper and the nether
millstone; to the wage-workers in the towns, suffering from the
exactions of the slave-driving capitalist to the agricultural labourer,
toiling away his life for a wage barely sufficient to keep body and soul
together; in fact to every one of the toiling millions upon whose misery
the outwardly-splendid fabric of our modern civilisation is reared, the
Irish Republic might be made a word to conjure with -- a rallying point
for the disaffected, a haven for the oppressed, a point of departure for
the Socialist, enthusiastic in the cause of human freedom.

This linking together of our national aspirations with the hopes of the
men and women who have raised the standard of revolt against that system
of capitalism and landlordism, of which the British Empire is the most
aggressive type and resolute defender, should not, in any sense, import
an element of discord into the ranks of earnest nationalists, and would
serve to place us in touch with fresh reservoirs of moral and physical
strength sufficient to lift the cause of Ireland to a more commanding
position than it has occupied since the day of Benburb.

It may be pleaded that the ideal of a Socialist Republic, implying, as
it does, a complete political and economic revolution would be sure to
alienate all our middle-class and aristocratic supporters, who would
dread the loss of their property and privileges.

What does this objection mean? That we must conciliate the privileged
classes in Ireland!

But you can only disarm their hostility by assuring them that in a
*free* Ireland their 'privileges␁ will not be interfered with. That is
to say, you must guarantee that when Ireland is free of foreign
domination, the green-coated Irish soldiers will guard the fraudulent
gains of capitalist and landlord from 'the thin hands of the poor' just
as remorselessly and just as effectually as the scarlet-coated
emissaries of England do today.

On no other basis will the classes unite with you. Do you expect the
masses to fight for this ideal?

When you talk of freeing Ireland, do you only mean the chemical elements
which compose the soil of Ireland? Or is it the Irish people you mean?
If the latter, from what do you propose to free them? From the rule of
England?

But all systems of political administration or governmental machinery
are but the reflex of the economic forms which underlie them.

English rule in England is but the symbol of the fact that English
conquerors in the past forced upon this country a property system
founded upon spoliation, fraud and murder: that, as the present-day
exercise of the 'rights of property' so originated involves the
continual practice of legalised spoliation and fraud, English rule is
found to be the most suitable form of government by which the spoliation
can be protected, and an English army the most pliant tool with which to
execute judicial murder when the fears of the propertied classes demand
it.

The Socialist who would destroy, root and branch, the whole brutally
materialistic system of civilisation, which like the English language we
have adopted as our own, is, I hold, a far more deadly foe to English
rule and tutelage, than the superficial thinker who imagines it possible
to reconcile Irish freedom with those insidious but disastrous forms of
economic subjection -- landlord tyranny, capitalist fraud and unclean
usury; baneful fruits of the Norman Conquest, the unholy trinity, of
which Strongbow and Diarmuid MacMurchadha -- Norman thief and Irish
traitor -- were the fitting precursors and apostles.

If you remove the English army to-morrow and hoist the green flag over
Dublin Castle, unless you set about the organisation of the Socialist
Republic your efforts would be in vain.

England would still rule you. She would rule you through her
capitalists, through her landlords, through her financiers, through the
whole array of commercial and individualist institutions she has planted
in this country and watered with the tears of our mothers and the blood
of our martyrs.

England would still rule you to your ruin, even while your lips offered
hypocritical homage at the shrine of that Freedom whose cause you had
betrayed.

Nationalism without Socialism -- without a reorganisation of society on
the basis of a broader and more developed form of that common property
which underlay the social structure of Ancient Erin - is only national
recreancy.

It would be tantamount to a public declaration that our oppressors had
so far succeeded in inoculating us with their perverted conceptions of
justice and morality that we had finally decided to accept those
conceptions as our own, and no longer needed an alien army to force them
upon us.

As a Socialist I am prepared to do all one man can do to achieve for our
motherland her rightful heritage -- independence; but if you ask me to
abate one jot or tittle of the claims of social justice, in order to
conciliate the privileged classes, then I must decline.

Such action would be neither honourable nor feasible. Let us never
forget that he never reaches Heaven who marches thither in the company
of the Devil. Let us openly proclaim our faith: the logic of events is
with us.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
