---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# America and Ireland

### Farmers' Demands

#### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 21 October 1899.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As a general rule we refrain from taking notice in our columns of the
quarrels or discussions of the Socialist parties of the world. We regard
ourselves as being, at present, primarily a missionary organ, founded
for the purpose of presenting to the working class of Ireland a truer
and more scientific understanding of the principles of Socialism than
they could derive from a perusal of the scant and misleading references
to that subject to be found in the ordinary capitalist press. This task
also involves, as a matter of course, the criticism and exposure of all
the quack remedies and political trickeries with which our masters, or
their ignorant imitators in the ranks of the workers themselves, seek to
impose upon the people as cure-alls for our social evils. We have all
along acted upon the conviction that we must give the revolutionary
principles of Socialism an Irish home and habitation before we venture
to express our opinions on the minor matters dividing the party abroad.
We can say now with some degree of confidence that we have succeeded in
that task and that the Socialist Republican Party of Ireland is one of
the factors which will play a big part in shaping the future history of
this country, and being so confident we now propose to say a word upon a
subject at present under discussion in the United States of America; and
in which the name of our Party has been cited as following a course of
action similar to that adopted by one of the disputants.

The matter is as follows:-- There are in the States just now two
distinct Socialist parties -- The Socialist Labor Party, and the Social
Democratic Party. The first named is the longest established of the two
and has repeatedly run candidates for the post of President of the
United States, polling on the occasion of the last Presidential contest
36,664 votes. The last named has only come into existence since the last
Presidential campaign, and is composed for the greater part of men and
women who, while avowing themselves Socialists, disapproved of the
policy and tactics pursued by the Socialist Labor Party. To the
uninitiated in the economics and philosophy of Socialism it is hard to
explain the exact point at issue, but it may be briefly summed up in the
statement that the Socialist Labor Party adhere uncompromisingly to the
policy of identifying themselves as a party with, and basing all their
hopes upon, the struggle of the working class against every section of
their exploiters, or employers. This involves opposition to every demand
made in the interest of the master class, and an attitude of
complacency, or even triumph, at the success of the great capitalist in
crushing out his smaller competitor -- this complacency arising from
the, it seems to us, absolutely correct position that the crushing out
of small capitalists by large ones will tend to increase the ranks of
the working class, concentrate industry under centralised management,
decrease the numbers of those interested in private property, and so
make the ultimate attainment of Socialism easier.

In other words, theirs is the position known in Europe as the Marxist
position, from its being first definitely formulated by the founder of
Modern Socialism -- Karl Marx.

The Social Democratic Party, on the other hand, look to the fact that
the small middle class, and especially the farmers, still wield an
enormous voting power, and, looking to the present rather than to the
future, they have embodied in their programme certain 'Farmers' Demands'
-- proposals for legislation to enable the petty farmers to bear up
against the competition of those mammoth farms for which the United
States is so famous. The object being, of course, to win the votes of
the farmers as a class.

Over those 'Farmers' Demands' a battle royal has been raging for some
time between the two parties. The Socialist Labor Party denouncing them
as reactionary and unscientific, the Social Democratic Party defending
them as practical and useful. Lately some members of the latter party
have themselves taken up the battle against those proposals being
included in their programme, and demand their removal. In the course of
this latter discussion in the columns of the **Social Democratic
Herald** published at Chicago, Sept 25th, one writer, F.G.R. Gordon, in
defending the proposals, cites our example as a party which, occupying
an absolutely scientific position on Socialist doctrines, yet has its
'Farmers' Demands'. Here is the quotation:--

> The Irish Socialist Republican Party have their Farmers' Demands; and
> their party has been endorsed as the par excellent Scientific
> Socialist Party.

No.3 of our programme is, we presume, the plank alluded to.

Now, we have no wish to be misunderstood by our comrades in America; we
value our reputation as a straight Socialist Party too much to allow our
name to be used as a cover for any kind of looseness in principles,
tactics, or policy, even when it is used accompanied by flattery.
Therefore, we would wish to point out to all whom it may concern that
the cases of America and Ireland are not at all analogous. Agriculture
in America has assumed already its company form, being in many cases
administered purely on capitalist lines for the profit of non-resident
owners; agriculture in Ireland is still in a semi-feudal form, the
largest farm in Ireland would be classed as a petty farm in America, and
the absorption of the working farmer by the capitalist managed estate of
the non-resident farmer is practically unknown. Now observe this vital
point of difference between the programme of the Socialist Republican
Party of Ireland, and the programme of the Social Democratic Party of
America. Both have demands for farmers, granted, but:--

1.  The Farmers' Demands of the Social Democrats of America are demands
    which aim at the perpetuation of the system of petty farming by
    legislation to protect it from the effects of the competition of
    farms managed on those lines most nearly approximating to the
    Socialist form of industry, viz, the lines of centralised capital,
    and agricultural armies. American agriculture, *as such*, is not in
    any danger as a source of support for the agriculturist. His status
    may be endangered, not his existence.
2.  The Farmers' Demands of the Socialist Republican Party of Ireland
    are demands which aim at preserving Agriculture in Ireland from
    being *annihilated as a native industry* by the competition of
    *foreign* agriculturists. Irish agriculturists are not threatened
    with absorption, but with extinction and enforced exile.

In other words the American Farmers' Demands are in the interest of one
particular form of agricultural enterprise, as against another; the
Irish Demands are directed towards rescuing agriculture itself, and
teaching the agriculturist to look to national co-operation as the
factor he should count upon for help in his struggle to remain in the
country of his birth.

Things which look alike are not always alike. The apparent identity of
the Irish and American proposals is seen to be non-existent when you
take into account the different historical and industrial conditions of
the two countries. Given American conditions in Ireland, the Irish
Socialists would wipe their Farmers' Demands from off their programme,
but in Ireland as it is with the rags of a medieval system of land
tenure still choking our life and cramping our industry, with perennial
famine destroying our people, with our population dwindling away by
emigrations, we consider it right to point out, even if unheeded, that
it is the duty of the State to undertake the functions of manufacture
and custodian of all implements required for the one important industry
of the country -- agriculture. This is all we demand in that nature:--

Establishment at public expense of rural depots for the most improved
agricultural machinery, to be lent out to the agricultural population at
a rent covering cost and management alone.

It is not a sectional demand, but is the outcome of a national exigency.

"The practical application of the principles" (of Socialism), said Marx
and Engels in their joint preface to the **Communist Manifesto**,
"everywhere, and at all times will depend on the historical conditions
for the time being existing."

Let our critics please remember that fact, and the Socialist Republicans
of Ireland can confidently abide by the result.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
