---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (May 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, May 1899.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.15.\
Transcription by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here we are again. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

And although the phrase -- beloved of the children watching with gaping
mouths the antics of a circus clown -- may seem a trifle too suggestive
for some of our sensitive readers, we venture to think it has in this
instance an appositeness most peculiarly its own.

Here we are again; the cause of amusement to those whose conscience our
pleasant satires leave untouched, and the cause of mental writhing to
the herd of mummers on the stage of life who feel our shafts ripping
open their disguises, or exposing their tricks to the ridicule of the
world.

As it is the function of the jester to laugh others out of their follies
by an assumption of folly on his own part, so it is the function of
'Spailpín' to reveal the shortcomings of the political hucksters, by
assuming the role of a huckster himself.

A huckster? Yes! On this front page 'Spailpín' carries on the trade of
buying and selling, and the veriest tyro in that art knows that the
first requisite for driving a good bargain is to depreciate the value of
your rivals' goods, whilst extolling the merits of your own.

Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, countrymen and women, Romans, and
lovers, lend me thine ears.

My own are not long enough; whereas --

Room for the **Daily Nation**. This broad-minded organ has declared
against the Filippinos. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} Hence we may now consider
their cause as indeed hopeless. But worse than all: that newspaper now
declares the insurgents to be "almost as degraded as the wretches who
formed a provisional government for Paris during the Commune of 1871."

Now just think of that. Those degraded wretches of the Commune held
Paris for three months without the aid of policemen or detectives and
yet, according to the testimony of many foreigners who then resided in
that city, Paris was never so free from crime, life and property were
never so safe.

They held the Bank of France in their power all that time, and yet left
its treasures untouched; no one, not even their greatest enemy, has ever
instanced a single case in which a member of the provisional Government
of the Paris Commune enriched himself as a result of his political
position.

Of what Irish political leaders of the present day can the same be said?
Certainly not of the political chiefs of the **Daily Nation**.

The Commune, if it had been successful, would have inaugurated the reign
of real freedom the world over -- it would have meant the emancipation
of the working class; therefore as it failed it serves as a mark for all
the literary prostitutes who sell themselves into the service of
capitalist journalism. Long live the Commune! If the Filippinos are akin
to the members of the Commune may their shadows never grow less.

Yes, gentlemen, what we want is a Catholic University. [\[3\]](#n3){#f3}
If we only had a Catholic University the poor ragged children who sit
around the Catholic Boys' Home in Abbey Street, or beg to find the
copper necessary to procure their admission to its shelter, would have
all their woes removed.

And the crowd of forlorn men and women who every night press for
admission to the night refuge in Bow Street; the hungry outcasts who
wait around the gates of the Mendicity [\[4\]](#n4){#f4}; the evicted
tenants patiently waiting for restoration to their homes; the
broken-hearted labourers toiling their lives away for a starvation wage;
the unemployed wearily tramping from insolent foremen to overbearing
employers; the slum dwellers poisoned by the pestiferous air of our city
tenements; the peasant mentally and physically starved on his barren
mountain patch, all, all would be initiated into the delights of a happy
existence --

If only we had a Catholic University.

Some of us would be satisfied with less -- most of those I have
mentioned would, I think, but then they are only base plebeians, common
working class people who would never see the inside of a university,
anyhow.

When we speak of a university for the Catholics we don't mean all the
Catholics, but only a small portion of the whole body, viz. those who
can afford to send their children to such places -- shopkeepers,
lawyers, gombeen men, rackrenting landlords, patriot publicans, slum
proprietors, and other such bright jewels in the crown of the Church
militant.

"Free Education up to the highest university grades" and, as a
supplement to make it workable, "Free Maintenance for all children",
both planks in the Socialist Republican programme, might make the
university question a popular one, but otherwise the agitation is simply
bogus, a clerical-cum-capitalist dodge to divert our attention whilst a
new bargain is being struck at our expense.

At least, so thinks

Spailpín.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} After the 22 October 1898 issue, **The Workers'
Republic** ceased publication due to the ISRP's lack of resources.

[2.](#f2){#n2} There was widespread popular resistance in the
Philippines to the United States, who had taken the islands from Spain
the previous year.

[3.](#f3){#n3} Nationalist politicians were demanding a Catholic
university as an equivalent of Trinity College.

[4.](#f4){#n4} The Mendicity Institution provided the homeless with beds
for the night.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
