---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Resurgam!

### (May 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Workers' Republic**, May 1899.\
Transcribed Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The re-appearance on the journalistic horizon of our little paper
[\[1\]](#n1){#f1} will, no doubt, cause somewhat of a flutter in the
ranks of both friends and enemies.

Our previous effort in the same line, all too brief and meteoric as it
was, if it sufficed to win for the cause we represent the bitterest
hatred of the political tricksters whose treacheries it exposed, also
served to win to our side the steadfast adhesion and ungrudging support
of fresh hosts of friends. For both we return our thanks. We would wish
for no better proof of the success of our efforts, no surer guarantee
that our shots had gone home, than the fact that we had aroused hatred
where we had only met with indifference, that furious opposition had
replaced careless toleration. And in the adhesion to our principles,
evidenced in the first place by our largely increased membership, and in
the second place by the surprisingly large vote cast in the North Dock
Ward of Dublin for our comrade Stewart standing upon a defiantly
uncompromising Socialist platform [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} -- we have the
verification of the doctrine we have held forth, in spite of the doubts
of friends and the sneers of foes, since this party was first launched
in the summer of '96, viz. that the only policy to pursue with the Irish
Democracy, if it is ever to be won to Socialism, is to preach the
revolutionary gospel in all its pristine purity, fresh and undiluted
with economic heresy or political time-serving; and having so reared the
banner aloft, to follow its fortunes in a like spirit until the good
work be done.

In this spirit we have entered the field of public life in Ireland, in
this spirit the first issues of the **Workers' Republic** were
conceived, and in this spirit the present publication will also be
conducted. We have now a paper of our own, a printing plant of our own,
and a staff as capable of giving a reasoned exposition of the faith that
is in them as any in Ireland. We are therefore free of that dependence
on the goodwill of a capitalist printer which cramped our efforts in the
past, and although we are likely to make many mistakes in the mere
technical minutiae of our work, we feel now that we have turned the
corner of adversity and need have no fear of the future.

Therefore, friends and comrades in the fight, the **Workers' Republic**
salutes you with joyfulness as it salutes our oppressors with defiance,
and "RESURGAM", "I will rise again" is its cry as it is the cry of the
disinherited the world over. Robbed and despoiled as we are, exiles in
our own land wherever that land may be, degraded to the lot of "human
tools to build another's pride", we of the working class, toiling
painfully up the ages from ignorance to knowledge, from superstition to
science, from Bondage to Freedom, crushed into the earth as our fathers
have been, we yet proudly take up their burden and, casting aside all
thoughts of compromise with the forces of iniquity, we devote ourselves
anew to the task of uprooting the last traces of slavery from this old
earth of ours.

Let the great ones of the world note this cry, the cry of the
revolutionary spirit, welling up from the hearts of their rebellious
slaves:

RESURGAM: I will rise again.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} **The Workers' Republic** had not appeared since 22
October 1898, due to the Irish Socialist Republican Party's lack of
resources.

[2.](#f2){#n2} E.W. Stewart stood for the ISRP in the local elections in
January, and received 448 votes (12 per cent of the total).

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
