---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Learning Their Lesson

### (1909)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, September, 1909.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.

Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our Socialist friends in the North of Ireland are learning their lesson.
As readers of **The Harp** are aware, there is in Belfast and its
neighbourhood a strong Socialist movement, born out of the advanced
industrial conditions which prevail in that district. But, as was
perhaps natural under the historical circumstances, that Socialist
movement keeps itself apart from the life of the rest of Ireland. Its
associations are with England, its chief speakers are imported from
England, and its methods are distinctly those of the English Labour
Party. Indeed, it is a part of the English movement known as the
Independent Labour Party. As a result, it has never yet run a candidate
as a Socialist Party distinctly and avowedly with a revolutionary
purpose and aim, differing in this from the Socialist movement in
Dublin, which has on four or five different occasions contested
municipal elections as an avowedly Socialist Party separate and distinct
from all others. The different tactics employed were characteristic of
the religious thought dominant at either part of the country.
Protestantism is essentially of the nature of a compromise between the
spirit of authority and the spirit of free inquiry, and when a
Protestant breaks with any tradition he does so in a halting and
tentative manner, perpetually retreating to his starting-point, and as
he disavows allegiance to one idol, hastens to create another. On the
other hand, the Catholic is positive and dogmatic, and ever inclined,
when he swings from his moorings at one point of the compass, to scorn
all intermediate stages between that point and its opposite pole. Out of
this curious anomaly arose the fact that even while the Belfast
Socialists were proclaiming that the Irish Catholics were too much under
the heel of priests to be Socialists, these same Irish Catholics in
Dublin were proudly nailing to the mast those Socialist colours which
their Northern brethren were furtively seeking to hide at every
election. This was not the least puzzling and disconcerting feature of
the situation. The Belfast Socialists are, as we have said, affiliated
to the Independent Labour Party in Great Britain, and while they have
had their faces set towards that country have at all times kept out of
touch with the toilers of the rest of Ireland, never at any time making
any effort to understand their point of view. This attitude of theirs
has ever been destructive to the hopes of a real revolutionary labour
movement in Ireland; indeed, the Northern men have never, apparently,
understood that the Socialist movement is a revolutionary labour
movement. Their standpoint and intellectual bias has ever been towards
the Fabian opportunism of England, while the Irish Socialists of
Catholic training have been most attracted by the Revolutionary
Social-Democracy of the Continent of Europe. This problem does not arise
out of any distinction of race; indeed, despite the prevalent opinion to
the contrary, the Irish Protestants of the North are as purely Celtic as
the Catholics of any part of Ireland. The parts of Scotland from whence
their forefathers re-emigrated into Ireland were and are as Celtic in
the make-up of their population as any part of Munster, and a deal more
so than many parts of Leinster. But from whatever source it arises, this
attitude of the Northerners has frustrated the hopes of those who longed
for a Socialist Party in Ireland of national scope and reach. In a
Socialist Party embracing all the toilers of Ireland, resting upon Irish
conditions, and shaping itself to reflect Irish needs, the sturdy men of
the Northern capital would be a force of incalculable value, but they
have up to the present been singularly blind to realise their
opportunity. They failed to see, what a moment's reflection should have
shown them, that they would be the backbone and dominating element in an
Irish Socialist Party, whereas they can never be anything but the
insignificant tail of a Socialist Party in England. And we say this
without any feeling of hostility towards the Socialists of England. We
are sure that the latter would have no objection to the Belfast branches
throwing in their lot with the rest of Ireland in a distinct party, if
the result of such action was to build up a Socialist Party in Ireland
strong enough to contest the field with the Home Rulers. For the Labour
Party of England is, after all, primarily a vote-gathering party. It
recognizes that the Irish vote is a strong factor in English cities, and
it seeks to conciliate the Home Rule Party as an essential towards
having an Irish representative on its side when it appeals to that Irish
vote during an election. It would just as soon, indeed much rather, have
a representative of a strong Irish Socialist and Labour movement on its
platform at such a time to appeal to the Irish workers in English
cities. But such an Irish Labour representative is of no value to them
if he comes as the Irish member of an English Party. Hence they court
the assistance of the Home Rulers, despite the protests of Irish
Socialists. Were the Belfast Socialists to withdraw in a body from the
Independent Labour Party and throw in their lot with the organization of
Irish Socialists recently formed in Dublin, their action would be of
incalculable service not only to the cause of Socialism in Ireland, but
also to the Socialists and Labour Party in England. It would help to
save the latter from all the dangers of a Home Rule alliance by bringing
into relief the reactionary attitude and policies of the Home Rulers as
opposed to the Socialist movement of the Irish working class. We believe
such a move would be welcomed by the most astute and farseeing of the
Labour Party, since it would enable them to appeal to the Irish voters
of Great Britain on their class interests as well as through their
national bias. But even if it failed to arouse the sympathetic
appreciation of English Labour leaders, the move ought to be taken. We
have long ago given up all hopes of making Englishmen understand the
Irish character. The English Socialists have failed utterly to fathom
the character of the capitalist Home Rulers of Ireland. Their failure
arises from their inability to understand the difference between
'rebelly' talk and serious revolutionary purpose. The Home Rulers are
adepts at 'rebelly' talk, but of serious revolutionary purpose, even in
a Nationalist sense, they are absolutely lacking. They easily succeed in
fooling the so-called hard-headed English working man, but they never
succeed in fooling the Socialists of Ireland. The latter know their men
too well; they know in what an inferno of reaction they have succeeded
in keeping the domestic affairs of Ireland, such as education and
municipal housing and sanitation, and they see them ever in league with
the most merciless exploiters of labour on the island.

Hence the Catholic masses regard the Catholic (?) Home Rule leaders with
ill-concealed distrust, and if the Protestant working men would only
throw off their senseless distrust of their Catholic fellows, realize
that class interests are stronger in political warfare than religious
bias, and so realizing, unite with their Catholic fellow-workers of the
rest of Ireland on the basis of those class interests, they would find
the latter not only willing, but madly anxious to receive them.

We have been moved to make these comments by reading in the **Labour
Leader**, of London, England, two articles, or rather letters, upon the
subject of the attitude of the Labour Party of England towards the Land
Question in Ireland. The first was written by Mr. Walker, of Belfast, a
Socialist member of the Belfast branch of the Independent Labour Party,
and twice Labour candidate for a parliamentary seat in Belfast. Mr.
Walker complains that the Labour Party is apparently influenced by the
Home Rulers, and voted along with them on the recent Land Bill, which,
he says, and truly, tends to make the farming class more conservative
and anti-Socialistic. He cites the case of one constituency, in which
the Protestant farmers who have hitherto been Liberal, for the first
time voted Conservative at a recent election. He then goes on to say
some very severe things about the Home Rule crowd in Parliament. The
second letter was from an English labour leader, a Mr. Clynes, and he,
of course, tells Mr. Walker that there was no use to talk in Parliament
about Land Nationalisation, because a bill on such lines would not pass
at present. He thus lays down the axiom that a parliamentary minority
must not talk about a measure in Parliament unless it has an immediate
chance to pass; quite a new conception of Parliamentary activity! He
then goes on to chide Mr. Walker for saying hard things about the Home
Rulers -- those dear friends of Labour -- and in general is serenely
indifferent to the Belfast man's protest. It is an old story. Some years
ago, when editing the **Workers' Republic** in Dublin, we also protested
against the fulsome praise of Home Rule leaders by English Socialists at
a time when these same capitalist gentry were bitterly antagonizing the
Labour candidates of the Irish trade unions in the Local Government
elections of 1899. We, under direction of the Irish Socialist Republican
Party, drew up a statement of the case, containing specific citations of
the anti-Labour record in Ireland of the Irish capitalist politicians,
and we informed our English comrades that their senseless praise of the
Home Rule Party in England was being used in Ireland against the Labour
candidates who were opposing capitalist Home Rulers. But the leaders of
the Independent Labour Party in England paid no attention to our
protests, and went joyously on supplying ammunition to our enemies,
although a paper so far away as **Vorwaerts**, of Berlin, Germany, the
organ of the German Social Democratic Party, quoted our manifesto and
expressly approved of our position.

Now it is the turn of the Belfast men! We hope that our Dublin comrades
will send them a copy of that earlier manifesto, and that they will
learn the lesson of both incidents and join where they belong -- in a
militant Irish movement of Labour.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 30.7.2007
