---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Bruce Glasier in Ireland

### (31 March 1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bruce Glasier in Ireland*, **Justice**, 31 March 1900, p.3.\
Transcribed by Ted Crawford.

Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our friend and quondam comrade, Bruce Glasier, has been giving in the
**Clarion** his impressions of Ireland; it is, then, in order, for
someone in Ireland to give their impressions of Bruce Glasier. This
article is a feeble contribution in that direction; where this article
fails of its purpose it is to be hoped the reader will be lenient, and
remember that it is not at all possible to reproduce in cold print a
vivid picture of the gyrations of a lightning-change artiste -- whether
the performance be on the stage or the platform, or the changes be of
clothing or of principles.

After the result of the first elections in Ireland under the Irish Local
Government Bill had astounded the world with a clear-cut manifestation
of class-feeling on the part of the Irish workers, the news was
announced, with much of the usual trumpeting, that the Fabian Society
was about to send a lecturer to Ireland. The real inwardness of this
move will only be apparent to those Social-Democrats who have so far cut
their economic wisdom-teeth as to appreciate the overwhelming importance
to our cause of a sound comprehension of the principle of the class
struggle. Where this principle is understood and battled for the Labour
movement is certain to develop along paths leading direct to political
action on Socialist lines; where this principle is obscured or denied,
the organisations of the working-class, even when professedly Socialist,
only serve as decoy ducks to the political parties of their masters. The
Fabian Society recruits itself principally among the astute bourgeoisie,
whose aim it is to emasculate the working class movement by denying the
philosophy of the class struggle, weakening the belief of the workers in
the political self-sufficiency of their own class, and by substituting
the principle of municipal capitalism and bureaucratic State control for
the principle of revolutionary reconstruction involved in Social
Democracy. How far this policy has succeeded in England our English
comrades can tell. But as a mere outsider I would suggest that the harm
wrought in the electoral prospects of Socialism by the plentiful crop of
"advanced Radicals" and "Liberal Labour" candidates which spring up in
every constituency where the Socialist doctrine has taken partial root,
is one sufficiently obvious proof of the danger to Socialism of Fabian
tactics. Ireland has not, until last year, received much attention from
the Fabian gentry. The Irish worker had not the municipal franchise,
therefore Fabian gas and water schemes would have been lost on him. But
as soon as he obtained the franchise and manifested a desire to use it
in a true class spirit, the cry went up for the Fabian missionaries. In
order to prevent the Irish working class from breaking off entirely from
the bourgeois parties, and from developing a revolutionary tendency, the
Fabians sent their lecturer to Ireland, to induce the Irish working
class to confine themselves to the work of municipalising, and to
fritter away their energies and break their hearts on the petty
squabbles of local administration, to the entire neglect of the
essential work of capturing the political power necessary for social
reconstruction. For this work Bruce Glasier was chosen as the man most
fitted to succeed. What the character of his teaching was may best be
judged by a short resume of the answers to some questions put to him
whilst in Dublin by some members of the Irish Socialist Republican
Party.

In one lecture he had given an elaborate and overdrawn picture of the
great benefits accruing to some English towns through municipalising --
½d. per £ off the taxes in one place, and 1d. in another, so much saved
to the rates from gas, so much from water, so much from electric light.
"This," he declared, "is all the work of the last ten years, *and is due
entirely to the new trade unionism*."

Question: "Seeing that the new trade unionism was conceived in the
brains of, was officered by, and largely composed of Socialists, why
does Mr. Glasier not give credit where credit is due, and state that the
reforms he speaks of were owing to Socialist agitation?"

Answer: "I wasn't speaking of the origin of new trade unionism."

Question: "You speak of peasant proprietary as a solution of the Irish
land question; now, under peasant proprietary would not the labourer be
exploited by the peasant proprietor?"

Answer: "Of course there is nothing in peasant proprietary to prevent
that, and the farmer might still exploit the labourer."

Question: "You say the farmer *might* exploit the labourer; did you ever
know of one man employing others for any other reason than to exploit
them?"

Answer: "No, but under the circumstances in Ireland peasant proprietary
is the most likely solution."

Question: "You speak of the enormous profits made by the Corporation out
of the tram service. Now we object to the exploitation of labour, and
consider it the basic injustice of the present system; and what
difference can it make to the Glasgow tram worker whether the profit
wrung out of him goes to a corporation or to an individual? He loses it
anyway."

Answer: "The labourer is not exploited, but the community. The profit is
not made out of the worker, but out of the people at large."

According to this theory, the payment of good wages, to municipal
employees is a matter of charity, not justice.

Question: "Is it not a fact that in all the cases of municipal
enterprise spoken of the original. Owners have had to be bought out at
an extravagant valuation, that this is done by the creation of municipal
interest-bearing bonds, and that thus you only succeed in replacing the
private, responsible capitalist by the private, irresponsible
bondholder?"

Answer: "Yes, that is certainly so. But we hope, when we have paid off
this debt and interest, to create a fund from the profit thus accruing
to enable us to purchase without the necessity of borrowing."

As it generally requires from 15 to 20 years to pay off the debt on even
the smallest municipal enterprise, during which time other debts are
being contracted, we can all see how long an innings the middle class
hope for from Fabianism, and also how delightfully "immediately
practicable" are their reforms.

Question: "Do you consider that the working class should strive to
capture political power by supporting only the candidates of their own
class?"

Answer: "As a matter of fact the working class are often the most
conservative, and great reforms are likely to come, in the immediate
future as in the past, from the action of generous-minded members of the
upper or middle classes."

Of course; the moral intended to be drawn was to look to the master
class for guidance and not to the working class.

Question: "Would it not be more advantageous to the cause of
municipalising if the municipal employees were to be paid as nearly as
possible the full fruits of their labour? Would this not induce
employees of private firms to clamour to be taken into municipal
service?"

Answer: "I consider that to pay municipal employees much more than
private employees would be to make of them a privileged class, and
arouse the jealousy of the employees of private firms."

These few questions and answers will serve to illustrate the character
of Mr. Glasier's teaching. He was also asked if he was a Socialist, and
answered it in such a "smart" manner that the audience present were left
in a complete fog of bewilderment as to his real position. I remembered
him as a man who was first a "revolutionary" Socialist for whom the SDF
was too moderate, then as an I.L.P.-er for whom the S.D.F. was too
extreme, but I had still retained a wild hope that the change might have
been the result of conviction. As he came down from the Trades Hall
platform in Dublin I spoke to him, saying:

"Well, Glasier, I am sorry you have turned Fabian."

"But I'm not a Fabian," he answered.

"Then what are you," I asked, a little bewildered, "aren't you speaking
on the Fabian platform and advocating Fabianism?"

"Oh, yes," he answered, "but you see I'm paid by the Fabians and must do
what I am paid for."

And so I left him. How I envied his self-restraint and sense of
responsibility. And how much more I envied him when I read his article
in the **Clarion**, and noted how in the front page he played to
Nunquam's ear by a simulated indignation over my participation in an
anti-war meeting, and in the latter part of the same article beslavers
another Irishman who had been deposed from a J.P.-ship for his sympathy
with the Boers.

But that is Bruce Glasier, his mark.

Honesty, it is said, is the best policy. But with some natures the
practical application of the maxim is an organic impossibility.

James Connoly

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
