Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Preliminary

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From various quarters we have been reproached for neglecting to portray
the economic conditions which form the material basis of the present
struggles between classes and nations. With set purpose we have hitherto
touched upon these conditions only when they forced themselves upon the
surface of the political conflicts.

It was necessary, beyond everything else, to follow the development of
the class struggle in the history of our own day, and to prove
empirically, by the actual and daily newly created historical material,
that with the subjugation of the working class, accomplished in the days
of February and March, 1848, the opponents of that class -- the
bourgeois republicans in France, and the bourgeois and peasant classes
who were fighting feudal absolutism throughout the whole continent of
Europe -- were simultaneously conquered; that the victory of the
\"moderate republic\" in France sounded at the same time the fall of the
nations which had responded to the February revolution with heroic wars
of independence; and finally that, by the victory over the revolutionary
workingmen, Europe fell back into its old double slavery, into the
English-Russian slavery. The June conflict in Paris, the fall of Vienna,
the tragi-comedy in Berlin in November 1848, the desperate efforts of
Poland, Italy, and Hungary, the starvation of Ireland into submission --
these were the chief events in which the European class struggle between
the bourgeoisie and the working class was summed up, and from which we
proved that every revolutionary uprising, however remote from the class
struggle its object might appear, must of necessity fail until the
revolutionary working class shall have conquered; -- that every social
reform must remain a Utopia until the proletarian revolution and the
feudalistic counter-revolution have been pitted against each other in a
world-wide war. In our presentation, as in reality, Belgium and
Switzerland were tragicomic caricaturish genre pictures in the great
historic tableau; the one the model State of the bourgeois monarchy, the
other the model State of the bourgeois republic; both of them, States
that flatter themselves to be just as free from the class struggle as
from the European revolution.

But now, after our readers have seen the class struggle of the year 1848
develop into colossal political proportions, it is time to examine more
closely the economic conditions themselves upon which is founded the
existence of the capitalist class and its class rule, as well as the
slavery of the workers.

We shall present the subject in three great divisions:

The Relation of Wage-labour to Capital, the Slavery of the Worker, the
Rule of the Capitalist.

The Inevitable Ruin of the Middle Classes
\[[petty-bourgeois](../../../../../glossary/terms/p/e.htm#petty-bourgeois)\]
and the so-called Commons \[peasants\] under the present system.

The Commercial Subjugation and Exploitation of the Bourgeois classes of
the various European nations by the Despot of the World Market --
England.

We shall seek to portray this as simply and popularly as possible, and
shall not presuppose a knowledge of even the most elementary notions of
political economy. We wish to be understood by the workers. And,
moreover, there prevails in Germany the most remarkable ignorance and
confusion of ideas in regard to the simplest economic relations, from
the patented defenders of existing conditions, down to the socialist
wonder-workers and the unrecognized political geniuses, in which divided
Germany is even richer than in duodecimo princelings. We therefore
proceed to the consideration of the first problem.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[What are Wages?](ch02.htm)

[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
