Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### By what is the price of a commodity determined?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

By the competition between buyers and sellers, by the relation of the
demand to the supply, of the call to the offer. The competition by which
the price of a commodity is determined is threefold.

The same commodity is offered for sale by various sellers. Whoever sells
commodities of the same quality most cheaply, is sure to drive the other
sellers from the field and to secure the greatest market for himself.
The sellers therefore fight among themselves for the sales, for the
market. Each one of them wishes to sell, and to sell as much as
possible, and if possible to sell alone, to the exclusion of all other
sellers. Each one sells cheaper than the other. Thus there takes place a
competition among the sellers which forces down the price of the
commodities offered by them.

But there is also a competition among the buyers; this upon its side
causes the price of the proffered commodities to rise.

Finally, there is competition between the buyers and the sellers: these
wish to purchase as cheaply as possible, those to sell as dearly as
possible. The result of this competition between buyers and sellers will
depend upon the relations between the two above-mentioned camps of
competitors -- i.e., upon whether the competition in the army of sellers
is stronger. Industry leads two great armies into the field against each
other, and each of these again is engaged in a battle among its own
troops in its own ranks. The army among whose troops there is less
fighting, carries off the victory over the opposing host.

Let us suppose that there are 100 bales of cotton in the market and at
the same time purchasers for 1,000 bales of cotton. In this case, the
demand is 10 times greater than the supply. Competition among the
buyers, then, will be very strong; each of them tries to get hold of one
bale, if possible, of the whole 100 bales. This example is no arbitrary
supposition. In the history of commerce we have experienced periods of
scarcity of cotton, when some capitalists united together and sought to
buy up not 100 bales, but the whole cotton supply of the world. In the
given case, then, one buyer seeks to drive the others from the field by
offering a relatively higher price for the bales of cotton. The cotton
sellers, who perceive the troops of the enemy in the most violent
contention among themselves, and who therefore are fully assured of the
sale of their whole 100 bales, will beware of pulling one another\'s
hair in order to force down the price of cotton at the very moment in
which their opponents race with one another to screw it up high. So, all
of a sudden, peace reigns in the army of sellers. They stand opposed to
the buyers like one man, fold their arms in philosophic contentment and
their claims would find no limit did not the offers of even the most
importunate of buyers have a very definite limit.

If, then, the supply of a commodity is less than the demand for it,
competition among the sellers is very slight, or there may be none at
all among them. In the same proportion in which this competition
decreases, the competition among the buyers increases. Result: a more or
less considerable rise in the prices of commodities.

It is well known that the opposite case, with the opposite result,
happens more frequently. Great excess of supply over demand; desperate
competition among the sellers, and a lack of buyers; forced sales of
commodities at ridiculously low prices.

But what is a rise, and what a fall of prices? What is a high and what a
low price? A grain of sand is high when examined through a microscope,
and a tower is low when compared with a mountain. And if the price is
determined by the relation of supply and demand, by what is the relation
of supply and demand determined?

Let us turn to the first worthy citizen we meet. He will not hesitate
one moment, but, like Alexander the Great, will cut this metaphysical
knot with his multiplication table. He will say to us: \"If the
production of the commodities which I sell has cost me 100 pounds, and
out of the sale of these goods I make 110 pounds -- within the year, you
understand -- that\'s an honest, sound, reasonable profit. But if in the
exchange I receive 120 or 130 pounds, that\'s a higher profit; and if I
should get as much as 200 pounds, that would be an extraordinary, and
enormous profit.\" What is it, then, that serves this citizen as the
standard of his profit? The cost of the production of his commodities.
If in exchange for these goods he receives a quantity of other goods
whose production has cost less, he has lost. If he receives in exchange
for his goods a quantity of other goods whose production has cost more,
he has gained. And he reckons the falling or rising of the profit
according to the degree at which the exchange value of his goods stands,
whether above or below his zero -- the cost of production.

We have seen how the changing relation of supply and demand causes now a
rise, now a fall of prices; now high, now low prices. If the price of a
commodity rises considerably owing to a failing supply or a
disproportionately growing demand, then the price of some other
commodity must have fallen in proportion; for of course the price of a
commodity only expresses in money the proportion in which other
commodities will be given in exchange for it. If, for example, the price
of a yard of silk rises from two to three shillings, the price of silver
has fallen in relation to the silk, and in the same way the prices of
all other commodities whose prices have remained stationary have fallen
in relation to the price of silk. A large quantity of them must be given
in exchange in order to obtain the same amount of silk. Now, what will
be the consequence of a rise in the price of a particular commodity? A
mass of capital will be thrown into the prosperous branch of industry,
and this immigration of capital into the provinces of the favored
industry will continue until it yields no more than the customary
profits, or, rather until the price of its products, owning to
overproduction, sinks below the cost of production.

Conversely: if the price of a commodity falls below its cost of
production, then capital will be withdrawn from the production of this
commodity. Except in the case of a branch of industry which has become
obsolete and is therefore doomed to disappear, the production of such a
commodity (that is, its supply), will, owning to this flight of capital,
continue to decrease until it corresponds to the demand, and the price
of the commodity rises again to the level of its cost of production; or,
rather, until the supply has fallen below the demand and its price has
risen above its cost of production, for the current price of a commodity
is always either above or below its cost of production.

We see how capital continually emigrates out of the province of one
industry and immigrates into that of another. The high price produces an
excessive immigration, and the low price an excessive emigration.

We could show, from another point of view, how not only the supply, but
also the demand, is determined by the cost of production. But this would
lead us too far away from our subject.

We have just seen how the fluctuation of supply and demand always bring
the price of a commodity back to its cost of production. The actual
price of a commodity, indeed, stands always above or below the cost of
production; but the rise and fall reciprocally balance each other, so
that, within a certain period of time, if the ebbs and flows of the
industry are reckoned up together, the commodities will be exchanged for
one another in accordance with their cost of production. Their price is
thus determined by their cost of production.

The determination of price by the cost of production is not to be
understood in the sense of the bourgeois economists. The economists say
that the average price of commodities equals the cost of production:
that is the law. The anarchic movement, in which the rise is compensated
for by a fall and the fall by a rise, they regard as an accident. We
might just as well consider the fluctuations as the law, and the
determination of the price by cost of production as an accident -- as
is, in fact, done by certain other economists. But it is precisely these
fluctuations which, viewed more closely, carry the most frightful
devastation in their train, and, like an earthquake, cause bourgeois
society to shake to its very foundations -- it is precisely these
fluctuations that force the price to conform to the cost of production.
In the totality of this disorderly movement is to be found its order. In
the total course of this industrial anarchy, in this circular movement,
competition balances, as it were, the one extravagance by the other.

We thus see that the price of a commodity is indeed determined by its
cost of production, but in such a manner that the periods in which the
price of these commodities rises above the costs of production are
balanced by the periods in which it sinks below the cost of production,
and vice versa. Of course this does not hold good for a single given
product of an industry, but only for that branch of industry. So also it
does not hold good for an individual manufacturer, but only for the
whole class of manufacturers.

The determination of price by cost of production is tantamount to the
determination of price by the labor-time requisite to the production of
a commodity, for the cost of production consists, first of raw materials
and wear and tear of tools, etc., i.e., of industrial products whose
production has cost a certain number of work-days, which therefore
represent a certain amount of labor-time, and, secondly, of direct
labor, which is also measured by its duration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[By what are wages determined?](ch04.htm)

[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
