Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### By what are wages determined?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Now, the same general laws which regulate the price of commodities in
general, naturally regulate wages, or the price of labour-power. Wages
will now rise, now fall, according to the relation of supply and demand,
according as competition shapes itself between the buyers of
labour-power, the capitalists, and the sellers of labour-power, the
workers. The fluctuations of wages correspond to the fluctuation in the
price of commodities in general. But within the limits of these
fluctuations the price of labour-power will be determined by the cost of
production, by the labour-time necessary for production of this
commodity: labour-power.

What, then, is the cost of production of labour-power?

It is the cost required for the maintenance of the labourer as a
labourer, and for his education and training as a labourer.

Therefore, the shorter the time required for training up to a particular
sort of work, the smaller is the cost of production of the worker, the
lower is the price of his labour-power, his wages. In those branches of
industry in which hardly any period of apprenticeship is necessary and
the mere bodily existence of the worker is sufficient, the cost of his
production is limited almost exclusively to the commodities necessary
for keeping him in working condition. The price of his work will
therefore be determined by the price of the necessary means of
subsistence.

Here, however, there enters another consideration. The manufacturer who
calculates his cost of production and, in accordance with it, the price
of the product, takes into account the wear and tear of the instruments
of labour. If a machine costs him, for example, 1,000 shillings, and
this machine is used up in 10 years, he adds 100 shillings annually to
the price of the commodities, in order to be able after 10 years to
replace the worn-out machine with a new one. In the same manner, the
cost of production of simple labour-power must include the cost of
propagation, by means of which the race of workers is enabled to
multiply itself, and to replace worn-out workers with new ones. The wear
and tear of the worker, therefore, is calculated in the same manner as
the wear and tear of the machine.

Thus, the cost of production of simple labour-power amounts to the cost
of the existence and propagation of the worker. The price of this cost
of existence and propagation constitutes wages. The wages thus
determined are called the minimum of wages. This minimum wage, like the
determination of the price of commodities in general by cost of
production, does not hold good for the single individual, but only for
the race. Individual workers, indeed, millions of workers, do not
receive enough to be able to exist and to propagate themselves; but the
wages of the whole working class adjust themselves, within the limits of
their fluctuations, to this minimum.

Now that we have come to an understanding in regard to the most general
laws which govern wages, as well as the price of every other commodity,
we can examine our subject more particularly.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[The nature and growth of capital](ch05.htm)

[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
