Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Nature and Growth of Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Capital consists of raw materials, instruments of labour, and means of
subsistence of all kinds, which are employed in producing new raw
materials, new instruments, and new means of subsistence. All these
components of capital are created by labour, products of labour,
accumulated labour. Accumulated labour that serves as a means to new
production is capital.

So say the economists.

What is a Negro slave? A man of the black race. The one explanation is
worthy of the other.

A Negro is a Negro. Only under certain conditions does he become a
slave. A cotton-spinning machine is a machine for spinning cotton. Only
under certain conditions does it become capital. Torn away from these
conditions, it is as little capital as gold is itself money, or sugar is
the price of sugar.

In the process of production, human beings work not only upon nature,
but also upon one another. They produce only by working together in a
specified manner and reciprocally exchanging their activities. In order
to produce, they enter into definite connections and relations to one
another, and only within these social connections and relations does
their influence upon nature operate -- i.e., does production take place.

These social relations between the producers, and the conditions under
which they exchange their activities and share in the total act of
production, will naturally vary according to the character of the means
of production. With the discover of a new instrument of warfare, the
firearm, the whole internal organization of the army was necessarily
altered, the relations within which individuals compose an army and can
work as an army were transformed, and the relation of different armies
to another was likewise changed.

We thus see that the social relations within which individuals produce,
the social relations of production, are altered, transformed, with the
change and development of the material means of production, of the
forces of production. The relations of production in their totality
constitute what is called the social relations, society, and, moreover,
a society at a definite stage of historical development, a society with
peculiar, distinctive characteristics. Ancient society, feudal society,
bourgeois (or capitalist) society, are such totalities of relations of
production, each of which denotes a particular stage of development in
the history of mankind.

Capital also is a social relation of production. It is a bourgeois
relation of production, a relation of production of bourgeois society.
The means of subsistence, the instruments of labour, the raw materials,
of which capital consists -- have they not been produced and accumulated
under given social conditions, within definite special relations? Are
they not employed for new production, under given special conditions,
within definite social relations? And does not just the definite social
character stamp the products which serve for new production as capital?

Capital consists not only of means of subsistence, instruments of
labour, and raw materials, not only as material products; it consists
just as much of exchange values. All products of which it consists are
commodities. Capital, consequently, is not only a sum of material
products, it is a sum of commodities, of exchange values, of social
magnitudes. Capital remains the same whether we put cotton in the place
of wool, rice in the place of wheat, steamships in the place of
railroads, provided only that the cotton, the rice, the steamships --
the body of capital -- have the same exchange value, the same price, as
the wool, the wheat, the railroads, in which it was previously embodied.
The bodily form of capital may transform itself continually, while
capital does not suffer the least alteration.

But though every capital is a sum of commodities -- i.e., of exchange
values -- it does not follow that every sum of commodities, of exchange
values, is capital.

Every sum of exchange values is an exchange value. Each particular
exchange value is a sum of exchange values. For example: a house worth
1,000 pounds is an exchange value of 1,000 pounds: a piece of paper
worth one penny is a sum of exchange values of 100 1/100ths of a penny.
Products which are exchangeable for others are commodities. The definite
proportion in which they are exchangeable forms their exchange value,
or, expressed in money, their price. The quantity of these products can
have no effect on their character as commodities, as representing an
exchange value, as having a certain price. Whether a tree be large or
small, it remains a tree. Whether we exchange iron in pennyweights or in
hundredweights, for other products, does this alter its character: its
being a commodity, or exchange value? According to the quantity, it is a
commodity of greater or of lesser value, of higher or of lower price.

How then does a sum of commodities, of exchange values, become capital?

Thereby, that as an independent social power -- i.e., as the power of a
part of society -- it preserves itself and multiplies by exchange with
direct, living labour-power.

The existence of a class which possesses nothing but the ability to work
is a necessary presupposition of capital.

It is only the dominion of past, accumulated, materialized labour over
immediate living labour that stamps the accumulated labour with the
character of capital.

Capital does not consist in the fact that accumulated labour serves
living labour as a means for new production. It consists in the fact
that living labour serves accumulated labour as the means of preserving
and multiplying its exchange value.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Relation of wage-labour to capital](ch06.htm)

[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
