Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Relation of Wage-Labour to Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

What is it that takes place in the exchange between the capitalist and
the wage-labourer?

The labourer receives means of subsistence in exchange for his
labour-power; the capitalist receives, in exchange for his means of
subsistence, labour, the productive activity of the labourer, the
creative force by which the worker not only replaces what he consumes,
but also gives to the accumulated labour a greater value than it
previously possessed. The labourer gets from the capitalist a portion of
the existing means of subsistence. For what purpose do these means of
subsistence serve him? For immediate consumption. But as soon as I
consume means of subsistence, they are irrevocably lost to me, unless I
employ the time during which these means sustain my life in producing
new means of subsistence, in creating by my labour new values in place
of the values lost in consumption. But it is just this noble
reproductive power that the labourer surrenders to the capitalist in
exchange for means of subsistence received. Consequently, he has lost it
for himself.

Let us take an example. For one shilling a labourer works all day long
in the fields of a farmer, to whom he thus secures a return of two
shillings. The farmer not only receives the replaced value which he has
given to the day labourer, he has doubled it. Therefore, he has consumed
the one shilling that he gave to the day labourer in a fruitful,
productive manner. For the one shilling he has bought the labour-power
of the day-labourer, which creates products of the soil of twice the
value, and out of one shilling makes two. The day-labourer, on the
contrary, receives in the place of his productive force, whose results
he has just surrendered to the farmer, one shilling, which he exchanges
for means of subsistence, which he consumes more or less quickly. The
one shilling has therefore been consumed in a double manner --
reproductively for the capitalist, for it has been exchanged for
labour-power, which brought forth two shillings; unproductively for the
worker, for it has been exchanged for means of subsistence which are
lost for ever, and whose value he can obtain again only by repeating the
same exchange with the farmer. Capital therefore presupposes
wage-labour; wage-labour presupposes capital. They condition each other;
each brings the other into existence.

Does a worker in a cotton factory produce only cotton? No. He produces
capital. He produces values which serve anew to command his work and to
create by means of it new values.

Capital can multiply itself only by exchanging itself for labour-power,
by calling wage-labour into life. The labour-power of the wage-labourer
can exchange itself for capital only by increasing capital, by
strengthening that very power whose slave it is. Increase of capital,
therefore, is increase of the proletariat, i.e., of the working class.

And so, the bourgeoisie and its economists maintain that the interest of
the capitalist and of the labourer is the same. And in fact, so they
are! The worker perishes if capital does not keep him busy. Capital
perishes if it does not exploit labour-power, which, in order to
exploit, it must buy. The more quickly the capital destined for
production -- the productive capital -- increases, the more prosperous
industry is, the more the bourgeoisie enriches itself, the better
business gets, so many more workers does the capitalist need, so much
the dearer does the worker sell himself. The fastest possible growth of
productive capital is, therefore, the indispensable condition for a
tolerable life to the labourer.

But what is growth of productive capital? Growth of the power of
accumulated labour over living labour; growth of the rule of the
bourgeoisie over the working class. When wage-labour produces the alien
wealth dominating it, the power hostile to it, capital, there flow back
to it its means of employment -- i.e., its means of subsistence, under
the condition that it again become a part of capital, that is become
again the lever whereby capital is to be forced into an accelerated
expansive movement.

To say that the interests of capital and the interests of the workers
are identical, signifies only this: that capital and wage-labour are two
sides of one and the same relation. The one conditions the other in the
same way that the usurer and the borrower condition each other.

As long as the wage-labourer remains a wage-labourer, his lot is
dependent upon capital. That is what the boasted community of interests
between worker and capitalists amounts to.

If capital grows, the mass of wage-labour grows, the number of
wage-workers increases; in a word, the sway of capital extends over a
greater mass of individuals.

Let us suppose the most favorable case: if productive capital grows, the
demand for labour grows. It therefore increases the price of
labour-power, wages.

A house may be large or small; as long as the neighboring houses are
likewise small, it satisfies all social requirement for a residence. But
let there arise next to the little house a palace, and the little house
shrinks to a hut. The little house now makes it clear that its inmate
has no social position at all to maintain, or but a very insignificant
one; and however high it may shoot up in the course of civilization, if
the neighboring palace rises in equal or even in greater measure, the
occupant of the relatively little house will always find himself more
uncomfortable, more dissatisfied, more cramped within his four walls.

An appreciable rise in wages presupposes a rapid growth of productive
capital. Rapid growth of productive capital calls forth just as rapid a
growth of wealth, of luxury, of social needs and social pleasures.
Therefore, although the pleasures of the labourer have increased, the
social gratification which they afford has fallen in comparison with the
increased pleasures of the capitalist, which are inaccessible to the
worker, in comparison with the stage of development of society in
general. Our wants and pleasures have their origin in society; we
therefore measure them in relation to society; we do not measure them in
relation to the objects which serve for their gratification. Since they
are of a social nature, they are of a relative nature.

But wages are not at all determined merely by the sum of commodities for
which they may be exchanged. Other factors enter into the problem. What
the workers directly receive for their labour-power is a certain sum of
money. Are wages determined merely by this money price?

In the 16th century, the gold and silver circulation in Europe increased
in consequence of the discovery of richer and more easily worked mines
in America. The value of gold and silver, therefore, fell in relation to
other commodities. The workers received the same amount of coined silver
for their labour-power as before. The money price of their work remained
the same, and yet their wages had fallen, for in exchange for the same
amount of silver they obtained a smaller amount of other commodities.
This was one of the circumstances which furthered the growth of capital,
the rise of the bourgeoisie, in the 18th century.

Let us take another case. In the winter of 1847, in consequence of bad
harvest, the most indispensable means of subsistence -- grains, meat,
butter, cheese, etc. -- rose greatly in price. Let us suppose that the
workers still received the same sum of money for their labour-power as
before. Did not their wages fall? To be sure. For the same money they
received in exchange less bread, meat, etc. Their wages fell, not
because the value of silver was less, but because the value of the means
of subsistence had increased.

Finally, let us suppose that the money price of labour-power remained
the same, while all agricultural and manufactured commodities had fallen
in price because of the employment of new machines, of favorable
seasons, etc. For the same money the workers could now buy more
commodities of all kinds. Their wages have therefore risen, just because
their money value has not changed.

The money price of labour-power, the nominal wages, do not therefore
coincide with the actual or real wages -- i.e., with the amount of
commodities which are actually given in exchange for the wages. If then
we speak of a rise or fall of wages, we have to keep in mind not only
the money price of labour-power, the nominal wages, but also the real
wages.

But neither the nominal wages -- i.e., the amount of money for which the
labourer sells himself to the capitalist -- nor the real wages -- i.e.,
the amount of commodities which he can buy for this money -- exhausts
the relations which are comprehended in the term wages.

Wages are determined above all by their relations to the gain, the
profit, of the capitalist. In other words, wages are a proportionate,
relative quantity.

Real wages express the price of labour-power in relation to the price of
commodities; relative wages, on the other hand, express the share of
immediate labour in the value newly created by it, in relation to the
share of it which falls to accumulated labour, to capital.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[The general law that determines the rise and fall of wages and
profit](ch07.htm)\
[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
