Karl Marx\
Wage Labour and Capital

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Introduction to Karl Marx's Wage Labour and Capital

#### by Frederick Engels

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This pamphlet first appeared in the form of a series of leading articles
in the [Neue Rheinische
Zeitung](../../subject/newspapers/neue-rheinische-zeitung.htm),
beginning on April 4th, 1849. The text is made up of from lectures
delivered by Marx before the German Workingmen's Club of Brussels in
1847. The series was never completed. The promise "to be continued," at
the end of the editorial in Number 269 of the newspaper, remained
unfulfilled in consequence of the precipitous events of that time: the
invasion of Hungary by the Russians [\[Tsarist troops invaded Hungary in
1849 to keep the Austrian Hapsburg dynasty in power\]]{.context}, and
the uprisings in Dresden, Iserlohn, Elberfeld, the Palatinate, and in
Baden [\[Spontaneous uprisings in Germany in May-July 1849, supporting
the Imperial Constitution which were crushed in mid-July\]]{.context},
which led to the suppression of the paper on May 19th, 1849. And among
the papers left by Marx no manuscript of any continuation of these
articles has been found.

"Wage-labour and Capital" has appeared as an independent publication in
several editions, the last of which was issued by the Swiss Co-operative
Printing Association, in Hottingen-Zurich, in 1884. Hitherto, the
several editions have contained the exact wording of the original
articles. But since at least 10,000 copies of the present edition are to
be circulated as a propaganda tract, the question necessarily forced
itself upon me, would Marx himself, under these circumstance, have
approved of an unaltered literal reproduction of the original?

Marx, in the '40s, had not yet completed his criticism of political
economy. This was not done until toward the end of the fifties.
Consequently, such of his writings as were published before the first
installment of his [Critique of Political
Economy](../../1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm) was finished,
deviate in some points from those written after 1859, and contain
expressions and whole sentences which, viewed from the standpoint of his
later writings, appear inexact, and even incorrect. Now, it goes without
saying that in ordinary editions, intended for the public in general,
this earlier standpoint, as a part of the intellectual development of
the author, has its place; that the author as well as the public, has an
indisputable right to an unaltered reprint of these older writings. In
such a case, I would not have dreamed of changing a single word in it.
But it is otherwise when the edition is destined almost exclusively for
the purpose of propaganda. In such a case, Marx himself would
unquestionably have brought the old work, dating from 1849, into harmony
with his new point of view, and I feel sure that I am acting in his
spirit when I insert in this edition the few changes and additions which
are necessary in order to attain this object in all essential point.

Therefore, I say to the reader at once: this pamphlet is not as Marx
wrote it in 1849, but approximately as Marx would have written it in
1891. Moreover, so many copies of the original text are in circulation,
that these will suffice until I can publish it again unaltered in a
complete edition of Marx's works, to appear at some future time.

My alterations centre about one point. According to the original
reading, the worker sells his *labour* for wages, which he receives from
the capitalist; according to the present text, he sells his
*labour-power*. And for this change, I must render an explanation: to
the workers, in order that they may understand that we are not quibbling
or word-juggling, but are dealing here with one of the most important
points in the whole range of political economy; to the bourgeois, in
order that they may convince themselves how greatly the uneducated
workers, who can be easily made to grasp the most difficult economic
analyses, excel our supercilious "cultured\" folk, for whom such
ticklish problems remain insoluble their whole life long.

[]{#1.1}

Classical political economy[^\[1\]^](#1) borrowed from the industrial
practice the current notion of the manufacturer, that he buys and pays
for the labour of his employees. This conception had been quite
serviceable for the business purposes of the manufacturer, his
bookkeeping and price calculation. But naively carried over into
political economy, it there produced truly wonderful errors and
confusions.

Political economy finds it an established fact that the prices of all
commodities, among them the price of the commodity which it calls
"labour," continually change; that they rise and fall in consequence of
the most diverse circumstances, which often have no connection
whatsoever with the production of the commodities themselves, so that
prices appear to be determined, as a rule, by pure chance. As soon,
therefore, as political economy stepped forth as a science, it was one
of its first tasks to search for the law that hid itself behind this
chance, which apparently determined the prices of commodities, and which
in reality controlled this very chance. Among the prices of commodities,
fluctuating and oscillating, now upward, now downward, the fixed central
point was searched for around which these fluctuations and oscillations
were taking place. In short, starting from the price of commodities,
political economy sought for the value of commodities as the regulating
law, by means of which all price fluctuations could be explained, and to
which they could all be reduced in the last resort.

And so, classical political economy found that the value of a commodity
was determined by the labour incorporated in it and requisite to its
production. With this explanation, it was satisfied. And we, too, may,
for the present, stop at this point. But, to avoid misconceptions, I
will remind the reader that today this explanation has become wholly
inadequate. Marx was the first to investigate thoroughly into the
value-forming quality of labour and to discover that not all labour
which is apparently, or even really, necessary to the production of a
commodity, imparts under all circumstances to this commodity a magnitude
of value corresponding to the quantity of labour used up. If, therefore,
we say today in short, with economists like Ricardo, that the value of a
commodity is determined by the labour necessary to its production, we
always imply the reservations and restrictions made by Marx. Thus much
for our present purpose; further information can be found in Marx's
*Critique of Political Economy*, which appeared in 1859, and in the
first volume of *Capital*.

But, as soon as the economists applied this determination of value by
labour to the commodity "labour\", they fell from one contradiction into
another. How is the value of "labour" determined? By the necessary
labour embodied in it. But how much labour is embodied in the labour of
a labourer of a day a week, a month, a year. If labour is the measure of
all values, we can express the "value of labour" only in labour. But we
know absolutely nothing about the value of an hour's labour, if all that
we know about it is that it is equal to one hour's labour. So, thereby,
we have not advanced one hair's breadth nearer our goal; we are
constantly turning about in a circle.

Classical economics, therefore, essayed another turn. It said: the value
of a commodity is equal to its cost of production. But, what is the cost
of production of "labour\"? In order to answer this question, the
economists are forced to strain logic just a little. Instead of
investigating the cost of production of labour itself, which,
unfortunately, cannot be ascertained, they now investigate the cost of
production of *the labourer*. And this latter can be ascertained. It
changes according to time and circumstances, but for a given condition
of society, in a given locality, and in a given branch of production,
it, too, is given, at least within quite narrow limits. We live today
under the regime of capitalist production, under which a large and
steadily growing class of the population can live only on the condition
that it works for the owners of the means of production -- tools,
machines, raw materials, and means of subsistence -- in return for
wages. On the basis of this mode of production, the labourer's cost of
production consists of the sum of the means of subsistence (or their
price in money) which on the average are requisite to enable him to
work, to maintain in him this capacity for work, and to replace him at
his departure, by reason of age, sickness, or death, with another
labourer -- that is to say, to propagate the working class in required
numbers.

Let us assume that the money price of these means of subsistence
averages 3 shillings a day. Our labourer gets, therefore, a daily wage
of 3 shillings from his employer. For this, the capitalist lets him
work, say, 12 hours a day. Our capitalist, moreover, calculates somewhat
in the following fashion: Let us assume that our labourer (a machinist)
has to make a part of a machine which he finishes in one day. The raw
material (iron and brass in the necessary prepared form) costs 20
shillings. The consumption of coal by the steam-engine, the
wear-and-tear of this engine itself, of the turning-lathe, and of the
other tools with which our labourer works, represent, for one day and
one labourer, a value of 1 shilling. The wages for one day are,
according to our assumption, 3 shillings. This makes a total of 24
shillings for our piece of a machine.

But, the capitalist calculates that, on an average, he will receive for
it a price of 27 shillings from his customers, or 3 shillings over and
above his outlay.

Whence do they 3 shillings pocketed by the capitalist come? According to
the assertion of classical political economy, commodities are in the
long run sold at their values, that is, they are sold at prices which
correspond to the necessary quantities of labour contained in them. The
average price of our part of a machine -- 27 shillings -- would
therefore equal its value, i.e., equal the amount of labour embodied in
it. But, of these 27 shillings, 21 shillings were values were values
already existing before the machinist began to work; 20 shillings were
contained in the raw material, 1 shilling in the fuel consumed during
the work and in the machines and tools used in the process and reduced
in their efficiency to the value of this amount. There remains 6
shillings, which have been added to the value of the raw material. But,
according to the supposition of our economists, themselves, these 6
shillings can arise only from the labour added to the raw material by
the labourer. His 12 hours' labour has created, according to this, a new
value of 6 shillings. Therefore, the value of his 12 hours' labour would
be equivalent to 6 shillings. So we have at last discovered what the
"value of labour" is.

"Hold on there!" cries our machinist. "Six shillings? But I have
received only 3 shillings! My capitalist swears high and day that the
value of my 12 hours' labour is no more than 3 shillings, and if I were
to demand 6, he'd laugh at me. What kind of a story is that?\"

If before this we got with our value of labour into a vicious circle, we
now surely have driven straight into an insoluble contradiction. We
searched for the value of labour, and we found more than we can use. For
the labourer, the value of the 12 hours' labour is 3 shillings; for the
capitalist, it is 6 shillings, of which he pays the workingman 3
shillings as wages, and pockets the remaining 3 shilling himself.
According to this, labour has not one but two values, and, moreover, two
very different values!

As soon as we reduce the values, now expressed in money, to labour-time,
the contradiction becomes even more absurd. By the 12 hours' labour, a
new value of 6 shillings is created. Therefore, in 6 hours, the new
value created equals 3 shillings -- the amount which the labourer
receives for 12 hours' labour. For 12 hours' labour, the workingman
receives, as an equivalent, the product of 6 hours' labour. We are,
thus, forced to one of two conclusions: either labour has two values,
one of which is twice as large as the other, or 12 equals 6! In both
cases, we get pure absurdities. Turn and twist as we may, we will not
get out of this contradiction as long as we speak of the buying and
selling of "labour" and of the "value of labour." And just so it
happened to the political economists. The last offshoot of classical
political economy -- the Ricardian school -- was largely wrecked on the
insolubility of this contradiction. Classical political economy had run
itself into a blind alley. The man who discovered the way out of this
blind alley was Karl Marx.

What the economists had considered as the cost of production of "labour"
was really the cost of production, not of "labour," but of the living
labourer himself. And what this labourer sold to the capitalist was not
his labour.

"So soon as his labour really begins," says Marx, "it ceases to belong
to him, and therefore can no longer be sold by him."

At the most, he could sell his *future* labour -- i.e., assume the
obligation of executing a certain piece of work in a certain time. But,
in this way, he does not sell labour (which would first have to be
performed), but not for a stipulated payment he places his labour-power
at the disposal of the capitalist for a certain time (in case of
time-wages), or for the performance of a certain task (in case of
piece-wages). He hires out or sells his *labour-power*. But this
labour-power has grown up with his person and is inseparable from it.
Its cost of production, therefore, coincides with his own cost of
production; what the economist called the cost of production of labour
is really the cost of production of the labourer, and therewith of his
labour-power. And, thus, we can also go back from the cost of production
of labour-power to the value of labour-power, and determine the quantity
of social labour that is required for the production of a labour-power
of a given quantity, as Marx has done in the chapter on "The Buying and
Selling of labour Power." \[[Capital, Vol.I](../../1867-c1/index.htm)\]

Now what takes place after the worker has sold his labour-power, i.e.,
after he has placed his labour-power at the disposal of the capitalist
for stipulated-wages -- whether time-wages or piece-wages? The
capitalist takes the labourer into his workshop or factory, where all
the articles required for the work can be found -- raw materials,
auxiliary materials (coal, dyestuffs, etc.), tools, and machines. Here,
the worker begins to work. His daily wages are, as above, 3 shillings,
and it makes no difference whether he earns them as day-wages or
piece-wages. We again assume that in 12 hours the worker adds by his
labour a new value of 6 shillings to the value of the raw materials
consumed, which new value the capitalist realizes by the sale of the
finished piece of work. Out of this new value, he pays the worker his 3
shillings, and the remaining 3 shillings he keeps for himself. If, now,
the labourer creates in 12 hours a value of 6 shillings, in 6 hours he
creates a value of 3 shillings. Consequently, after working 6 hours for
the capitalist, the labourer has returned to him the equivalent of the 3
shillings received as wages. After 6 hours' work, both are quits,
neither one owing a penny to the other.

"Hold on there!" now cries out the capitalist. "I have hired the
labourer for a whole day, for 12 hours. But 6 hours are only half-a-day.
So work along lively there until the other 6 hours are at an end -- only
then will we be even." And, in fact, the labourer has to submit to the
conditions of the contract upon which he entered of "his own free
will\", and according to which he bound himself to work 12 whole hours
for a product of labour which cost only 6 hours' labour.

Similarly with piece-wages. Let us suppose that in 12 hours our worker
makes 12 commodities. Each of these costs a shilling in raw materials
and wear-and-tear, and is sold for 2.5 shillings. On our former
assumption, the capitalist gives the labourer .25 of a shilling for each
piece, which makes a total of 3 shillings for 12 pieces. To earn this,
the worker requires 12 hours. The capitalist receives 30 shillings for
the 12 pieces; deducting 24 shillings for raw materials and
wear-and-tear, there remains 6 shillings, of which he pays 3 shillings
in wages and pockets the remaining 3. Just as before! Here, also, the
worker labours 6 hours for himself -- i.e., to replace his wages
(half-an-hour in each of the 12 hours), and 6 hours for the capitalist.

The rock upon which the best economists were stranded, as long as they
started out from the value of labour, vanishes as soon as we make our
starting-point the value of *labour-power*. Labour-power is, in our
present-day capitalist society, a commodity like every other commodity,
but yet a very peculiar commodity. It has, namely, the peculiarity of
being a value-creating force, the source of value, and, moreover, when
properly treated, the source of more value than it possesses itself. In
the present state of production, human labour-power not only produces in
a day a greater value than it itself possesses and costs; but with each
new scientific discovery, with each new technical invention, there also
rises the surplus of its daily production over its daily cost, while as
a consequence there diminishes that part of the working-day in which the
labourer produces the equivalent of his day's wages, and, on the other
hand, lengthens that part of the working-day in which he must present
labour gratis to the capitalist.

And this is the economic constitution of our entire modern society: the
working class alone produces all values. For value is only another
expression for labour, that expression, namely, by which is designated,
in our capitalist society of today, the amount of socially necessary
labour embodied in a particular commodity. But, these values produced by
the workers do not belong to the workers. They belong to the owners of
the raw materials, machines, tools, and money, which enable them to buy
the labour-power of the working class. Hence, the working class gets
back only a part of the entire mass of products produced by it. And, as
we have just seen, the other portion, which the capitalist class
retains, and which it has to share, at most, only with the landlord
class, is increasing with every new discovery and invention, while the
share which falls to the working class (per capita) rises but little and
very slowly, or not at all, and under certain conditions it may even
fall.

But, these discoveries and inventions which supplant one another with
ever-increasing speed, this productiveness of human labour which
increases from day to day to unheard-of proportions, at last gives rise
to a conflict, in which present capitalistic economy must go to ruin. On
the one hand, immeasurable wealth and a superfluidity of products with
which the buyers cannot cope. On the other hand, the great mass of
society proletarianized, transformed into wage-labourers, and thereby
disabled from appropriating to themselves that superfluidity of
products. The splitting up of society into a small class, immoderately
rich, and a large class of wage-labourers devoid of all property, brings
it about that this society smothers in its own superfluidity, while the
great majority of its members are scarcely, or not at all, protected
from extreme want.

This condition becomes every day more absurd and more unnecessary. It
*must* be gotten rid of; it can be gotten rid of. A new social order is
possible, in which the class differences of today will have disappeared,
and in which -- perhaps after a short transition period, which, though
somewhat deficient in other respects, will in any case be very useful
morally -- there will be the means of life, of the enjoyment of life,
and of the development and activity of all bodily and mental faculties,
through the systematic use and further development of the enormous
productive powers of society, which exists with us even now, with equal
obligation upon all to work. And that the workers are growing ever more
determined to achieve this new social order will be proven on both sides
of the ocean on this dawning May Day, and on Sunday, May 3rd. [\[Engels
is referring to the May Day celebrations of 1891\]]{.context}

FREDERICK ENGELS\
London, April 30, 1891.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

[[1.](#1.1){#1}]{.term} "By classical political economy, I understand
that economy which, since the time of W. Petty, has investigated the
real relations of production in bourgeois society, in contradistinction
to vulgar economy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without
ceasing on the materials long since provided by scientific economy, and
there seeks plausible explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena for
bourgeois daily use, but for the rest confines itself to systematizing
in a pedantic way, and proclaiming for everlasting truths, trite ideas
held by the self-complacent bourgeoisie with regard to their own world,
to them the best of all possible worlds."

(Karl Marx, [Capital, Vol.I, p.93f.](../../1867-c1/ch01.htm#33))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Preliminary](ch01.htm)\
[Wage Labour and Capital Index](index.htm)
