---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

# Programme of the Social-Democratic Emancipation of Labour Group

### (1884)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** 1884\
**Source:***Georgi Plekhanov: Selected Philosopohical Works,* Vol I.\
**Publisher:** Progress Publishers, 1974\
**Transcribed:** Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The *Emancipation of Labour* group sets itself the aim of spreading
socialist ideas in Russia and working out the elements for organising a
Russian workers' *socialist party.*

The essence of its outlook can be expressed in the following few
propositions: [[\[1\]]{.note}](#f1){#a1}

I. The economic emancipation of the working class will be achieved only
by the transfer to collective ownership by the working people of all
means and products of production and the organisation of all the
functions of social and economic life in accordance with the
requirements of society.

II\. The modern development of technology in civilised societies not
only provides the *material possibility* for such an organisation but
makes it *necessary and inevitable* for solving the contradictions which
hinder the quiet and all-round development of those societies.

III\. This radical economic revolution will entail most fundamental
changes in the entire constitution of social and international
relationships.

Eliminating the class struggle by destroying the classes themselves;
making the economic struggle of individuals impossible and unnecessary
by abolishing commodity production and the competition connected with
it; briefly, putting an end to the struggle for existence between
individuals, classes and whole societies, it renders unnecessary all
those social organs which have developed as the weapons of that struggle
during the many centuries it has been proceeding.

Without falling into utopian fantasies about the social and
international organisation of the future, we can already now foretell
the abolition of the most important of the organs of chronic struggle
inside society, namely, *the state, as a political organisation opposed
to society* and safeguarding mainly the interests of its ruling section.
In exactly the same way we can already now foresee the international
character of the impending economic revolution. The contemporary
development of international exchange of products necessitates the
participation of all civilised societies in this revolution.

That is why the socialist parties in all countries acknowledge the
international character of the present-day working-class movement and
proclaim the principle of international solidarity of producers.

The *Emancipation of Labour* group also acknowledges the great
principles of the former *International Working Men's Association* and
the identity of interests among the working people of the whole
civilised world.

IV\. Introducing *consciousness* where there now reigns *blind economic
necessity,* replacing the present mastery of the *product* over the
*producer* by that of the *producer* over the *product,* the socialist
revolution simplifies all social relationships and gives them a purpose,
at the same time providing each citizen with the real possibility of
participating directly in the discussion and decision of all social
matters.

This direct participation of citizens in the management of all social
matters presupposes the abolition of the modern system of political
representation and its replacement by direct popular legislation.

In their present-day struggle, the socialists must bear in mind this
necessary political reform and aim at its realisation by all means in
their power.

This is all the more necessary as the political self-education and the
rule of the working class are a necessary preliminary condition of its
economic emancipation. Only a completely *democratic* state can carry
out the economic revolution which conforms to the interests of the
producers and demands their intelligent participation in the
organisation and regulation of production.

At present the working class in the advanced countries is becoming
increasingly clear on the necessity of the social and political
revolution referred to and is organising into a special labour party
which is hostile to all parties of exploiters.

Being accomplished according to the principles of the *International
Working Men's Association,* this organisation, however, has mainly in
view the achievement by the workers of political domination within each
of the respective states. "The proletariat of each country must, of
course, first of all settle matters with its own bourgeoisie."

This introduces an element of variety into the programmes socialist
parties in the different states, compelling each of them to conform to
the social conditions in its country.

It goes without saying that the practical tasks, and consequently the
programmes of the socialists, are bound to be more original and
complicated in countries where capitalist production has not yet become
dominant and where the working masses are oppressed under a double yoke
-- that of rising capitalism and that of obsolescent patriarchal
economy.

In those countries, the socialists must at the same time organise the
workers for the struggle against the bourgeoisie and wage war against
the survivals of old pre-bourgeois social relationships, which are
harmful both to the development of the working class and to the welfare
of the whole people.

That is precisely the position of the Russian socialists. The working
population of Russia is oppressed directly by the whole burden of the
enormous police-despotic state and at the same time suffers all the
miseries inherent in the epoch of capitalist *accumulation* and in
places -- in our industrial centres -- it suffers from the oppression of
capitalist *production* which is not as yet limited by any decisive
intervention of the state or by the organised resistance of the workers
themselves. Present-day Russia is suffering -- as Marx once said of the
West European continent -- not only from the development of capitalist
production, but also from insufficiency of that development.

One of the most harmful consequences of this backward state of
production was and still is the underdevelopment of the middle class,
which, in our country, is incapable of taking the *initiative* in the
struggle against absolutism.

That is why the socialist intelligentsia has been obliged to head the
present-day emancipation movement, whose immediate task must be to set
up free political institutions in our country, the socialists on their
side being under the obligation to provide the working class with the
possibility to take an active and fruitful part in the future political
life of Russia.

The first means to achieve this aim must be agitation for a democratic
constitution guaranteeing:

1\. The right to vote and to be elected to the Legislative Assembly as
well as to the provincial and communal self-government bodies for every
citizen who has not been sentenced by court to deprivation of political
rights [[\[2\]]{.note}](#f2){#a2} for certain *shameful* activities
strictly specified by law.

2\. A money payment fixed by law for the representatives of the people,
which will allow them to be elected from the poorest classes of the
population.

3\. Inviolability of the person and home of citizens.

4\. Unlimited freedom of conscience, speech, the press, assembly and
association.

5\. Freedom of movement and of employment.

6\. Complete equality of all citizens irrespective of religion and
racial origin. [[\[3\]]{.note}](#f3){#a3}

7\. The replacement of the standing army by general arming of the
people.

8\. A revision of all our civil and criminal legislation, the abolition
of division according to estates and of punishments incompatible with
human dignity.

But this aim will not be achieved, the political initiative of the
workers will be unthinkable, if the fall of absolutism finds them
completely unprepared and unorganised.

That is why the socialist intelligentsia has the obligation to organise
the workers and *prepare* them as far as possible for the struggle
against the present-day system of government as well as against the
future bourgeois parties.

The intelligentsia must *immediately set to work to organise* the
workers in our industrial centres, as the foremost representatives of
the whole working population of Russia, in secret groups with links
between them and a definite social and political programme corresponding
to the present-day needs of the entire class of producers in Russia and
the basic tasks of socialism.

Understanding that the details of such a programme can be worked out
only in the future and by the working class itself when it is called on
to participate in the political life of the country and is united in its
own party, the *Emancipation of Labour* group presumes that the main
points of the economic section of the workers' programme must be the
*demands:*

1\. Of a radical revision of our agrarian relations, i.e., the
conditions for the redemption of the land and its allotment to peasant
communes. Of the right to renounce allotments and leave the commune for
those peasants who find this convenient for themselves, etc.

2\. Of the abolition of the present system of dues and the institution
of a progressive taxation system.

3\. Of the legislative regulation of relations between workers (in town
and country) and employers, and the organisation of the appropriate
*inspection with representation of the workers.*

4\. Of state assistance for production associations organised in all
possible branches of agriculture, the mining and manufacturing
industries (by peasants, miners, factory and plant workers, craftsmen,
etc.).

The *Emancipation of Labour* group is convinced that not only the
success but even the mere possibility of such a purposeful movement of
the Russian working class depends in a large degree upon the work
referred to above being done by the intelligentsia among the working
class.

But the group assumes that the intelligentsia themselves must as a
preliminary step adopt the standpoint of modern scientific socialism,
adhering to the Narodnaya Volya traditions only inasmuch as they are not
opposed to its principles.

In view of this, the Emancipation of Labour Group sets itself the aim of
spreading modern socialism in Russia and preparing the working class for
a conscious social and political movement; to this aim it devotes all
its energies, calling upon our revolutionary youth for help and
collaboration.

Pursuing this aim by all means in its power, the Emancipation of Labour
group at the same time recognises the necessity for terrorist struggle
against the absolute government and differs from the Narodnaya Volya
party only on the question of the so-called seizure of power by the
revolutionary party and of the *tasks of the immediate activity of the
socialists among the working class*.

The Emancipation of Labour group *does not in the least ignore the
peasantry, which constitutes an enormous portion of Russia's working
population.* But it assumes that the work of the intelligentsia,
especially under present-day conditions of the social and political
struggle, must be aimed first of all at the most developed part of this
population, which consists of the industrial workers. Having secured the
powerful support of this section, the socialist intelligentsia will have
far greater hope of success in extending their action to the peasantry
as well, especially if they have by that time won freedom of agitation
and propaganda. Incidentally, it goes without saying that the
distribution of the forces of our socialists *will have to be changed if
an independent revolutionary movement becomes manifest among the
peasantry,* and that even at present people who are in direct touch with
the peasantry could, by their work among them, render an important
service to the socialist movement in Russia. The Emancipation of Labour
group, far from rejecting such people, will exert all its efforts to
agree with them on the basic propositions of the programme.

Geneva, 1884

 

### Footnotes

[[\[1\]]{.note}](#a1){#f1} We by no means regard the programme which we
submit to the judgement of the comrades as something finished and
complete, not subject to partial changes or additions. On the contrary,
we are ready to introduce into it any kind of corrections provided they
do not contradict the basic concepts of scientific socialism and that
they correspond to the practical conclusions following from these
concepts concerning the work of the socialists in Russia.

[[\[2\]]{.note}](#a2){#f2} Such actions may include, for example,
bribing at elections, outrageous repression of workers by employers,
etc.

[[\[3\]]{.note}](#a3){#f3} This point is logically included in 4, which
requires, among other things, complete freedom of conscience; but we
consider it necessary to set it in relief in view of the fact that there
are in our country whole sections of the population, for instance the
Jews, who do not even enjoy the wretched "rights" made available to
other "residents".

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.7.2004
