The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852

# II

Let us pick up the threads of the development once more.

The history of the *Constituent National Assembly* since the June days
is the *history of the domination and the disintegration of the
republican faction of the bourgeoisie*, of the faction known by the
names of tricolor republicans, pure republicans, political republicans,
formalist republicans, etc.

Under the bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe it had formed the
*official* republican *opposition* and consequently a recognized
component part of the political world of the day. It had its
representatives in the Chambers and a considerable sphere of influence
in the press. Its Paris organ, the *National*, was considered just as
respectable in its way as the *Journal des Débats*. Its character
corresponded to this position under the constitutional monarchy. It was
not a faction of the bourgeoisie held together by great common interests
and marked off by specific conditions of production. It was a clique of
republican-minded bourgeois, writers, lawyers, officers, and officials
that owed its influence to the personal antipathies of the country to
Louis Philippe, to memories of the old republic, to the republican faith
of a number of enthusiasts, above all, however, to French nationalism,
whose hatred of the Vienna treaties^[\[79\]](notes.htm#n79)^ and of the
alliance with England it stirred up perpetually. A large part of the
following the *National* had under Louis Philippe was due to this
concealed imperialism, which could consequently confront it later, under
the republic, as a deadly rival in the person of Louis Bonaparte. It
fought the aristocracy of finance, as did all the rest of the bourgeois
opposition. Polemics against the budget, which in France were closely
connected with fighting the aristocracy of finance, procured popularity
too cheaply and material for puritanical leading articles too
plentifully not to be exploited. The industrial bourgeoisie was grateful
to it for its slavish defense of the French protectionist system, which
it accepted, however, more on national grounds than on grounds of
national economy; the bourgeoisie as a whole, for its vicious
denunciation of communism and socialism. For the rest, the party of the
*National* was purely republican; that is, it demanded a republican
instead of a monarchist form of bourgeois rule and, above all, the
lion's share of this rule. About the conditions of this transformation
it was by no means clear in its own mind. On the other hand, what was
clear as daylight to it, and was publicly acknowledged at the reform
banquets in the last days of Louis Philippe, was its unpopularity with
the democratic petty bourgeois, and in particular with the revolutionary
proletariat. These pure republicans, as is indeed the way with pure
republicans, were already at the point of contenting themselves in the
first instance with a regency of the Duchess of
Orleans^[\[80\]](notes.htm#n80)^ when the February Revolution broke out
and assigned their best-known representatives a place in the Provisional
Government. From the start they naturally had the confidence of the
bourgeoisie and a majority in the Constituent National Assembly. The
socialist elements of the Provisional Government were excluded forthwith
from the Executive Commission which the National Assembly formed when it
met, and the party of the *National* took advantage of the outbreak of
the June insurrection to discharge the Executive
Commission^[\[81\]](notes.htm#n81)^ also, and therewith to get rid of
its closest rivals, the petty-bourgeois, or democratic, republicans
(Ledru-Rollin, etc.). Cavaignac, the general of the bourgeois-republican
part who commanded the June massacre, took the place of the Executive
Commission with a sort of dictatorial power. Marrast, former editor in
chief of the *National*, became the perpetual president of the
Constituent National Assembly, and the ministries, as well as all other
important posts, fell to the portion of the pure republicans.

The republican bourgeois faction, which had long regarded itself as the
legitimate heir of the July Monarchy, thus found its fondest hopes
exceeded; it attained power, however, not as it had dreamed under Louis
Philippe, through a liberal revolt of the bourgeoisie against the
throne, but through a rising of the proletariat against capital, a
rising laid low with grapeshot. What it had conceived as the most
revolutionary event turned out in reality to be the most
counterrevolutionary. The fruit fell into its lap, but it fell from the
tree of knowledge, not from the tree of life.

The exclusive rule of the bourgeois republicans lasted only from June 24
to December 10, 1848. It is summed up in the drafting of a republican
constitution and in the state of siege of Paris.

The new constitution was at bottom only the republicanized edition of
the constitutional Charter of 1830.^[\[82\]](notes.htm#n82)^ The narrow
electoral qualification of the July Monarchy, which excluded even a
large part of the bourgeoisie from political rule, was incompatible with
the existence of the bourgeois republic. In lieu of this qualification,
the February Revolution had at once proclaimed direct universal
suffrage. The bourgeois republicans could not undo this event. They had
to content themselves with adding the limiting proviso of a six months'
residence in the constituency. The old organization of the
administration, the municipal system, the judicial system, the army,
etc., continued to exist inviolate, or, where the constitution changed
them, the change concerned the table of contents, not the contents; the
name, not the subject matter.

The inevitable general staff of the liberties of 1848, personal liberty,
liberty of the press, of speech, of association, of assembly, of
education and religion, etc., received a constitutional uniform which
made them invulnerable. For each of these liberties is proclaimed as the
absolute right of the French *citoyen*, but always with the marginal
note that it is unlimited so far as it is not limited by the "equal
rights of others and the public safety" or by "laws" which are intended
to mediate just this harmony of the individual liberties with one
another and with the public safety. For example:

"The citizens have the right of association, of peaceful and unarmed
assembly, of petition and of expressing their opinions, whether in the
press or in any other way. The enjoyment of these rights has no limit
save the equal rights of others and the public safety."

"Education is free. Freedom of education shall be enjoyed under the
conditions fixed by law and under the supreme control of the state."

"The home of every citizen is inviolable except in the forms prescribed
by law."

The constitution, therefore, constantly refers to future organic laws
which are to put into affect those marginal notes and regulate the
enjoyment of these unrestricted liberties in such manner that they will
collide neither with one another nor with the public safety. And later
these organic laws were brought into being by the friends of order and
all those liberties regulated in such manner that the bourgeoisie in its
enjoyment of them finds itself unhindered by the equal rights of the
other classes. Where it forbids these liberties entirely to "the
others," or permits enjoyment of them under conditions that are just so
many police traps, this always happens solely in the interest of "public
safety" -- that is, the safety of the bourgeoisie -- as the constitution
prescribes. In the sequel, both sides accordingly appeal with complete
justice to the constitution: the friends of order, who abrogated all
these liberties, as well as the democrats, who demanded all of them. For
each paragraph of the constitution contains its own antithesis, its own
upper and lower house, namely, liberty in the general phrase, abrogation
of liberty in the marginal note. Thus so long as the name of freedom was
respected and only its actual realization prevented, of course in a
legal way, the constitutional existence of liberty remained intact,
inviolate, however mortal the blows dealt to its existence in actual
life.

This constitution, made inviolable in so ingenious a manner, was
nevertheless, like Achilles, vulnerable in one point -- not in the heel,
but in the head, or rather in the two heads it wound up with: the
Legislative Assembly on the one hand, the President on the other. Glance
through the constitution and you will find that only the paragraphs in
which the relationship of the President to the Legislative Assembly is
defined are absolute, positive, noncontradictory, and cannot be
distorted. For here it was a question of the bourgeois republicans
safeguarding themselves. Articles 45-70 of the Constitution are so
worded that the National Assembly can remove the President
constitutionally, whereas the President can remove the National Assembly
only unconstitutionally, only by setting aside the constitution itself.
Here, therefore, it challenges its forcible destruction. It not only
sanctifies the division of powers, like the Charter of 1830, it widens
it into an intolerable contradiction. The play of the constitutional
powers, as Guizot termed the parliamentary squabble between the
legislative and executive power, is in the constitution of 1848
continually played *va-banque* [\[staking all\]]{.context}. On one side
are seven hundred and fifty representatives of the people, elected by
universal suffrage and eligible for re-election; they form an
uncontrollable, indissoluble, indivisible National Assembly, a National
Assembly that enjoys legislative omnipotence, decides in the last
instance on war, peace, and commercial treaties, alone possesses the
right of amnesty, and, by its permanence, perpetually holds the front of
the stage. On the other side is the President, with all the attributes
of royal power, with authority to appoint and dismiss his ministers
independently of the National Assembly, with all the resources of the
executive power in his hands, bestowing all posts and disposing thereby
in France of the livelihoods of at least a million and a half people,
for so many depend on the five hundred thousand officials and officers
of every rank. He has the whole of the armed forces behind him. He
enjoys the privilege of pardoning individual criminals, of suspending
National Guards, of discharging, with the concurrence of the Council of
State, general, cantonal, and municipal councils elected by the citizens
themselves. Initiative and direction are reserved to him in all treaties
with foreign countries. While the Assembly constantly performs on the
boards and is exposed to daily public criticism, he leads a secluded
life in the Elysian Fields, and that with Article 45 of the constitution
before his eyes and in his heart, crying to him daily: "*Frere, il faut
mourir!*" [\['Brother, one must
die!'\]]{.context}^[\[83\]](notes.htm#n83)^ Your power ceases on the
second Sunday of the lovely month of May in the fourth year after your
election! Then your glory is at an end, the piece is not played twice,
and if you have debts, look to it quickly that you pay them off with the
600,000 francs granted you by the constitution, unless, perchance, you
prefer to go to Clichy^[\[84\]](notes.htm#n84)^ on the second Monday of
the lovely month of May! Thus, whereas the constitution assigns power to
the President, it seeks to secure moral power for the National Assembly.
Apart from the fact that it is impossible to create a moral power by
paragraphs of law, the constitution here abrogates itself once more by
having the President elected by all Frenchmen through direct suffrage.
While the votes of France are split up among the seven hundred and fifty
members of the National Assembly, they are here, on the contrary,
concentrated on a single individual. While each separate representative
of the people represents only this or that party, this or that town,
this or that bridgehead, or even only the mere necessity of electing
someone as the seven hundred and fiftieth, without examining too closely
either the cause or the man, he is the elect of the nation and the act
of his election is the trump that the sovereign people plays once every
four years. The elected National Assembly stands in a metaphysical
relation, but the elected President in a personal relation, to the
nation. The National Assembly, indeed, exhibits in its individual
representatives the manifold aspects of the national spirit, but in the
President this national spirit finds its incarnation. As against the
Assembly, he possesses a sort of divine right; he is President by the
grace of the people.

Thetis, the sea goddess, prophesied to Achilles that he would die in the
bloom of youth. The constitution, which, like Achilles, had its weak
spot, also had, like Achilles, a presentiment that it must go to an
early death. It was sufficient for the constitution-making pure
republicans to cast a glance from the lofty heaven of their ideal
republic at the profane world to perceive how the arrogance of the
royalists, the Bonapartists, the democrats, the communists, as well as
their own discredit, grew daily in the same measure as they approached
the completion of their great legislative work of art, without Thetis on
this account having to leave the sea and communicate the secret to them.
They sought to cheat destiny by a catch in the constitution, through
Article III according to which every motion for a revision of the
constitution must be supported by at least three-quarters of the votes,
cast in three successive debates with an entire month between each, with
the added proviso that not less than five hundred members of the
National Assembly must vote. Thereby they merely made the impotent
attempt to continue exercising a power -- when only a parliamentary
minority, as which they already saw themselves prophetically in their
mind's eye -- a power which at that time, when they commanded a
parliamentary majority and all the resources of governmental authority,
was daily slipping more and more from their feeble hands.

Finally the constitution, in a melodramatic paragraph, entrusts itself
"to the vigilance and the patriotism of the whole French people and
every single Frenchman," after it has previously entrusted in another
paragraph the "vigilant" and "patriotic" to the tender, most painstaking
care of the High Court of Justice, the *haute cour* it invented for the
purpose.

Such was the Constitution of 1848, which on December 2, 1851, was not
overthrown by a head, but fell down at the touch of a mere hat; this
hat, to be sure, was a three-cornered Napoleonic hat.

While the bourgeois republicans in the Assembly were busy devising,
discussing, and voting this constitution, Cavaignac outside the Assembly
maintained the state of siege of Paris. The state of siege of Paris was
the midwife of the Constituent Assembly in its travail of republican
creation. If the constitution is subsequently put out of existence by
bayonets, it must not be forgotten that it was likewise by bayonets, and
these turned against the people, that it had to be protected in its
mother's womb and by bayonets that it had to be brought into existence.
The forefathers of the "respectable republicans" had sent their symbol,
the tricolor, on a tour around Europe. They themselves in turn produced
an invention that of itself made its way over the whole Continent, but
returned to France with ever renewed love until it has now become
naturalized in half her departments -- the state of siege. A splendid
invention, periodically employed in every ensuing crisis in the course
of the French Revolution. But barrack and bivouac, which were thus
periodically laid on French society's head to compress its brain and
render it quiet; saber and musket, which were periodically allowed to
act as judges and administrators, as guardians and censors, to play
policeman and do night watchman's duty; mustache and uniform, which were
periodically trumpeted forth as the highest wisdom of society and as its
rector - were not barrack and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and
uniform finally bound to hit upon the idea of instead saving society
once and for all by proclaiming their own regime as the highest and
freeing civil society completely from the trouble of governing itself?
Barrack and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and uniform were bound
to hit upon this idea all the more as they might then also expect better
cash payment for their higher services, whereas from the merely periodic
state of siege and the transient rescues of society at the bidding of
this or that bourgeois faction, little of substance was gleaned save
some killed and wounded and some friendly bourgeois grimaces. Should not
the military at last one day play state of siege in their own interest
and for their own benefit, and at the same time besiege the citizens'
purses? Moreover, be it noted in passing, one must not forget that
Colonel Bernard, the same military commission president who under
Cavaignac had fifteen thousand insurgents deported without trial, is at
this moment again at the head of the military commissions active in
Paris.

Whereas with the state of siege in Paris, the respectable, the pure
republicans planted the nursery in which the praetorians of December 2,
1851, were to grow up, they on the other hand deserve praise for the
reason that, instead of exaggerating the national sentiment as under
Louis Philippe, they now, when they had command of the national power,
crawled before foreign countries, and instead of setting Italy free, let
her be reconquered by Austrians and
Neapolitans.^[\[85\]](notes.htm#n85)^ Louis Bonaparte's election as
President on December 10, 1848, put an end to the dictatorship of
Cavaignac and to the Constituent Assembly.

In Article 44 of the Constitution it is stated:

"The President of the French Republic must never have lost his status of
French citizen."

The first President of the French Republic, L. N. Bonaparte, had not
merely lost his status of French citizen, had not only been an English
special constable, he was even a naturalized
Swiss.^[\[86\]](notes.htm#n86)^

I have worked out elsewhere the significance of the election of December
10. I will not revert to it here. It is sufficient to remark here that
it was a *reaction of the peasants*, who had had to pay the costs of the
February Revolution, against the remaining classes of the nation; a
*reaction of the country against the town*. It met with great approval
in the army, for which the republicans of the *National* had provided
neither glory nor additional pay; among the big bourgeoisie, which
hailed Bonaparte as a bridge to monarchy, among the proletarians and
petty bourgeois, who hailed him as a scourge for Cavaignac. I shall have
an opportunity later of going more closely into the relationship of the
peasants to the French Revolution.

The period from December 20, 1848, until the dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly in May, 1849, comprises the history of the downfall
of the bourgeois republicans. After having founded a republic for the
bourgeoisie, driven the revolutionary proletariat out of the field, and
reduced the democratic petty bourgeoisie to silence for the time being,
they are themselves thrust aside by the mass of the bourgeoisie, which
justly impounds this republic as *its property*. This bourgeois mass
was, however, royalist. One section of it, the large landowners, had
ruled during the Restoration and was accordingly Legitimist. The other,
the aristocrats of finance and big industrialists, had ruled during the
July Monarchy and was consequently Orleanist. The high dignitaries of
the army, the university, the church, the bar, the academy, and the
press were to be found on either side, though in various proportions.
Here, in the bourgeois republic, which bore neither the name Bourbon nor
the name Orleans, but the name capital, they had found the form of state
in which they could rule conjointly. The June insurrection had already
united them in the party of Order. Now it was necessary, in the first
place, to remove the coterie of bourgeois republicans who still occupied
the seats of the National Assembly. Just as brutal as these pure
republicans had been in their misuse of physical force against the
people, just as cowardly, mealy-mouthed, broken-spirited, and incapable
of fighting were they now in their retreat, when it was a question of
maintaining their republicanism and their legislative rights against the
executive power and the royalists. I need not relate here the
ignominious history of their dissolution. They did not succumb; they
passed out of existence. Their history has come to an end forever, and,
both inside and outside the Assembly, they figure in the following
period only as memories, memories that seem to regain life whenever the
mere name republic is once more the issue and as often as the
revolutionary conflict threatens to sink down to the lowest level. I may
remark in passing that the journal which gave its name to this party,
the *National*, was converted to socialism in the following period.

Before we finish with this period we must still cast a retrospective
glance at the two powers, one of which annihilated the other on December
2, 1851, whereas from December 20, 1848, until the exit of the
Constituent Assembly, they had lived in conjugal relations. We mean
Louis Bonaparte, on the one hand, and the part of the coalesced
royalists, the party of Order, of the big bourgeoisie, on the other. On
acceding to the presidency, Bonaparte at once formed a ministry of the
party of Order, at the head of which he placed Odilon Barrot, the old
leader, nota bene, of the most liberal faction of the parliamentary
bourgeoisie. M. Barrot had at last secured the ministerial portfolio
whose image had haunted him since 1830, and what is more, the
premiership in the ministry; but not, as he had imagined under Louis
Philippe, as the most advanced leader of the parliamentary opposition,
but with the task of putting a parliament to death, and as the
confederate of all his archenemies, Jesuits and Legitimists. He brought
the bride home at last, but only after she had been prostituted.
Bonaparte seemed to efface himself completely. This party acted for him.

The very first meeting of the council of ministers resolved on the
expedition to Rome, which, it was agreed, should be undertaken behind
the back of the National Assembly and the means for which were to be
wrested from it under false pretenses. Thus they began by swindling the
National Assembly and secretly conspiring with the absolutist powers
abroad against the revolutionary Roman republic.

In the same manner and with the same maneuvers Bonaparte prepared his
coup of December 2 against the royalist Legislative Assembly and its
constitutional republic. Let us not forget that the same party which
formed Bonaparte's ministry on December 20, 1848, formed the majority of
the Legislative National Assembly on December 2, 1851.

In August the Constituent Assembly had decided to dissolve only after it
had worked out and promulgated a whole series of organic laws that were
to supplement the constitution. On January 6, 1849, the party of Order
had a deputy named Rateau move that the Assembly should let the organic
laws go and rather decide on its own dissolution. Not only the ministry,
with Odilon Barrot at its head, but all the royalist members of the
National Assembly told it in bullying accents then that its dissolution
was necessary for the restoration of credit, for the consolidation of
order, for putting an end to the indefinite provisional arrangements and
establishing a definitive state of affairs; that it hampered the
productivity of the new government and sought to prolong its existence
merely out of malice; that the country was tired of it. Bonaparte took
note of all this invective against the legislative power, learned it by
heart, and proved to the parliamentary royalists, on December 2, 1851,
that he had learned from them. He repeated their own catchwords against
them.

The Barrot Ministry and the party of Order went further. They caused
petitions to the National Assembly to be made throughout France, in
which this body was politely requested to decamp. They thus led the
unorganized popular masses into the fire of battle against the National
Assembly, the constitutionally organized expression of the people. They
taught Bonaparte to appeal against the parliamentary assemblies to the
people. At length, on January 29, 1849, the day had come on which the
Constituent Assembly was to decide concerning its own dissolution. The
National Assembly found the building where its sessions were held
occupied by the military; Changarnier, the general of the party of
Order, in whose hands the supreme command of the National Guard and
troops of the line had been united, held a great military review in
Paris, as if a battle were impending, and the royalists in coalition
threateningly declared to the Constituent Assembly that force would be
employed if it should prove unwilling. It was willing, and only
bargained for a very short extra term of life. What was January 29 but
the coup d'etat of December 2, 1851, only carried out by the royalists
with Bonaparte against the republican National Assembly? The gentlemen
did not observe, or did not wish to observe, that Bonaparte availed
himself of January 29, 1849, to have a portion of the troops march past
him in front of the Tuileries, and seized with avidity on just this
first public summoning of the military power against the parliamentary
power to foreshadow Caligula. They, to be sure, saw only their
Changarnier.

A motive that particularly actuated the party of Order in forcibly
cutting short the duration of the Constituent Assembly's life was the
organic laws supplementing the constitution, such as the law on
education, the law on religious worship, etc. To the royalists in
coalition it was most important that they themselves should make these
laws and not let them be made by the republicans, who had grown
mistrustful. Among these organic laws, however, was also a law on the
responsibility of the President of the Republic. In 1851 the Legislative
Assembly was occupied with the drafting of just such a law, when
Bonaparte anticipated this coup with the coup of December 2. What would
the royalists in coalition not have given in their winter election
campaign of 1851 to have found the Responsibility Law ready to hand, and
drawn up, at that, by a mistrustful, hostile, republican Assembly!

After the Constituent Assembly had itself shattered its last weapon on
January 29, 1849, the Barrot Ministry and the friends of order hounded
it to death, left nothing undone that could humiliate it, and wrested
from the impotent, self-despairing Assembly laws that cost it the last
remnant of respect in the eyes of the public. Bonaparte, occupied with
his fixed Napoleonic idea,^[\[87\]](notes.htm#n87)^ was brazen enough to
exploit publicly this degradation of the parliamentary power. For when
on May 8, 1849, the National Assembly passed a vote of censure of the
ministry because of the occupation of Civitavecchia by Oudinot, and
ordered it to bring back the Roman expedition to its alleged
purpose,^[\[88\]](notes.htm#n88)^ Bonaparte published the same evening
in the Moniteur a letter to Oudinot in which he congratulated him on his
heroic exploits and, in contrast to the ink-slinging parliamentarians,
already posed as the generous protector of the army. The royalists
smiled at this. They regarded him simply as their dupe. Finally, when
Marrast, the President of the Constituent Assembly, believed for a
moment that the safety of the National Assembly was endangered and,
relying on the constitution, requisitioned a colonel and his regiment,
the colonel declined, cited discipline in his support, and referred
Marrast to Changarnier, who scornfully refused him with the remark that
he did not like *baionnettes intelligentes* [\[intellectual
bayonets\]]{.context}. In November, 1851, when the royalists in
coalition wanted to begin the decisive struggle with Bonaparte, they
sought to put through in their notorious Quaestors' Bill the principle
of the direct requisition of troops by the President of the National
Assembly.^[\[89\]](notes.htm#n89)^ One of their generals, Le Flo, had
signed the bill. In vain did Changarnier vote for it and Thiers pay
homage to the farsighted wisdom of the former Constituent Assembly. The
War Minister, Saint-Arnaud, answered him as Changarnier had answered
Marrast -- and to the acclamation of the Montagne!

Thus the party of Order, when it was not yet the National Assembly, when
it was still only the ministry, had itself stigmatized the parliamentary
regime. And it makes an outcry when December 2, 1851, banishes this
regime from France!

We wish it a happy journey.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter One](ch01.htm) \| [Chapter Three](ch03.htm)\
[Contents](index.htm)
