The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Karl Marx 1852

# VII

The social republic appeared as a phrase, as a prophecy, on the
threshold of the February Revolution. In the June days of 1848, it was
drowned in the blood of the Paris proletariat, but it haunts the
subsequent acts of the drama like a ghost. The democratic republic
announces its appearance. It is dissipated on June 13, 1849, together
with its deserting petty bourgeois, but in its flight it redoubles its
boastfulness. The parliamentary republic together with the bourgeoisie
takes possession of the entire state; it enjoys its existence to the
full, but December 2, 1851, buries it to the accompaniment of the
anguished cry of the coalesced royalists: "Long live the Republic!"

The French bourgeoisie balked at the domination of the working
proletariat; it has brought the [lumpen
proletariat](../../../../../glossary/terms/l/u.htm#lumpenproletariat) to
domination, with the Chief of the Society of December 10 at the head.
The bourgeoisie kept France in breathless fear of the future terrors of
red anarchy -- Bonaparte discounted this future for it when, on December
4, he had the eminent bourgeois of the Boulevard Montmartre and the
Boulevard des Italiens shot down at their windows by the drunken army of
law and order. The bourgeoisie apotheosized the sword; the sword rules
it. It destroyed the revolutionary press; its own press is destroyed. It
placed popular meetings under police surveillance; its salons are placed
under police supervision. It disbanded the democratic National Guard,
its own National Guard is disbanded. It imposed a state of siege; a
state of siege is imposed upon it. It supplanted the juries by military
commissions; its juries are supplanted by military commissions. It
subjected public education to the sway of the priests; the priests
subject it to their own education. It jailed people without trial, it is
being jailed without trial. It suppressed every stirring in society by
means of state power; every stirring in its society is suppressed by
means of state power. Out of enthusiasm for its moneybags it rebelled
against its own politicians and literary men; its politicians and
literary men are swept aside, but its moneybag is being plundered now
that its mouth has been gagged and its pen broken. The bourgeoisie never
tired of crying out to the revolution what St. Arsenius cried out to the
Christians: "*Fuge, tace, quiesce!*" [\["Flee, be silent, keep
still!"\]]{.context} Bonaparte cries to the bourgeoisie: "*Fuge, tace,
quiesce!*\"

The French bourgeoisie had long ago found the solution to Napoleon's
dilemma: "In fifty years Europe will be republican or Cossack." It
solved it in the "Cossack republic." No Circe using black magic has
distorted that work of art, the bourgeois republic, into a monstrous
shape. That republic has lost nothing but the semblance of
respectability. Present-day France was already contained in the
parliamentary republic. It required only a bayonet thrust for the bubble
to burst and the monster to leap forth before our eyes.

Why did the Paris proletariat not rise in revolt after December 2?

The overthrow of the bourgeoisie had as yet been only decreed; the
decree was not carried out. Any serious insurrection of the proletariat
would at once have put new life into the bourgeoisie, reconciled it with
the army, and insured a second June defeat for the workers.

On December 4 the proletariat was incited by bourgeois and shopkeeper to
fight. On the evening of that day several legions of the National Guard
promised to appear, armed and uniformed, on the scene of battle. For the
bourgeois and the shopkeeper had learned that in one of his decrees of
December 2 Bonaparte had abolished the secret ballot and had ordered
them to put a "yes" or "no" after their names on the official registers.
The resistance of December 4 intimidated Bonaparte. During the night he
had placards posted on all the street corners of Paris announcing the
restoration of the secret ballot. The bourgeois and the shopkeeper
believed they had gained their objective. Those who failed to appear
next morning were the bourgeois and the shopkeeper.

By a *coup de main* the night of December 1-2 Bonaparte had robbed the
Paris proletariat of its leaders, the barricade commanders. An army
without officers, averse to fighting under the banner of the Montagnards
because of the memories of June, 1848 and 1849, and May, 1850, it left
to its vanguard, the secret societies, the task of saving the
insurrectionary honor of Paris, which the bourgeoisie had surrendered to
the military so unresistingly that, subsequently, Bonaparte could disarm
the National Guard with the sneering motive of his fear that its weapons
would be turned against it by the anarchists!

\"This is the complete and final triumph of socialism!" Thus Guizot
characterized December 2. But if the overthrow of the parliamentary
republic contains within itself the germ of the triumph of the
proletarian revolution, its immediate and obvious result was Bonaparte's
victory over parliament, of the executive power over the legislative
power, of force without phrases over the force of phrases. In parliament
the nation made its general will the law; that is, it made the law of
the ruling class its general will. It renounces all will of its own
before the executive power and submits itself to the superior command of
an alien, of authority. The executive power, in contrast to the
legislative one, expresses the heteronomy of a nation in contrast to its
autonomy. France therefore seems to have escaped the despotism of a
class only to fall back under the despotism of an individual, and what
is more, under the authority of an individual without authority. The
struggle seems to be settled in such a way that all classes, equally
powerless and equally mute, fall on their knees before the rifle butt.

[]{#staterev}

But the revolution is thoroughgoing. It is still traveling through
purgatory. It does its work methodically. By December 2, 1851, it had
completed half of its preparatory work; now it is completing the other
half. It first completed the parliamentary power in order to be able to
overthrow it. Now that it has achieved this, it completes the executive
power, reduces it to its purest expression, isolates it, sets it up
against itself as the sole target, in order to concentrate all its
forces of destruction against it. And when it has accomplished this
second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap from its seat and
exult: Well burrowed, old mole! [\[paraphrase from Shakespeare's
*Hamlet*, Act 1, Scene 5: "Well said, old mole!", also cited by Hegel in
his [Philosophy of
History](../../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/hp/hpfinal.htm)\]]{.context}

The executive power with its enormous bureaucratic and military
organization, with its wide-ranging and ingenious state machinery, with
a host of officials numbering half a million, besides an army of another
half million -- this terrifying parasitic body which enmeshes the body
of French society and chokes all its pores sprang up in the time of the
absolute monarchy, with the decay of the feudal system which it had
helped to hasten. The seignorial privileges of the landowners and towns
became transformed into so many attributes of the state power, the
feudal dignitaries into paid officials, and the motley patterns of
conflicting medieval plenary powers into the regulated plan of a state
authority whose work is divided and centralized as in a factory.

The *first* French Revolution, with its task of breaking all separate
local, territorial, urban, and provincial powers in order to create the
civil unity of the nation, was bound to develop what the monarchy had
begun, centralization, but at the same time the limits, the attributes,
and the agents of the governmental power. Napoleon completed this state
machinery. The Legitimate Monarchy and the July Monarchy added nothing
to it but a greater division of labor, increasing at the same rate as
the division of labor inside the bourgeois society created new groups of
interests, and therefore new material for the state administration.
Every common interest was immediately severed from the society,
countered by a higher, general interest, snatched from the activities of
society's members themselves and made an object of government activity
-- from a bridge, a schoolhouse, and the communal property of a village
community, to the railroads, the national wealth, and the national
University of France. Finally the parliamentary republic, in its
struggle against the revolution, found itself compelled to strengthen
the means and the centralization of governmental power with repressive
measures. ***All revolutions perfected this machine instead of breaking
it.*** The parties, which alternately contended for domination, regarded
the possession of this huge state structure as the chief spoils of the
victor.

But under the absolute monarchy, during the first Revolution, and under
Napoleon the bureaucracy was only the means of preparing the class rule
of the bourgeoisie. Under the Restoration, under Louis Philippe, under
the parliamentary republic, it was the instrument of the ruling class,
however much it strove for power of its own.

Only under the second Bonaparte does the state seem to have made itself
completely independent. The state machinery has so strengthened itself
vis-à-vis civil society that the Chief of the Society of December 10
suffices for its head -- an adventurer dropped in from abroad, raised on
the shoulders of a drunken soldiery which he bought with whisky and
sausages and to which he has to keep throwing more sausages. Hence the
low-spirited despair, the feeling of monstrous humiliation and
degradation that oppresses the breast of France and makes her gasp. She
feels dishonored.

And yet the state power is not suspended in the air. Bonaparte
represented a class, and the most numerous class of French society at
that, the small-holding peasants.

Just as the Bourbons were the dynasty of the big landed property and the
Orleans the dynasty of money, so the Bonapartes are the dynasty of the
peasants, that is, the French masses. The chosen of the peasantry is not
the Bonaparte who submitted to the bourgeois parliament but the
Bonaparte who dismissed the bourgeois parliament. For three years the
towns had succeeded in falsifying the meaning of the December 10
election and in cheating the peasants out of the restoration of the
Empire. The election of December 10, 1848, has been consummated only by
the coup d'état of December 2, 1851.

[]{#s1} The small-holding peasants form an enormous mass whose members
live in similar conditions but without entering into manifold relations
with each other. Their mode of production isolates them from one another
instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse. The isolation is
furthered by France's poor means of communication and the poverty of the
peasants. Their field of production, the small holding, permits no
division of labor in its cultivation, no application of science, and
therefore no multifariousness of development, no diversity of talent, no
wealth of social relationships. Each individual peasant family is almost
self-sufficient, directly produces most of its consumer needs, and thus
acquires its means of life more through an exchange with nature than in
intercourse with society. A small holding, the peasant and his family;
beside it another small holding, another peasant and another family. A
few score of these constitute a village, and a few score villages
constitute a department. Thus the great mass of the French nation is
formed by the simple addition of homologous magnitudes, much as potatoes
in a sack form a sack of potatoes. Insofar as millions of families live
under conditions of existence that separate their mode of life, their
interests, and their culture from those of the other classes, and put
them in hostile opposition to the latter, they form a class. Insofar as
there is merely a local interconnection among these small-holding
peasants, and the identity of their interests forms no community, no
national bond, and no political organization among them, they do not
constitute a class. They are therefore incapable of asserting their
class interest in their own name, whether through a parliament or a
convention. They cannot represent themselves, they must be represented.
Their representative must at the same time appear as their master, as an
authority over them, an unlimited governmental power which protects them
from the other classes and sends them rain and sunshine from above. The
political influence of the small-holding peasants, therefore, finds its
final expression in the executive power which subordinates society to
itself.

Historical tradition gave rise to the French peasants' belief in the
miracle that a man named Napoleon would bring all glory back to them.
And there turned up an individual who claims to be that man because he
bears the name Napoleon, in consequence of the Code Napoleon, which
decrees: "Inquiry into paternity is forbidden." After a twenty-year
vagabondage and a series of grotesque adventures the legend is
consummated, and the man becomes Emperor of the French. The fixed idea
of the nephew was realized because it coincided with the fixed idea of
the most numerous class of the French people.

But, it may be objected, what about the peasant uprisings in half of
France,^[\[117\]](notes.htm#n117)^ the raids of the army on the
peasants, the mass incarceration and transportation of the peasants?

Since Louis XIV, France has experienced no similar persecution of the
peasants "on account of demagogic agitation."
^[\[118\]](notes.htm#n118)^

But let us not misunderstand. The Bonaparte dynasty represents not the
revolutionary, but the conservative peasant; not the peasant who strikes
out beyond the condition of his social existence, the small holding, but
rather one who wants to consolidate his holding; not the countryfolk who
in alliance with the towns want to overthrow the old order through their
own energies, but on the contrary those who, in solid seclusion within
this old order, want to see themselves and their small holdings saved
and favored by the ghost of the Empire. It represents not the
enlightenment but the superstition of the peasant; not his judgment but
his prejudice; not his future but his past; not his modern Cevennes [\[A
peasant uprising in the Cevennes mountains in 1702-1705\]]{.context} but
his modern Vendée.^[\[119\]](notes.htm#n119)^ [\[A peasant-backed
uprising against the French Revolution in the French province of Vendée,
in 1793\]]{.context}

The three years' stern rule of the parliamentary republic freed a part
of the French peasants from the Napoleonic illusion and revolutionized
them, even though superficially; but the bourgeoisie violently repulsed
them as often as they set themselves in motion. Under the parliamentary
republic the modern and the traditional consciousness of the French
peasant contended for mastery. The process took the form of an incessant
struggle between the schoolmasters and the priests. The bourgeoisie
struck down the schoolmasters. The peasants for the first time made
efforts to behave independently vis-à-vis the government. This was shown
in the continual conflict between the mayors and the prefects. The
bourgeoisie deposed the mayors. Finally, during the period of the
parliamentary republic, the peasants of different localities rose
against their own offspring, the army. The bourgeoisie punished these
peasants with sieges and executions. And this same bourgeoisie now cries
out against the stupidity of the masses, the vile multitude that
betrayed it to Bonaparte. The bourgeoisie itself has violently
strengthened the imperialism of the peasant class; it has preserved the
conditions that form the birthplaces of this species of peasant
religion. [The bourgeoisie]{#masses}, in truth, is bound to fear the
stupidity of the masses so long as they remain conservative, and the
insight of the masses as soon as they become revolutionary.

In the uprisings after the coup d'état, a part of the French peasants
protested, arms in hand, against their own vote of December 10, 1848.
The school they had gone to since 1848 had sharpened their wits. But
they had inscribed themselves in the historical underworld; history held
them to their word, and the majority was still so implicated that
precisely in the reddest departments the peasant population voted openly
for Bonaparte. In their view, the National Assembly had hindered his
progress. He has now merely broken the fetters that the towns had
imposed on the will of the countryside. In some parts the peasants even
entertained the grotesque notion of a convention with Napoleon.

After the first Revolution had transformed the semi-feudal peasants into
freeholders, Napoleon confirmed and regulated the conditions in which
they could exploit undisturbed the soil of France which they had only
just acquired, and could slake their youthful passion for property. But
what is now ruining the French peasant is his small holding itself, the
division of the land and the soil, the property form which Napoleon
consolidated in France. It is exactly these material conditions which
made the feudal peasant a small-holding peasant and Napoleon an emperor.
Two generations sufficed to produce the unavoidable result: progressive
deterioration of agriculture and progressive indebtedness of the
agriculturist. The "Napoleonic" property form, which at the beginning of
the nineteenth century was the condition of the emancipation and
enrichment of the French countryfolk, has developed in the course of
this century into the law of their enslavement and their pauperism. And
just this law is the first of the "Napoleonic ideas" which the second
Bonaparte has to uphold. If he still shares with the peasants the
illusion that the cause of their ruin is to be sought not in the small
holdings themselves but outside them -- in the influence of secondary
circumstances -- his experiments will shatter like soap bubbles when
they come in contact with the relations of production.

The economic development of small-holding property has radically changed
the peasants' relations with the other social classes. Under Napoleon
the fragmentation of the land in the countryside supplemented free
competition and the beginning of big industry in the towns. The peasant
class was the ubiquitous protest against the recently overthrown landed
aristocracy. The roots that small-holding property struck in French soil
deprived feudalism of all nourishment. The landmarks of this property
formed the natural fortification of the bourgeoisie against any surprise
attack by its old overlords. But in the course of the nineteenth century
the urban usurer replaced the feudal one, the mortgage replaced the
feudal obligation, bourgeois capital replaced aristocratic landed
property. The peasant's small holding is now only the pretext that
allows the capitalist to draw profits, interest, and rent from the soil,
while leaving it to the agriculturist himself to see to it how he can
extract his wages. The mortgage debt burdening the soil of France
imposes on the French peasantry an amount of interest equal to the
annual interest on the entire British national debt. Small-holding
property, in this enslavement by capital toward which its development
pushes it unavoidably, has transformed the mass of the French nation
into troglodytes. Sixteen million peasants (including women and
children) dwell in caves, a large number of which have but one opening,
others only two and the most favored only three. Windows are to a house
what the five senses are to the head. The bourgeois order, which at the
beginning of the century set the state to stand guard over the newly
emerged small holdings and fertilized them with laurels, has become a
vampire that sucks the blood from their hearts and brains and casts them
into the alchemist's caldron of capital. The *Code Napoléon* is now
nothing but the codex of distraints, of forced sales and compulsory
auctions. To the four million (including children, etc.) officially
recognized paupers, vagabonds, criminals, and prostitutes in France must
be added another five million who hover on the margin of existence and
either have their haunts in the countryside itself or, with their rags
and their children, continually desert the countryside for the towns and
the towns for the countryside. Therefore the interests of the peasants
are no longer, as under Napoleon, in accord with, but are now in
opposition to bourgeois interests, to capital. Hence they find their
natural ally and leader in the urban proletariat, whose task it is to
overthrow the bourgeois order. But "strong and unlimited government" -
and this is the second "Napoleonic idea" that the second Napoleon has to
carry out -- is called upon to defend this "material order" by force.
This "material order" also serves, in all Bonaparte's proclamations, as
the slogan against the rebellious peasants.

In addition to the mortgage which capital imposes on it, the small
holding is burdened by taxes. Taxes are the life source of the
bureaucracy, the army, the priests, and the court -- in short, of the
entire apparatus of the executive power. Strong government and heavy
taxes are identical. By its very nature, small-holding property forms a
basis for an all-powerful and numberless bureaucracy. It creates a
uniform level of personal and economic relationships over the whole
extent of the country. Hence it also permits uniform action from a
supreme center on all points of this uniform mass. It destroys the
aristocratic intermediate steps between the mass of the people and the
power of the state. On all sides, therefore, it calls forth the direct
intrusion of this state power and the interposition of its immediate
organs. Finally, it produces an unemployed surplus population which can
find no place either on the land or in the towns and which perforce
reaches out for state offices as a sort of respectable alms, and
provokes the creation of additional state positions. By the new markets
which he opened with bayonets, and by the plundering of the Continent,
Napoleon repaid the compulsory taxes with interest. These taxes were a
spur to the industry of the peasant, whereas now they rob his industry
of its last resources and complete his defenselessness against
pauperism. An enormous bureaucracy, well gallooned and well fed, is the
"Napoleonic idea" which is most congenial to the second Bonaparte. How
could it be otherwise, considering that alongside the actual classes of
society, he is forced to create an artificial caste for which the
maintenance of his regime becomes a bread-and-butter question? Hence one
of his first financial operations was the raising of officials' salaries
to their old level and the creation of new sinecures.

Another "*idée napoléonienne*\" [\[Napoleonic idea\]]{.context} is the
domination of the priests as an instrument of government. But while at
the time of their emergence the small-holding owners, in their accord
with society, in their dependence on natural forces and submission to
the authority which protected them from above, were naturally religious,
now that they are ruined by debts, at odds with society and authority,
and driven beyond their own limitations, they have become naturally
irreligious.

Heaven was quite a pleasing addition to the narrow strip of land just
won, especially as it makes the weather; it becomes an insult as soon as
it is thrust forward as a substitute for the small holding. The priest
then appears as only the anointed bloodhound of the earthly police --
another "*idée napoléonienne*." The expedition against Rome will take
place in France itself next time, but in a sense opposite from that of
M. de Montalembert.^[\[120\]](notes.htm#n120)^

Finally, the culminating "*idée napoléonienne*" is the ascendancy of the
army. The army was the "*point d' honneur*" of the small-holding
peasants, it was they themselves transformed into heroes, defending
their new possessions against the outer world, glorifying their recently
won nationhood, plundering and revolutionizing the world. The uniform
was their own state costume; war was their poetry; the small holding,
enlarged and rounded off in imagination, was their fatherland, and
patriotism the ideal form of the sense of property. But the enemies whom
the French peasant now has to defend his property against are not the
Cossacks; they are the *huissiers* [\[bailiffs\]]{.context} and the tax
collectors. The small holding no longer lies in the so-called fatherland
but in the registry of mortgages. The army itself is no longer the
flower of the peasant youth; it is the swamp flower of the peasant
lumpen proletariat. It consists largely of replacements, of substitutes,
just as the second Bonaparte is himself only a replacement, the
substitute for Napoleon. It now performs its deeds of valor by hounding
the peasants in masses like chamois, by doing gendarme duty; and if the
natural contradictions of his system chase the Chief of the Society of
December 10 across the French border, his army, after some acts of
brigandage, will reap, not laurels, but thrashings.

It is clear: All "*idée napoléonienne*" are ideas of the undeveloped
small holding in the freshness of its youth; they are a contradiction to
the outlived holdings. They are only the hallucinations of its death
struggle, words transformed into phrases, spirits transformed into
ghosts. But the parody of imperialism was necessary to free the mass of
the French nation from the weight of tradition and to work out in pure
form the opposition between state power and society. With the
progressive deterioration of small-holding property, the state structure
erected upon it collapses. The centralization of the state that modern
society requires arises only on the ruins of the military-bureaucratic
government machinery which was forged in opposition to feudalism.

The condition of the French peasants provides us with the answer to the
riddle of the general elections of December 20 and 21, which bore the
second Bonaparte up Mount Sinai, not to receive laws but to give them.

Obviously the bourgeoisie now had no choice but to elect Bonaparte. When
the Puritans of the Council of Constance
[\[1414-18\]]{.context}^[\[121\]](notes.htm#n121)^ complained of the
dissolute lives of the popes and wailed about the necessity for moral
reform, Cardinal Pierre d'Ailly thundered at them: "Only the devil in
person can still save the Catholic Church, and you ask for angels."
Similarly, after the coup d'état the French bourgeoisie cried out: Only
the Chief of the Society of December 10 can still save bourgeois
society! Only theft can still save property; only perjury, religion;
bastardy, the family; disorder, order!

As the executive authority which has made itself independent, Bonaparte
feels it to be his task to safeguard "bourgeois order." But the strength
of this bourgeois order lies in the middle class. He poses, therefore,
as the representative of the middle class and issues decrees in this
sense. Nevertheless, he is somebody solely because he has broken the
power of that middle class, and keeps on breaking it daily. He poses,
therefore, as the opponent of the political and literary power of the
middle class. But by protecting its material power he revives its
political power. Thus the cause must be kept alive, but the effect,
where it manifests itself, must be done away with. But this cannot
happen without small confusions of cause and effect, since in their
interaction both lose their distinguishing marks. New decrees obliterate
the border line. Bonaparte knows how to pose at the same time as the
representative of the peasants and of the people in general, as a man
who wants to make the lower classes happy within the framework of
bourgeois society. New decrees cheat the "true socialists"
^[\[122\]](notes.htm#n122)^ of their governmental skill in advance. But
above all, Bonaparte knows how to pose as the Chief of the Society of
December 10, as the representative of the lumpen proletariat to which he
himself, his entourage, his government, and his army belong, and whose
main object is to benefit itself and draw California lottery prizes from
the state treasury. And he confirms himself as Chief of the Society of
December 10 with decrees, without decrees, and despite decrees.

This contradictory task of the man explains the contradictions of his
government, the confused groping which tries now to win, now to
humiliate, first one class and then another, and uniformly arrays all of
them against him; whose uncertainty in practice forms a highly comical
contrast to the imperious, categorical style of the government decrees,
a style slavishly copied from the uncle.

Industry and commerce, hence the business affairs of the middle class,
are to prosper in hothouse fashion under the strong government: the
grant of innumerable railroad concessions. But the Bonapartist lumpen
proletariat is to enrich itself: those in the know play *tripotage*
[\[underhand dealings\]]{.context} on the Exchange with the railroad
concessions. But no capital is forthcoming for the railroads: obligation
of the Bank to make advances on railroad shares. But at the same time
the Bank is to be exploited for personal gain and therefore must be
cajoled: release the Bank from the obligation to publish its report
weekly; leonine [\[from Aesop's fable about the lion who made a contract
in which one partner got all the profits and the other all the
disadvantages\]]{.context} agreement of the Bank with the government.
The people are to be given employment: initiation of public works. But
the public works increase the people's tax obligations: hence reduction
of taxes by an attack on the rentiers, by conversion of the 5-percent
bonds into 4½-percent. But the middle class must again receive a
sweetening: hence a doubling of the wine tax for the people, who buy
wine retail, and a halving of the wine tax for the middle class, which
drinks it wholesale; dissolution of the actual workers' associations,
but promises of miraculous future associations. The peasants are to be
helped: mortgage banks which hasten their indebtedness and accelerate
the concentration of property. But these banks are to be used to make
money out of the confiscated estates of the House of Orleans; no
capitalist wants to agree to this condition, which is not in the decree,
and the mortgage bank remains a mere decree, etc., etc.

Bonaparte would like to appear as the patriarchal benefactor of all
classes. But he cannot give to one without taking from another. Just as
it was said of the Duke de Guise in the time of the Fronde that he was
the most obliging man in France because he gave all his estates to his
followers, with feudal obligations to him, so Bonaparte would like to be
the most obliging man in France and turn all the property and all the
labor of France into a personal obligation to himself. He would like to
steal all of France in order to make a present of it to France, or
rather in order to buy France anew with French money, for as the Chief
of the Society of December 10 he must buy what ought to belong to him.
And to the Institution of Purchase belong all the state institutions,
the Senate, the Council of State, the Assembly, the Legion of Honor, the
military medals, the public laundries, the public works, the railroads,
the general staff, the officers of the National Guard, the confiscated
estates of the House of Orleans. The means of purchase is obtained by
selling every place in the army and the government machinery. But the
most important feature of this process, by which France is taken in
order to give to her, are the percentages that find their way into the
pockets of the head and the members of the Society of December 10 during
the turnover. The witticism with which Countess L., the mistress of M.
de Morny, characterized the confiscation of the Orleans estates -- "It
is the first *vol* [\[the word means both "flight" and
"theft\"\]]{.context} of the eagle" -- is applicable to every flight of
this eagle, who is more like a *raven*.^[\[123\]](notes.htm#n123)^ He
and his follower; call out to one another like that Italian Carthusian
admonishing the miser who ostentatiously counted the goods on which he
could still live for years: "*Tu fai conto sopra i beni, bisogna prima
far il conto sopra gli anni*" [\[Thou countest thy goods, thou shouldst
first count thy years\]]{.context}. In order not to make a mistake in
the years, they count the minutes. At the court, in the ministries, at
the head of the administration and the army, a gang of blokes of whom
the best that can be said is that one does not know whence they come --
these noisy, disreputable, rapacious bohemians who crawl into gallooned
coats with the same grotesque dignity as the high dignitaries of
Soulouque -- elbow their way forward. One can visualize clearly this
upper stratum of the Society of December 10 if one reflects that
Veron-Crevel [\[A dissolute philistine character in Balzac's novel
*Cousin Bette*\]]{.context} is its preacher of morals and Granier de
Cassagnac its thinker. When Guizot, at the time of his ministry, turned
this Granier of an obscure newspaper into a dynastic opponent, he used
to boast of him with the quip: "*C'est le roi des droles*" [\[He is the
king of buffoons\]]{.context}. It would be wrong to recall either the
Regency^[\[124\]](notes.htm#n124)^ or Louis XV in connection with Louis
Bonaparte's court and clique. For "often before France has experienced a
government of mistresses, but never before a government of kept men."
\[Quoted from Mme. de Girardin.\]

Driven by the contradictory demands of his situation, and being at the
same time, like a juggler, under the necessity of keeping the public
gaze on himself, as Napoleon's successor, by springing constant
surprises -- that is to say, under the necessity of arranging a coup
d'état in miniature every day -- Bonaparte throws the whole bourgeois
economy into confusion, violates everything that seemed inviolable to
the Revolution of 1848, makes some tolerant of revolution and makes
others lust for it, and produces anarchy in the name of order, while at
the same time stripping the entire state machinery of its halo,
profaning it and making it at once loathsome and ridiculous. The cult of
the Holy Tunic of Trier^[\[125\]](notes.htm#n125)^ [\[A Catholic relic,
allegedly taken from Christ when he was dying, preserved in the
cathedral of Marx's native city\]]{.context} he duplicates in Paris in
the cult of the Napoleonic imperial mantle. But when the imperial mantle
finally falls on the shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of
Napoleon will come crashing down from the top of the Vendôme
Column.^[\[126\]](notes.htm#n126)^

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](index.htm)\
[Marx/Engels Archive](../../../index.htm) \| [Contents](index.htm)
