Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871

### Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann In Hanover

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} April 17, 1871;\
[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} International Publishers (1968);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gestamtausgabe*;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} [Sally
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) in 1999;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### \[London\] April 17, 1871

**Dear Kugelmann**

Your letter duly received. Just at present I have my hands full. Hence
only a few words.

\... How you can compare petty-bourgeois demonstrations *à la* 13
June^[\[1\]](#n1)^, 1849, etc., with the present struggle in Paris is
quite incomprehensible to me.

World history would indeed be very easy to make, if the struggle were
taken up only on condition of infallibly favorable chances. It would, on
the other hand, be a very mystical nature, if "accidents" played no
part. These accidents themselves fall naturally into the general course
of development and are compensated again by other accidents. But
acceleration and delay are very dependent upon such "accidents," which
included the \"accident\" of the character of those who at first stand
at the head of the movement.

The decisive, unfavorable "accident" this time is by no means to be
found in the general conditions of French society, but in the presence
of the Prussians in France and their position right before Paris. Of
this the Parisians were well aware. But of this, the bourgeois
*canaille* of Versailles were also well aware. Precisely for that reason
they presented the Parisians with the alternative of taking up the fight
of succumbing without a struggle. In the latter case, the demoralization
of the working class against the capitalist class and its state has
entered upon a new phase with the struggle in paris. Whatever the
immediate results may be, a new point of departure of world-historic
importance has been gained. \...

Adieu!

**KM**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} On 13 June 1849, the petty-bourgeois party of the
Montagne organised a peaceful demonstration in Paris as a protest
against the infringements of the French constitution by the president
and the majority of the Legislative Assembly. The demonstration was
easily dispersed by troops thus confirming the complete bankruptcy of
the petty-bourgeois democrats in France -- Progress Publishers.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1871 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
