Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871

# Marx to Dr Kugelmann Concerning the Paris Commune

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} April 12-17, 1871;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} Zodiac;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} [S.
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### \[London\] April 12, 1871

**Dear Kugelmann**

Your 'medical advice' was effective in so far as I have consulted my Dr
Maddison and have for the present put myself under his care. He says
however that my lungs are in excellent condition and the cough is due to
bronchitis, etc. It probably also affects the liver.

Yesterday we received the by no means soothing news that Lafargue (not
Laura) was at present in Paris. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

If you look at the last chapter of my [Eighteenth
Brumaire](../../1852/18th-brumaire/index.htm) you will find that I say
that the next attempt of the French revolution will be no longer, as
before, to transfer the bureaucratic-military machine from one hand to
another, but to *smash* it, and this is essential for every real
people\'s revolution on the Continent. And this is what our heroic Party
comrades in Paris are attempting. What elasticity, what historical
initiative, what a capacity for sacrifice in these Parisians! After six
months of hunger and ruin, caused rather by internal treachery than by
the external enemy, they rise, beneath Prussian bayonets, as if there
had never been a war between France and Germany and the enemy were not
at the gates of Paris. History has no like example of a like greatness.
If they are defeated only their "good nature" will be to blame. They
should have marched at once on Versailles, after first Vinoy and then
the reactionary section of the Paris National Guard had themselves
retreated. The right moment was missed because of conscientious
scruples. They did not want to *start the civil war*, as if that
mischievous *abortion* Thiers had not already started the civil war with
his attempt to disarm Paris. Second mistake: The Central Committee
surrendered its power too soon, to make way for the Commune. Again from
a too "honorable" scrupulosity! However that may be, the present rising
in Paris -- even if it be crushed by the wolves, swine and vile curs of
the old society -- is the most glorious deed of our Party since the June
insurrection in Paris. Compare these Parisians, storming heaven, with
the slave to heaven of the German-Prussian Holy Roman Empire, with its
posthumous masquerades reeking of the barracks, the Church,
cabbage-*junkerdom* and above all, of the philistine.

A propos. In the official publication of the list of those receiving
direct subsidies from Louis Bonaparte\'s treasury there is a note that
Vogt received 40,000 francs in August 1859. I have informed Liebknecht
of the *fait*, for further use.

You can send me Haxthausen's ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ book for *lately* I have
been receiving undamaged various pamphlets, etc, not only from Germany
but even from Petersburg.

Thanks for the various newspapers you sent me. (Please let me have more
of them, for I want to write something about Germany, the Reichstag,
etc.)

Best regards to the Countess and Käuzchen. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^

Yours

**KM**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Paul Lafargue had come to Paris from Bordeaux, where
he was then living, to obtain from the Commune full powers to organise
an armed uprising in Bordeaux -- Progress Publishers.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} August Haxthausen (1792-1866) -- Prussian official
and writer, author of a book on survival of communal system in land
relations in Russia, reactionary feudalist -- Progress Publishers.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann -- Progress
Publishers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1871 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
