Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871

# Marx to Friedrich Bolte In New York

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} November 23, 1871;\
[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} International Publishers (1968);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gestamtausgabe*;\
[Translated:]{.info} Donna Torr;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} [Sally
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) in 1999;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### \[London,\] November 23, 1871

[The
International](../../../../../glossary/orgs/f/i.htm#first-international)
was founded in order to replace the Socialist or semi-Socialist sects by
a real organisation of the working class for struggle. The original
Statutes and the Inaugural Address show this at the first glance. On the
other hand the Internationalists could not have maintained themselves if
the course of history had not already smashed up the sectarian system.
The development of the system of Socialist sects and that of the real
workers\' movement always stand in inverse ratio to each other. So long
as the sects are (historically) justified, the working class is not yet
ripe for an independent historic movement. As soon as it has attained
this maturity ail sects are essentially reactionary. Nevertheless what
history has shown everywhere was repeated within the International. The
antiquated makes an attempt to re-establish and maintain itself within
the newly achieved form.

And the history of the International was a continual struggle on the
part of the General Council against the sects and amateur experiments
which attempted to assert themselves within the International itself
against the genuine movement of the working class. This struggle was
conducted at the Congresses, but far more in the private dealings of the
General Council with the individual sections.

In Paris, as the
[Proudhonists](../../../../../glossary/terms/p/r.htm#proudhonism)
(Mutualists) were co-founders of the Association, they naturally had the
reins in their hands there for the first years. Later, of course,
collectivist, positivist, etc., groups were formed in opposition to
them.

In Germany -- the
[Lassalle](../../../../../glossary/people/l/a.htm#lassalle) clique. I
myself went on corresponding for two years with the notorious Schweitzer
and proved irrefutably to him that Lassalle\'s organisation is nothing
but a sectarian organisation and as such hostile to the organisation of
the *genuine* workers\' movement striven for by the International. He
had his \"reasons\" for not understanding this.

At the end of 1868 the Russian,
[Bakunin](../../../../../glossary/people/b/a.htm#bakunin), entered the
*International* with the aim of forming inside it a *second
International* called the "*Alliance of Social-Democracy," with himself
as leader.* He -- a man devoid of theoretical knowledge -- put forward
the pretension that this separate body was to represent the scientific
propaganda of the International, which was to be made the special
function of this second *International within the International.*

His programme was a superficially scraped together hash of Right and
Left -- EQUALITY Of CLASSES (!), *abolition of the right of inheritance
as the starting point* of the social movement (St. Simonistic nonsense),
*atheism as a dogma* to be dictated to the members, etc., and as the
main dogma *(Proudhonist), abstention from the political movement.*

This infant\'s spelling-book found favour (and still has a certain hold)
in Italy and Spain, where the real conditions of the workers\' movement
are as yet little developed, and among a few vain, ambitious and empty
doctrinaires in French Switzerland and Belgium.

For Mr. [Bakunin](../../../../../glossary/people/b/a.htm#bakunin) the
theory (the assembled rubbish he has scraped together from
[Proudhon](../../../../../glossary/people/p/r.htm#proudhon), St. Simon,
etc.) is a secondary affair -- merely a means to his personal
self-assertion. If he is a nonentity as a theoretician he is in his
element as an intriguer.

For years the General Council had to fight against this conspiracy
(which was supported up to a certain point by the French Proudhonists,
especially in the *south of France).* At last, by means of Conference
resolutions I (2) and (3), IX, XVI, and XVII, it delivered its long
prepared blow.

Obviously the General Council does not support in America what it
combats in Europe. Resolutions I (2) and (3) and IX now give the New
York committee legal weapons with which to put an end to all sectarian
formations and amateur groups and if necessary to expel them.

The New York Committee will do well to express its full agreement with
the decisions of the Conference in an *official communication to the
General Council.*

Bakunin, personally threatened in addition by Resolution XIV
(publication in *Égalité* of the Netchaev trial) which will bring to
light his infamous doings in Russia, is making every possible effort to
get a protest started against the Conference among the remnants of his
followers.

For this purpose he has got into contact with the demoralised section of
the French political refugees in Geneva and London (a numerically weak
section, anyway). The slogan given out is that the Geneva Council is
dominated by *Pan-Germanism* (especially Bismarckism). This refers to
the *unpardonable* fact that I am by birth a German and do actually
exercise a decisive intellectual influence on the German Council. (N.B.
The *German* element on the Council is two-thirds weaker *numerically*
than either the *English* or the *French.* The crime therefore consists
in the fact that the English and French elements are dominated by the
German element where *theory* is concerned (!) and find this domination,
i.e., German science, very useful and indeed indispensable.)

In Geneva, under the patronage of the bourgeois Madame Andrée Léo (who
at the Lausanne Congress was shameless enough to denounce Ferré to his
executioners in Versailles), they have published a paper, *La Révolution
Sociale,* which conducts arguments against us in almost literally the
same words as the *Journal de Genève,* the most reactionary paper in
Europe.

In London they attempted to establish a French section, of whose
activities you will find an example in No. 42 of *Qui Vive?* which I
enclose. (Also the number which contains the letter from our French
Secretary, Seraillier). This section, consisting of twenty people
(including a lot of spies), has not been recognised by the General
Council, but another much more numerous section has been.

Actually, despite the intrigues of this bunch of scoundrels, we are
carrying on great propaganda in France\--and in Russia, where they know
what value to place on Bakunin and where my book on capital is just
being published in Russian\....

*N.B. as to political movement:* The political movement of the working
class has as its object, of course, the conquest of political power for
the working class, and for this it is naturally necessary that a
previous organisation of the working class, itself arising from their
economic struggles, should have been developed up to a certain point.

On the other hand, however, every movement in which the working class
comes out as a class against the ruling classes and attempts to force
them by pressure from without is a political movement. For instance, the
attempt in a particular factory or even a particular industry to force a
shorter working day out of the capitalists by strikes, etc., is a purely
economic movement. On the other hand the movement to force an eight-hour
day, etc., *law* is a *political* movement. And in this way, out of the
separate economic movements of the workers there grows up everywhere a
*political* movement, that is to say a movement of the *class,* with the
object of achieving its interests in a general form, in a form
possessing a general social force of compulsion. If these movements
presuppose a certain degree of previous organisation, they are
themselves equally a means of the development of this organisation.

Where the working class is not yet far enough advanced in its
organisation to undertake a decisive campaign against the collective
power, i.e., the political power of the ruling classes, it must at any
rate be trained for this by continual agitation against and a hostile
attitude towards the policy of the ruling classes. Otherwise it will
remain a plaything in their hands, as the September revolution in France
showed, and as is also proved up to a certain point by the game Messrs.
[Gladstone](../../../../../glossary/people/g/l.htm#gladstone) & Co. are
bringing off in England even up to the present time.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1871 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
