---
layout: default
title: 
---
Antonio Labriola

## Essays on the Materialist Conception of History

### Part 1: In Memory of the Communist Manifesto

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In three years we can celebrate our jubilee. The memorable date of
publication of the Communist Manifesto (February, 1848) marks our first
unquestioned entrance into history. To that date are referred all our
judgments and all our congratulations on the progress made by the
proletariat in these last fifty years. That date marks the beginning of
the new era. This is arising, or, rather, is separating itself from the
present era, and is developing by a process peculiar to itself and thus
in a way that is necessary and inevitable, whatever may be the
vicissitudes and the successive phases which cannot yet be foreseen.

All those in our ranks who have a desire or an occasion to possess a
better understanding of their own work should bring to mind the causes
and the moving forces which determined the genesis of the Manifesto, the
circumstances under which it appeared on the eve of the Revolution which
burst forth from Paris to Vienna, from Palermo to Berlin. Only in this
way will it be possible for us to find in the present social form the
explanation of the tendency towards socialism, thus showing by its
present necessity the inevitability of its triumph.

Is not that in fact the vital part of the Manifesto, its essence and its
distinctive character?

We surely should be taking a false road if we regarded as the essential
part the measures advised and proposed at the end of the second chapter
for the contingency of a revolutionary success on the part of the
proletariat -- or again the indications of political relationship to the
other revolutionary parties of that epoch which are found in the fourth
chapter. These indications and these measures, although they deserved to
be taken into consideration at the moment and under the circumstances
where they were formulated and suggested, and although they may be very
important for forming a precise estimate of the political action of the
German communists in the revolutionary period from 1848 to 1850,
henceforth no longer form for us a mass of practical judgments for or
against which we should take sides in each contingency. The political
parties which since the International have established themselves in
different countries, in the name of the proletariat, and taking it
clearly for their base, have felt, and feel, in proportion as they are
born and develop, the imperious necessity of adopting and conforming
their programme and their action to circumstances always different and
multiform. But not one of these parties feels the dictatorship of the
proletariat so near or even the temptation to examine anew and pass
judgment upon the measures proposed in the Manifesto. There really are
no historic experiences but those that history makes itself. It is as
impossible to foresee them as to plan them beforehand or make them to
order. That is what happened at the moment of the Commune, which was and
which still remains up to this day the only experience (although partial
and confused because it was sudden and of short duration) of the action
of the proletariat in gaining control of political power. This
experience, too, was neither desired nor sought for, but imposed by
circumstances. It was heroically carried through and has become a
salutary lesson for us today. It might easily happen that where the
socialist movement is still in its beginnings, appeal may be made, for
lack of personal direct experience -- as often happens in Italy -- to
the authority of a text from the Manifesto as if it were a precept, but
these passages are in reality of no importance.

Again, we must not, as I believe, seek for this vital part, this
essence, this distinctive character, in what the Manifesto says of the
other forms of socialism of which it speaks under the name of
*literature*. The entire third chapter may doubtless serve for defining
clearly by way of exclusion and antithesis, by brief but vigorous
characterizations, the differences which really exist between the
communism commonly characterized to-day as scientific -- an expression
sometimes used in a mistaken way -- that is to say, between the
communism which has the proletariat for its subject and the proletarian
revolution for its theme, and the other forms of socialism; reactionary,
bourgeois, semi-bourgeois, petite-bourgeois, utopian, etc. All these
forms except one[]{#[1]}^[\[1\]](#1.)^ have re-appeared and renewed
themselves more than once. They are re-appearing under a new form even
to-day in the countries where the modern proletarian movement is of
recent birth. For these countries and under these circumstances the
Manifesto has exercised and still exercises the function of contemporary
criticism and of a literary whip. And in the countries where these forms
have already been theoretically and practically outgrown, as in Germany
and Austria, or survive only as an individual opinion among a few, as in
France and England, without speaking of other nations, the Manifesto
from this point of view has played its part. It thus merely records as a
matter of history something no longer necessary to think of, since we
have to deal with the political action of the proletariat which already
is before us in its gradual and normal course.

That was, to anticipate, the attitude of mind of those who wrote it. By
the force of their thought and with some scanty data of experience they
had anticipated the events which have occurred and they contented
themselves with declaring the elimination and the condemnation of what
they had outgrown. Critical communism -- that is its true name, and
there is none more exact for this doctrine -- did not take its stand
with the feudalists in regretting the old society for the sake of
criticising by contrast the contemporary society -- it had an eye only
to the future. Neither did it associate itself with the petty bourgeois
in the desire of saving what cannot be saved -- as, for example, small
proprietorship, or the tranquil life of the small proprietor whom the
bewildering action of the modern state, the necessary and natural organ
of present society, destroys and overturns, because by its constant
revolutions it carries in itself the necessity for other revolutions new
and more fundamental.

Neither did it translate into metaphysical whimsicalities, into sickly
sentimentalism, or into a religious contemplation, the real contrasts of
the material interests of every day life: on the contrary, it exposed
those contrasts in all their prosaic reality. It did not construct the
society of the future upon a plan harmoniously conceived in each of its
parts. It has no word of eulogy and exaltation, of invocation and of
regret, for the two goddesses of philosophic mythology, justice and
equality, those two goddesses who cut so sad a figure in the practical
affairs of everyday life, when we observe that the history of so many
centuries maliciously amuses itself by nearly always contradicting their
infallible suggestions. Once more these communists, while declaring on
the strength of facts which carry conviction that the mission of the
proletarians is to be the grave diggers of the bourgeoisie, still
recognize the latter as the author of a social form which represents
extensively and intensively an important stage of progress, and which
alone can furnish the field for the new struggles which already give
promise of a happy issue for the proletariat. Never was funeral oration
so magnificent. There is in these praises addressed to the bourgeoisie a
certain tragical humor -- they have been compared to dithyrambics.

The negative and antithetical definitions of other forms of socialism
then current, which have often re-appeared since, even up to the present
time, although they are fundamentally beyond criticism both in their
form and their aim, nevertheless, do not pretend to be and are not the
real history of socialism; they furnish neither its outlines nor its
plan for him who would write it. History in reality does not rest upon
the distinction between the true and the false, the just and the unjust
and still less upon the more abstract antithesis between the possible
and the real as if the things were on one side and on the other side
were their shadows and their reflections in ideas. History is all of a
piece, and it rests upon the process of formation and transformation of
society; and that evidently in a fashion altogether objective and
independent of our approval or disapproval. It is a dynamic of a special
class to speak like the positivists who are so dainty with expressions
of this sort but are often dominated by the new phrases they have put
out. The different socialist forms of thought and action which have
appeared and disappeared in the course of the centuries, so different in
their causes, their aspects, and their effects, are all to be studied
and explained by the specific and complex conditions of the social life
in which they were produced. Upon a close examination it is seen that
they do not form one single whole of continuous process because the
series is frequently interrupted by changes in the social fabric and by
the disappearance and breaking off of the tradition. It is only since
the French Revolution that socialism presents a certain unity of
process, which appears more evident since 1830 with the definite
political supremacy of the capitalist class in France and England and
which finally becomes obvious, we might say even palpable, since the
rise of the International. Upon this road the Manifesto stands like a
colossal guide post bearing a double inscription: on one side the first
sketch of the new doctrine which has now made the circle of the world;
on the other, the definition of its relations to the forms which it
excludes, without giving, however, any historic account of them.

The vital part, the essence, the distinctive character of this work are
all contained in the new conception of history which permeates it and
which in it is partially explained and developed. By the aid of this
conception, communism, ceasing to be a hope, an aspiration, a
remembrance, a conjecture, and expedient, found for the first time its
adequate expression in the realization of its very necessity, that is to
say, in the realization that it is the outcome and the solution of the
struggles of existing classes. These struggles have varied according to
times and places and out of them history has developed; but, they are
all reduced in our days to the single struggle between the capitalist
bourgeois and the workingmen inevitably forced into the ranks of the
proletariat. The Manifesto gives the genesis of this struggle; it
details its evolutionary rhythm, and predicts its final result.

In that conception of history is embodied the whole doctrine of
scientific communism. From that moment the theoretical adversaries of
socialism have no longer had to discuss the abstract possibility of the
democratic socialization of the means of
production;[]{#[2]}^[\[2\]](#2.)^ as if it were possible in this
question to rest their judgment upon inductions based upon the general
and common aptitudes of what they characterize as human nature.
Thenceforth, the question was to recognize, or not to recognize, in the
course of human events the necessity which stands over and above our
sympathy and our subjective assent. Is or is not society in the
countries most advanced in civilization organized in such a way that it
will pass into communism by the laws inherent in its own future, once
conceding its present economic structure and the friction which it
necessarily produces within itself, and which will end by breaking and
dissolving it? That is the subject of all discussion since the
appearance of this theory and thence follows also the rule of conduct
which imposes itself upon the action of the socialist parties whether
they have in their ranks men who have come out from the other classes
and who join as volunteers the army of the proletariat.

That is why we voluntarily accept the epithet of scientific, provided we
do not thus confuse ourselves with the positivists, sometimes
embarrassing guests, who assume to themselves a monopoly of science; we
do not seek to maintain an abstract and generic thesis like lawyers or
sophists, and we do not plume ourselves on demonstrating the
reasonableness of our aims. Our intentions are nothing less than the
theoretical expression and the practical explanation of the data offered
us by the interpretation of the process which is being accomplished
among us and about us and which has it whole existence in the objective
relations of social life of which we are the subject and the object, the
cause and the effect. Our aims are rational, not because they are
founded on arguments drawn from the reasoning of reason, but because
they are derived from the objective study of things, that is to say,
from the explanation of their process, which is not, and which cannot
be, a result of our will but which on the contrary triumphs over our
will and subdues it.

Not one of the previous or subsequent works of the authors of the
Manifesto themselves, although they have a much more considerable
scientific leaning, can replace the Manifesto or have the same specific
efficacy. It gives us in its classic simplicity the true expression of
this situation; the modern proletariat exists, takes its stand, grows
and develops in contemporary history as the concrete subject, the
positive force whose necessarily revolutionary action must find in
communism its necessary outcome. And that is why this work while giving
a theoretical base to its prediction and expressing it in brief, rapid
and concise formulae, forms a storehouse, or rather an inexhaustible
mine of embryonic thoughts which the reader may fertilize and multiply
indefinitely; it preserves all the original and originating force of the
thing which is but lately born and which has not yet left the field of
its production. This observation is intended especially for those who
applying a learned ignorance, when they are not humbugs, charlatans, or
amiable dilletanti, give to the doctrine of critical communism
precursors, patrons, allies and masters of every class without any
respect for common sense and the most vulgar chronology. Or, again they
try to bring back our materialistic conception of history into the
theory of universal evolution which to the minds of many is but a new
metaphor of a new metaphysics. Or again they seek in this doctrine a
derivative of Darwinism which is an analogous theory only in a certain
point of view and in a very broad sense; or again they have they
condescension to favor us with the alliance or the patronage of that
positive philosophy which extends from Comte, that degenerate and
reactionary disciple of the genial Saint-Simon, to Spencer, that
quintessence of anarchical capitalism, which is to say that they wish to
give us for allies our most open adversaries.

It is to its origin that this work owes its fertilizing power, its
classic strength, and the fact that it has given in so few pages the
synthesis of so many series and groups of ideas.[]{#[3]}^[\[3\]](#3.)^

It is the work of two Germans, but it is not either in its form or its
basis the expression of personal opinion. It contains no trace of the
imprecations, or the anxieties, or the bitterness familiar to all
political refugees and to all those who have voluntarily abandoned their
country to breathe elsewhere freer air. Neither do we find in it the
direct reproduction of the conditions of their own country, then in a
deplorable political state and which could not be compared to those of
France and England socially and economically, except as regards certain
portions of their territory. They brought to their work, on the
contrary, the philosophical thought which alone had placed and
maintained their country upon the level of contemporary history:-this
philosophic thought which in their hands was undergoing that important
transformation which permitted materialism, already renewed by Feuerbach
combined with dialectics, to embrace and understand the movement of
history in its most secret and until then unexplored causes,-unexplored
because hidden and difficult to observe. Both were communists and
revolutionists, but they were so neither by instinct, by impulse nor by
passion. They had elaborated an entirely new criticism of economic
science and they had understood the connection and the historic meaning
of the proletarian movement on both sides of the Channel, in France and
in England, before they were called to give in the Manifesto the
programme and the doctrine of the Communist League. This had its center
in London and numerous branches on the continent; it had behind it a
life and a development of its own.

Engels had already published a critical essay in which passing over all
subjective and one-sided corrections he brought out for the first time
in an objective fashion the criticism of political economy and of the
antitheses inherent in the data and the concepts of that economy itself,
and he had become celebrated by the publication of a book on the
condition of the working class which was the first attempt to represent
the movements of the working class as a result of the workings of the
forces and means of production.[]{#[4]}^[\[4\]](#4.)^ Marx, in the few
years preceding, had become known as a radical publicist in Germany,
Paris and Brussels. He had conceived the first rudiments of the
materialistic conception of history. He had made a theoretically
victorious criticism of the hypotheses of Proudhon and the deductions
from his doctrine, and had given the first precise explanation of the
origin of surplus value as a consequence of the purchase and the use of
labor power, that is to say the first germ of the conceptions which were
later demonstrated and explained in their connection and their details
in Capital. Both men were in touch with the revolutionists of the
different countries of Europe, notably France, Belgium and England;
their Manifesto was not the expression of their personal theory, but the
doctrine of a party whose spirit, aim and activity already formed the
International Workingmen\'s Association.

These are the beginnings of modern socialism. We find here the line
which separates it from all the rest.

*The Communist League* grew out of the *League of the Just*; the latter
in its turn had been formed with a clear consciousness of its
proletarian aims through a gradual specialization of the generic group
of the refugees, the exiles. As a type, bearing within itself in an
embryonic design the form of all the later socialist and proletarian
movements, it had traversed the different phases of conspiracy and of
equalitarian socialism. It was metaphysical under Gruen and utopian with
Weitling. Having its principal seat at London it was interested in the
Chartist movement and had had some influence over it. This movement
showed by its disordered character, because it was neither the fruit of
a premeditated experience, nor the embodiment of a conspiracy or of a
sect, how painfully and difficult was the formation of a proletarian
political party. the socialist tendency was not manifested in Chartism
until the movement was near its end and was nearly finished (though
Jones and Horner can never be forgotten). The *League* everywhere
carried an odor of revolution, both because the thing was in the air and
because its instinct and method of procedure tended that way: and as
long as the revolution was bursting forth effectively, it provided
itself, thanks to the new doctrine of the Manifesto, with an instrument
of orientation which was at the same time a weapon for combat. In fact,
already international, both by the quality and differences of origin of
its members, and still more by the result of the instinct and devotion
of all, it took its place in the general movement of political life as
the clear and definite precursor of all that can to-day be called modern
socialism, if by modern we mean not the simple fact of extrinsic
chronology but an index of the internal or organic process of society.

A long interruption from 1852 to 1864 which was the period of political
reaction and at the same time that of the disappearance, the dispersion
and the absorption of the old socialist schools, separates the
International of the *Arbeiterbildungsverein* of London, from the
International properly so called, which, from 1864 to 1873, strove to
put unity into the struggle of the proletariat of Europe and America.
The action of the proletariat had other interruptions especially in
France, and with the exception of Germany, from the dissolution of the
International of glorious memory up to the new International which lives
to-day through other means and which is developing in other ways, both
of them adapted to the political situation in which we live, and based
upon riper experience. But just as the survivors of those who in
December, 1847, discussed and accepted the new doctrine, have
re-appeared on the public scene in the great International and later
again in the new International, the Manifesto itself has also
re-appeared little by little and haws made the tour of the world in all
the languages of the civilized countries, something which it promised to
do but could not do at the time of is first appearance.

There was our real point of departure; there were our real precursors.
They marched before all the others, early in the day, with a step rapid
but sure, over this exact road which we were to traverse and which we
are traversing in reality. It is not proper to give the name of our
precursors to those who followed ways which they later had to abandon,
or to those who, to speak without metaphor, formulated doctrines and
started movements, doubtless explicable by the times and circumstances
of their birth, but which were later outgrown by the doctrine of
critical communism, which is the theory of the proletarian revolution.
This does not mean that these doctrines and these attempts were
accidental, useless and superfluous phenomena. There is nothing
irrational in the historic course of things because nothing comes into
existence without reason, and thus there is nothing superfluous. We
cannot even to-day arrive at a perfect understanding of critical
communism without mentally retracing these doctrines and following the
processes of their appearance and disappearance. In fact these doctrines
have not only passed, they have been intrinsically outgrown both by
reason of the change in the conditions of society and by reason of the
more exact understanding of the laws upon which rest its formation and
its process.

The moment at which they enter into the past, that is to say, that at
which they are intrinsically outgrown, is precisely that of the
appearance of the Manifesto. As the first index of the genesis of modern
socialism, this writing, which gives only the most general and the most
easily accessible features of its teaching, bears within itself traces
of the historic field within which it was born, which was that of
France, England and Germany. Its field for propaganda and diffusion has
since become wider and wider, and it is henceforth as vast as the
civilized world. In all countries in which the tendency to communism has
developed through antagonisms under aspects different but every day more
evident between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the process of its
first formation is wholly or partly repeated over and over. The
proletarian parties which are formed little by little have traversed
anew the stages of formation which their precursors traversed at first;
but his process has become from country to country and from year to year
always more rapid by reason of the greater evidence, the pressing
necessity and energy of the antagonisms, and because it is easier to
create both for the first time. Our co-workers of 50 years ago were also
from this point of view international, since by their example they
started the proletariat of the different nations upon the general march
which labor must accomplish.

But the perfect theoretical knowledge of socialism today, as before, and
as it always will be, lies in the understanding of its historic
necessity, that is to say, in the consciousness of the manner of its
genesis; and this is precisely reflected, as in a limited field of
observation and in a hasty example, in the formation of the Manifesto.
It was intended for a weapon of war and thus bears upon its own exterior
the traces of its origin. It contains more substantial declarations than
demonstrations. The demonstration rests entirely in the imperative force
of its necessity. But we may retrace the process of this formation and
to retrace it is to understand truly the doctrine of the Manifesto.
There is an analysis which while separating in theory the factors of an
organism destroys them in so far as they are elements contributing to
the unity of the whole. But there is another analysis, and this alone
permits us to understand history, which only distinguishes and separates
the elements to find again in them the objective necessity of their
co-operation toward the total result.

It is now a current of opinion that modern socialism is a normal and
thus and inevitable product of history. Its political action, which may
in future involve delays and set-backs but never henceforth a total
absorption, begin with the *International*. Nevertheless, the Manifesto
precedes it. Its teaching is of prime importance in the light which it
throws on the proletarian movement, which movement indeed had its birth
and development independently of any doctrine. it is also more than this
light. Critical communism dates from the moment when the proletarian
movement is not merely a result of social conditions, but when it has
already strength enough to understand that these conditions can be
changed and to discern what means can modify them and in what direction.
It was not enough to say that socialism was a result of history. It was
also necessary to understand the intrinsic causes of this outcome and to
what all its activity tended. This affirmation, that the proletariat is
a necessary result of modern society, has for its mission to succeed the
bourgeoisie, and to succeed it as the producing force of a new social
order in which class antagonisms shall disappear, makes of the Manifesto
a characteristic epoch in the general course of history. It is a
revolution-but not in the sense of an apocalypse or a promised
millennium. It is the scientific and reflected revelation of the way
which our *civil society* is traversing (if the shade of Fourier will
pardon me!).

The Manifesto thus gives us the inside history of its origin and thereby
justifies its doctrine and at the same time explains its singular effect
and its wonderful efficacy. Without losing ourselves in details, here
are the series and groups of elements which, reunited and combined in
this rapid and exact synthesis, give us the clue to all the later
development of scientific socialism.

The immediate, direct and appreciable material is given by France and
England which had already had since 1830 a working-class movement which
sometimes resembles and sometimes differentiates itself from the other
revolutionary movements and which extended from instinctive revolt to
the practical aims of the political parties (Chartism and Social
Democracy for example) and gave birth to different temporary and
perishable forms of communism and semi-communism like that to which the
name of socialism was then given.

To recognize in these movements no longer the fugitive phenomenon of
meteoric disturbances but a new social fact, there was need of a theory
which should explain them, -- and a theory which should not be a simple
complement of the democratic tradition nor the subjective correction of
the disadvantages, thenceforth recognized, of the economy of
competition: although many were then concerned with this. This new
theory was the personal work of Marx and Engels. They carried over the
conception of historical progress through the process of antitheses from
the abstract form, which the Hegelian dialectic had already described in
its most general features, to the concrete explanation of the class
struggle; and in this historic movement where it had been supposed that
we observed the passage from one from of ideas to another form they saw
for the first time the transition from one form of social anatomy to
another, that is from one form of economic production to another form.

This historic conception, which gave a theoretic form to this necessity
of the *new social revolution* more or less explicit in the instinctive
consciousness of the proletariat and in its passionate and spontaneous
movements, recognizing the intrinsic and imminent necessity of the
revolution, changed the concept of it. That which the sects of
conspirators had regarded as belonging to the domain of the will and
capable of being constructed at pleasure, became a simple process which
might be favored, sustained, and assisted. The revolution became the
object of a policy the conditions of which are given by the complex
situation of society; it therefore became a result which the proletariat
must attain through struggles and various means of organization which
the old tactics of revolts had not yet imagined. And this because the
proletariat is not an accessory and auxiliary means, an excrescence, an
evil, which can be eliminated from the society in which we are living
but because it is its substratum, its essential condition, its
inevitable effect and in turn the cause which preserves and maintains
society itself; and thus it cannot emancipate itself without at the same
time emancipating every one, that is to say, revolutionizing completely
the form of production.

Just as the *League of the Just* had become *The Communist League* by
stripping itself of the forms of symbolism and conspiracy and adopting
little by little the means of propaganda and of political action from
and after the check attending the insurrection of Barbès and Blanqui, so
likewise the new doctrine, which the *League* accepted and made its own,
definitively abandoned the ideas which inspired the action of
conspiracies, and conceived as the outcome and objective result of a
process, that which the conspirators believed to be the result of a
pre-determined plan or the emanation from their heroism.

At that point begins a new ascending line in the order of facts and
another connection of concepts and of doctrines.

The communism of conspiracy, the Blanquism of that time, carries us up
through Buonarotti and also through Bazard and the \"Carbonari\" to the
conspiracy of Baboeuf, a true heir of ancient tragedy who hurled himself
against fate because there was no connection between his aim and the
economic condition of the moment, and he was as yet incapable of
bringing upon the political scene a proletariat having a broad class
consciousness. From Baboeuf and certain less known elements of the
Jacobin period, past Boissel and Fauchet we ascend to the intuitive
Morelly and to the original and versatile Mably and if you please to the
chaotic *Testament* of the *curé* Meslier, an instinctive and violent
rebellion of \"good sense\" against the savage oppression endured by the
unhappy peasant.

These precursors of the socialism of violence, protest and conspiracy
were all equalitarians; as were also most of the conspirators. Thus by a
singular but inevitable error they took for a weapon of combat,
interpreting it and generalizing it, that same doctrine of equality
which, developing as a *natural right* parallel to the formation of the
economic theory, had become an instrument in the hands of the
bourgeoisie which was winning step by step its present position to
transform the society of privilege into that of liberalism, free
exchange and the civil code.[]{#[5]}^[\[5\]](#5.)^

Following this immediate deduction which at bottom was a simple
illusion, that all men being equal in nature should also be equal in
their enjoyments, it was thought that the appeal to reason carried with
it all the elements of propaganda and persuasion, and that the rapid,
immediate and violent taking possession of the exterior instruments of
political power was the only means to set right those who resisted.

But whence come and how persist all these inequalities which appear so
irrational in the light of a concept of justice so simple and so
elementary? The Manifesto was the clear negation of the principle of
equality understood so naively and so clumsily. While proclaiming as
inevitable the abolition of classes in the future form of collective
production, it explains to us the necessity, the birth and the
development of these very classes as a fact which is not an exception,
or a derogation of an abstract principle, but the very process of
history.

Even as the modern proletariat involves the bourgeoisie, so the latter
cannot exist without the former. And both are the result of a process of
formation which rests altogether upon the new mode of production of the
objects necessary to life, that is to say, which rests altogether on the
manner of economic production. The bourgeois society grew out of the
corporative and feudal society and it grew out of it through struggle
and revolution in order to take possession of the instruments and means
of production which all culminate in the formation, the development and
the multiplication of capital. To describe the origin and the progress
of the bourgeoisie in its different phases, to explain its successes in
the colossal development of technique and in the conquest of the world
market, and to point out the political transformations which followed
it, which are the expression, the defense and the result of these
conquests is, at the same time, to write the history of the proletariat.
The latter in its present condition is inherent in the epoch of
bourgeois society and it has had, it has, and will have as many phases
as that society itself up to the time of its extinction. The antithesis
of rich an poor, of happy and unhappy, of oppressors and oppressed is
not something accidental which can easily be put on one side as was
believed by the enthusiasts of justice. Still further it is a fact of
necessary correlation, once granted the directing principle of the
present form of production which makes the wageworker a necessity. This
necessity is double. Capital can only take possession of production by
converting laborers into proletarians and it cannot continue to live, to
be fruitful, to accumulate, to multiply itself and to transform itself
except on the condition of paying wages to those who it has made
proletarians. The latter, on their side, can only live and reproduce
their kind on the condition of selling themselves as labor power, the
use of which is left to the discretion, that is to say, to the good
pleasure of the possessors of capital. The harmony between capital and
labor is wholly contained in this fact that labor is the living force by
which the proletarians continually put in motion and reproduce by adding
to it the labor accumulated in capital. This connection resulting from a
development which is the whole inner essence of modern history, if it
gives the key to comprehend the true reason of the new class struggle of
which the communist conception has become the expression, is of such a
nature that no sentimental protest, no argument based on justice can
resolve and disentangle it.

It is for these reasons which I have explained here as simply as
possible that equalitarian communism remained vanquished. Its practical
powerlessness blended with its theoretical inability to account for the
causes of the wrongs or of the inequalities which it desired, bravely or
stupidly, to destroy or eliminate at a blow.

To understand history became thenceforth the principal task of the
theorists of communism. How could a cherished ideal be still opposed to
the hard reality of history? Communism is not the natural and necessary
state of human life in all times and in all places and the whole course
of historic formations cannot be considered as a series of deviations
and wanderings. One does not reach communism by Spartan abnegation or
Christian resignation. It can be, still more it must be and it will be
the consequence of the dissolution of our capitalist society. But the
dissolution cannot be inoculated into it artificially nor imported from
without. It will dissolve by its own weight as Machiavelli would say. It
will disappear as a form of production which engenders of itself and in
itself the constant and increasing rebellion of it productive forces
against the conditions (juridical and political) of production and it
continues to live only by augmenting (through competition which
engenders crises, and by a bewildering extension of its sphere of
action) the intrinsic conditions of its inevitable death. The death of a
social form like that which comes from natural death in any other branch
of science becomes a *physiological case.*

The Manifesto did not make, and it was not its part to make the picture
of a future society. It told how our present society will dissolve by
the progressive dynamics of its forces. To make this understood it was
necessary above all to explain the development of the bourgeoisie and
this was done in rapid sketches, a model philosophy of history, which
can be retouched, completed and developed, but which cannot be
corrected.[]{#[6]}^[\[6\]](#6.)^

Saint-Simon and Fourier, although neither their ideas nor the general
trend of their development were accepted, found their justification.
Idealists both, they had by their heroic vision transcended the
\"liberal\" epoch which in their horizon had its culminating point at
the epoch of the French revolution. The former in his interpretation of
history substituted social physics for economic law and politics, and in
spite of many idealistic and positivistic uncertainties, he almost
discovered the genesis of the third estate. The other, ignorant of
details which were still unknown or neglected, in the exuberance of his
undisciplined spirit imagined a great chain of historic epochs vaguely
distinguished by certain indications of the directing principle of the
forms of production and distribution. He thereupon proposed to himself
to construct a society in which the existing antitheses should
disappear. From all these antitheses he discovered by a flash of genius
and he, more than any other, developed \"the vicious circle of
production\"; he there unconsciously reached the position of Sismondi,
who at the same epoch, but with other intentions and along different
roads, studying crises and denouncing the disadvantages of the large
scale industry and of unbridled competition, announced the collapse of
the newly established economic science. From the summit of his serene
mediation on the future world of the harmonians he looked down with a
serene contempt upon the misery of civilization and unmoved wrote the
satire of history. Ignorant both, because idealists, of the bitter
struggle which the proletariat is called upon to maintain before putting
an end to the epoch of exploitation and of antitheses, they arrived
through a subjective necessity at their conclusions, in the one case
scheme-making, in the other utopianism. But as by divination they
foresaw some of the direct principles of a society without antitheses.
The former reached a clear conception of the technical government of
society in which should disappear the domination of man over man, and
the other divined, foresaw and prophesied along with the extravagances
of his luxuriant imagination a great number of the important traits of
the psychology and pedagogy of that future society in which according to
the expression of the Manifesto, \"the free development of each is the
condition of the free development of all.\"

It is not in the name of a school, but as the promise, the threat, and
the desire of a party that the new doctrine of critical communism
presented. Its authors and its adherents did not feed upon the utopian
manufacture of the future but their minds were full of the experience
and the necessity of the present. They united with the proletarians whom
instance, not as yet fortified by experience, impelled to overthrow, at
Paris and in England, the rule of the bourgeois class with a rapidity of
movement not guided by well-considered tactics. These communists
disseminated their revolutionary ideas in Germany: they were the
defenders of the June martyrs, and they had in the Neue Rheinische
Zeitung a political organ, extracts from which, reproduced occasionally
after so many years, still carry authority.[]{#[7]}^[\[7\]](#7.)^ After
the disappearance of the historic situations which in 1848 had pushed
the proletarians to the front of the political stage, the doctrines of
the Manifesto no longer found either a foundation or a field for
diffusion. Many years were required before it circulated again and that
because many years were required before the proletariat could re-appear
by other roads and under other methods as a political force upon the
scene, making of this doctrine its intellectual organ and directing its
course by it.

But from the day when the doctrine appeared it made its anticipated
criticism of that *socialismus vulgaris* which was flourishing in Europe
and especially in France from the Coup d\'Etat to the International; the
latter moreover in its short period of life had not time to vanquish and
eliminate it. This vulgar socialism found its intellectual food (when
nothing even more incoherent and chaotic was at hand) in the doctrine
and especially in the paradoxes of Proudhon who had already been
vanquished theoretically by Marx []{#[8]}^[\[8\]](#8.)^ but who was not
vanquished practically until the time of the Commune when his disciples,
and it was a salutary lesson in affairs, were forced to act in
opposition to their own doctrines and those of their master.

From the time of its appearance, this new communist doctrine carried and
implied criticism of all forms of State socialism, from Louis Blanc to
Lassalle. This State socialism, although mingled with revolutionary
doctrines, was then summed up in the empty dream, in the abracadabra, of
the *Right to Work*. This is an insidious formula if it implies a demand
addressed to a government even of revolutionary bourgeois. It is an
economic absurdity if by it is meant to suppress the unemployment which
ensues upon the variations of wages, that is to say upon the conditions
of competition. It may be a tool for politicians, if it serves as an
expedient to calm a shapeless mass of unorganized proletarians. This is
very evident for any one who conceives clearly the course of a
victorious proletarian revolution which cannot proceed to the
socialization of the means of production by taking possession of them,
that is to say, which cannot arrive at the economic form in which there
is neither merchandise nor wage labor and in which the right to work and
the duty of working are one and the same, mingle in the common necessity
of labor for all.

The mirage of the right to work ended in the tragedy of June. The
parliamentary discussion of which it was the object in the sequel was
nothing but a parody. Lamartine, that tearful rhetorician, that great
man for all proper occasions, had pronounced the last, or the next to
the last of his celebrated phrases, \"Catastrophes are the experiences
of nations,\" and that sufficed for the irony of history.

The brevity and simplicity of the Manifesto were wholly foreign to the
insinuating rhetoric of faith or creed. It was of the utmost
inclusiveness by virtue of the many ideas which it for the first time
reduced to a system and it was a series of germs capable of an immense
development. But it was not, and it did not pretend to be a code of
socialism, a catechism of critical communism, or the handbook of the
proletarian revolution. We may leave its \"quintessence\" to the
illustrious Dr. Schaeffle, to whom also we willingly leave the famous
phrase, \"The social question is a question of the stomach.\"

The \"ventre\" of Dr. Schaeffle has for long years cut a fine enough
figure in the world to the great advantage of the dilletanti in
socialism and to the delight of the politicians. Critical communism, in
reality, scarcely begun with the Manifesto it needed to develop and it
has developed effectively.

The sum total of the teachings customarily designated by the name of
\"Marxism\" did not arrive at maturity before the years 1860-70. It is
certainly a long step from the little work Wage Labor and
Capital []{#[9]}^[\[9\]](#9.)^ in which is seen for the first time in
precise terms how from the purchase and the use of the labor-commodity
is obtained a product superior to the cost of production, this being the
clue to the question of surplus value-it is a long step from this to the
complex and multiple developments of \"Capital.\" This book goes
exhaustively into the genesis of the bourgeois epoch in all its inner
economic structure, and intellectually it transcends that epoch because
it explains its course, its particular laws and the antitheses which it
organically produces and which organically dissolve it.

It is a long step also from the proletarian movement which succumbed in
1848 to the present proletarian movement which through great
difficulties after having re-appeared on the political scene has
developed with continuity and deliberation. Until a few years ago this
regularity of the forward march of the proletariat was observed and
admired only in Germany. The social democracy there had normally
increased as upon its own field (from the Workingmen\'s Conference of
Nuremberg, 1868, to our day.) But since then the same phenomenon has
asserted itself in other countries, under various forms.

In this broad development of Marxism and in this increase of the
proletarian movement in the limited forms of political action, has there
not been, as some assert, an alteration from the militant character of
the original form of critical communism? Has there not been a passing
from revolution to the self-styled evolution? Has there not been an
acquiescence of the revolutionary spirit in the exigencies of the reform
movement?

These reflections and these objections have arisen and arise continually
both among the most enthusiastic and most passionate of the socialists
and among the adversaries of socialism whose interest its is to give an
appearance of uniformity to the special defeats, checks and delays, so
as to affirm that communism has no future.

Whoever compares the present proletarian movement and its varied and
complicated course with the impression left by the Manifest when one
reads it without being provided with knowledge from other sources, may
easily believe that there was something juvenile and premature in the
confident boldness of those communists of fifty years ago. There is in
them the sound as of a battle cry and an echo of the vibrant eloquence
of some of the orators of Chartism; there is the declaration of a new
\`93 with no room left of a new Thermidor.

And Thermidor has re-appeared several times since in various forms, more
or less explicit or disguised, and their authors have been since 1848
French ex-radicals, or Italian ex-patriots, or German bureaucrats,
adorers of the god State and practically slaves of the god Mammon,
English parliamentarians broken by the artifices of the art of
government, or even politicians under the guise of anarchists. Many
people believe that the constellation of Thermidor is destined never to
disappear from the heaven of history, or to speak in a more prosaic
fashion, that liberalism, that is to say a society where men are equal
only in law, marks the extreme limit of human evolution beyond which
nothing remains but a return backward. That is the opinion of all those
who see in the progressive extension of the bourgeois form over the
whole world the reason and the end of all progress. Whether they are
optimists or pessimists here are, for them, the columns of Hercules of
the human race. Often it happens that this sentiment in its pessimistic
form operates unconsciously upon some of those, who, with others
unclassified, go to swell the ranks of anarchism.

There are others who go further and who theorize upon the objective
improbabilities of the assertions of critical communism. That
affirmation of the Manifesto that the reduction of all class struggles
to a single one carries within itself the necessity of the proletarian
revolution, would seem to them intrinsically false. That doctrine would
be without foundation because it assumes to draw a theoretical deduction
and a practical rule of conduct from the prevision of a fact which,
according to these adversaries, would be a simple theoretical point
which might be displaced and set ahead indefinitely. The assumed
inevitable collision between the productive forces and the form of
production would never take place because it is reduced, as they claim,
to an infinite number of particular cases of friction, because it
multiplies itself into the partial collisions of economic competition,
and because it meets with checks and hindrances in the expedients and
attacks of the governmental art. In other words, our present society,
instead of breaking up and dissolving would in a continuous fashion
repair the evils which it produced. Every proletarian movement which is
not repressed by violence as was that of June, 1848, and that of May,
18871, would perish of slow exhaustion as happened with Chartism which
ended in trade unionism, the war horse of this fashion of arguing, the
honor and glory of the economists and the vulgar sociologists. Every
modern proletarian movement would be regarded as meteoric and not
organic, it would be a disturbance and not a process, and according to
these critics, in spite of ourselves, we should still be utopians.

The historic forecast which is found in the doctrine of the Manifesto
and which critical communism has since developed by a broad and detailed
analysis of the actual world, has certainly taken on by reason of the
circumstances in which it was produced a warlike appearance and a very
aggressive form. But it did not imply, anymore than it implies now,
either a chronological datum or a prophetic picture of the social
organization like those in the apocalypses and the ancient prophesies.

The heroic Father Dolcino did not re-appear with the prophetic war cry
of Joachino del Fiore. We did not celebrate anew at Münster the
resurrection of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. There were not more Taborites
nor millenarians. Nor was there another Fourier waiting in his house at
a fixed hour year after year for the \"candidate of humanity.\" Nor
again, was there an initiator of a new life, beginning with artificial
means to create the first nucleus of an association proposing to make
man over, as was the case with Beller, Owen, Cabet, and the enterprise
of the Fourierites in Texas, which was the tomb of utopianism, marked by
a singular epitaph: the dumbness which succeeded the fiery eloquence of
Considerant. Neither is there here a sect which retires modestly and
timidly from the world in order to celebrate in a closed circle the
perfect idea of communism as in the socialist colonies of America.

Here, on the contrary, in the doctrine of critical communism, it is
society as a whole which at a moment of its general process discovers
the cause of its destined course and at a critical point asserts itself
to proclaim the laws of its movement. The foresight indicated by the
Manifesto was not chronological, it was not a prophecy nor a promise,
but a morphological prevision.

Beneath the noise of the passions over which our daily conversation
extends itself, beyond the visible movements of the persons who formed
the material at which the historians stop, beyond the juridical and
political apparel of our civil society, far enough from the meanings
which religion and art give to life, there remains, grows and develops
the elementary structure of society which supports all the rest. The
anatomical study of this underlying structure is economics. And as human
society has several times changed, partially or entirely, in its most
visible exterior form, or in its ideological, religious or artistic
manifestations, we must first find the cause and the reason of these
changes, the only ones which historians relate, in the transformations
more hidden, and at first less visible, of the economic *processus* of
this structure. We must set ourselves to the study of the differences
which exist between the various forms of production when we have to deal
with historic epochs clearly distinct and properly designated; and when
we have to explain the succession of these forms, the replacing of one
by the other, we must study the causes of erosion, and of the
destruction of the form which disappears; and finally when we wish to
understand the historic fact determined and concrete, we must study the
frictions and the contrasts which take their rise from the different
currents, that is to say, classes, their subdivisions and their
intersections which characterize a given society.

When the Manifesto declared that all history up to the present time has
been nothing but the history of class struggles and that these are the
case of all revolutions as also of all reactions, it did two things at
the same time, it gave to communism the elements of a new doctrine and
to the communists the guiding thread to discover in the confused events
of political life the conditions of the underlying economic movement.

In these last fifty years the generic foresight of a new historic era
has become for socialists the delicate art of understanding in every
case what it is expedient to do, because this new era is in itself in
continual formation. Communism has become an art because the
proletarians have become, or are on the point of becoming a political
party. The revolutionary spirit is embodied to-day in the proletarian
organization. The desired union of communists and proletarians is
henceforth an accomplished fact. []{#[10]}^[\[10\]](#10.)^ These last
fifty years have been the ever stronger proof of the ever growing revolt
of the producing forces against the forms of production. We \"utopians\"
have no other answer to offer than this lesson from events to those who
still speak of meteoric disturbances which, as they would have it, will
disappear little by little and will all resolve themselves into the calm
of this final epoch of civilization. And this lesson suffices.

Eleven years after the publication of the Manifesto, Marx formulated in
clear and precise fashion the directing principles of the materialistic
interpretation of history in the preface to a book which is the
forerunner of \"Capital.\" []{#[11]}^[\[11\]](#11.)^

\"The first work which I undertook for the purpose of solving the doubts
which perplexed me was a critical re-examination of Hegel\'s Philosophy
of Law. The introduction to this work appeared in the German-French Year
Books, published in Paris in 1844.

My investigation ended in the conviction that legal relations and forms
of government cannot be explained either by themselves or by the
so-called general development of the human mind, but on the contrary,
have their roots in the conditions of man\'s physical existence, whose
totality Hegel, following the English and French writers of the
eighteenth century, summed up under the name of civil society; and that
the anatomy of civil society must be sought in political economy.

The study of the latter which I began at Paris was continued at Brussels
wither I had betaken myself in consequence of an order of Guizot
expelling me from France.

The general result which I arrived at and which, once obtained, served
as a guide for my subsequent studies, can be briefly formulated as
follows:

In making their livelihood together men enter into certain necessary
involuntary relations with each other, industrial relations which
correspond to whatever stage society has reached in the development of
its material productive forces.

The totality of these industrial relations constitutes the economic
structure of society, the real basis upon which the legal and political
superstructure is built, and to which definite forms of social
consciousness correspond.

The method of producing the material livelihood determines the social,
political and intellectual life process in general.

It is not men\'s consciousness which determines their life; on the
contrary, it is their social life which determines their consciousness.

At a certain stage of their development the material productive forces
of society come into conflict with the old conditions of production or,
to use a legal expression, with the old property relations under which
these forces have hitherto been exerted. From forms of development of
the productive forces these relations turn into fetters of production.
Then begins an epoch of social revolution. With the change of the
economic basis the whole vast superstructure undergoes sooner or later a
revolution.

In considering such revolutions one must constantly distinguish between
the industrial revolution, to be carefully posited scientifically, which
takes place in the economic conditions of production, and the legal,
political, religious, artistic or philosophical, in short ideological,
forms wherein men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. As
little as we judge an individual by what he himself thinks he is, just
as little can we judge such a revolutionary epoch by its own
consciousness. We must rather explain this consciousness out of the
antagonisms of men\'s industrial life, out of the conflict existing
between the forces of social production and the relations of social
production.

A form of society never breaks down until all the productive forces are
developed for which it affords room. New and higher relations of
production are never established, until the material conditions of life
to support them have been prepared in the lap of the old society itself.
Therefore mankind always sets for itself only such tasks as it is able
to perform; for upon close examination it will always be found that the
task itself only arises where the material conditions for its solution
are already at hand or are at least in process of growth.

We may in broad outlines characterize the Asiatic, the antique, the
feudal and the modern capitalist methods of production as progressive
epochs in the economic evolution of society.

The industrial relations arising out of the capitalistic method of
production constitute the last of the antagonistic forms of social
production; antagonistic not in the sense of an individual antagonism,
but of an antagonism growing out of the social conditions of
individuals.

But the productive forces which are developed in the lap of capitalistic
society create at the same time the material conditions needed for the
abolition of this antagonism. The capitalist form of society, therefore,
brings to a close this prelude to the history of human society.\"

Marx had some years before left the political arena and he did not
return to it until later with the International. The reaction had
triumphed in Italy, Austria, Hungary and Germany over the patriotic,
liberal or democratic revolution. the bourgeoisie on its side had
overcome the proletarians of France and England. The indispensable
conditions for the development of a democratic and proletarian movement
suddenly disappeared. The battalion small in numbers indeed of the
Manifesto communists who had taken part in the revolution and who had
participated in all the acts of resistance and popular rebellion against
reaction saw its activity crushed by the memorable process of Cologne.
The survivors of the movement tried to make a new start at London, but
soon Marx, Engels and others separated themselves from the
revolutionaries and retired from the movement. The crisis was passed. A
long period of repose followed. this was shown by the slow disappearance
of the Chartist movement, that is to say, the proletarian movement of
the country which was the spinal column of the capitalist system.
History had for the moment discredited the illusions of the
revolutionaries.

Before giving himself almost entirely to the long incubation of the
already discovered elements of the critique of political economy, Marx
illustrated in several works the history of the revolutionary period
from 1848 to 1850 and especially the class struggles in France, showing
thus that if the revolution in the forms which it had taken on at that
moment had not succeeded, the revolutionary theory of history was not
contradicted for all that. []{#[12]}^[\[12\]](#12.)^ The suggestions
given in the Manifesto found here their complete development.

Later the 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte []{#[13]}^[\[13\]](#13.)^ was
the first attempt to apply the new conception of history to a series of
facts contained within precise limits of time. It is extremely difficult
to rise for the apparent movement to the real movement of history and to
discover their intimate connection. There are indeed great difficulties
in rising from the phenomena of passion, oratory, Parliaments, elections
and the like to the inner social gearing to discover in the latter the
different interests of the large and small bourgeois, of the peasants,
the artisans, the laborers, the priests, the soldiers, the bankers, the
usurers and the mob. All these interests act consciously or
unconsciously, jostling each other, eliminating each other, combining
and fusing, in the discordant life of civilized man.

The crisis was passed and this was precisely true in the countries which
constituted the historic field from which critical communism proceeded.
All that the critical communists could do was to understand the reaction
in its hidden economic causes because, for the moment, to understand the
reaction was to continue the work of the revolution. The same thing
happened under other conditions and other forms 20 years later when
Marx, in the name of the International made in the \"Civil War in
France\" an apology for the Commune which was at the same time its
objective criticism.

The heroic resignation with which Marx after 1850 abandoned political
life was shown again when he retired from the International after the
congress at the Hague in 1872. These two facts have their value for
biography because they give glimpses of his personal character. With
him, in fact, ideas, temperament, policy and thought were one and the
same. But, on the other hand, these facts have a much greater bearing
for us. Critical communism does not manufacture revolutions, it does not
prepare insurrections, it does not furnish arms for revolts. It mingles
itself with the proletarian movement in the full intelligence of the
connection which its has, which it can have, and which it must have,
with all the relations of social life as a whole. In a word it is not a
seminary in which superior officers of the proletarian revolution are
trained, but is it neither more nor less than the consciousness of this
revolution and especially the consciousness of its difficulties.

The proletarian movement has grown in a colossal fashion during these
last thirty years. In the midst of numberless difficulties, through
gains and losses, it has little by little taken on a political form. Its
methods have been elaborated and gradually applied. All this is not the
work of the magic action of the doctrine scattered by the persuasive
virtue of written and spoken propaganda. From their first beginnings the
communists had this feeling that they were the extreme left of every
proletarian movement, but in proportion as the latter developed and
specialized it became their necessity and duty to assist, (through the
elaboration of programmes, and through their participation in the
political action of the parties) in the various contingencies of the
economic development and of the political situation growing out of it.

In the fifty years which separate us from the publication of the
Manifesto the specialization and the complexity of the proletarian
movement have become such that there is henceforth no mind capable of
embracing it in its completeness, of understanding it in its details and
grasping its real causes and exact relations. The single International,
from 1864 to 1873, necessarily disappeared after it had fulfilled its
task. The preliminary equalization of the general tendencies and of the
ideas common and indispensable to all the proletariat, and no one can
assume or will assume to re-constitute anything like it.

Two causes, notably, contributed in a high degree to this
specialization, this complexity of the proletarian movement. In many
countries the bourgeoisie felt the need of putting an end in the
interest of its own defense to some of the abuses which had arisen in
consequence of the introduction of the industrial system. Thence arose
labor legislation, or as it has been pompously called social
legislation. This same bourgeoisie in its own interest or, under the
pressure of circumstances has been obliged, in many countries to
increase the generic conditions of liberty, and notably to extend the
right of suffrage. These two circumstances have drawn the proletariat
into the circle of daily political life. They have considerably
increased its chance for action and the agility and suppleness thus
acquired permit it to struggle with the bourgeoisie in elective
assemblies. And as the *processus* of things determines the *processus*
of ideas, this practical multiform development of the proletariat is
accompanied by a gradual development of the doctrines of critical
communism, as well in the manner of understanding history or
contemporary life as in the minute description of the most infinitesimal
parts of economics: in a word, it has become a science.

Have we not there, some ask, a deviation from the simple and imperative
doctrine of the Manifesto? Others again say, have we not lost in
intensity and precision what we have gained in extension and complexity?

These questions, in my opinion, arise from an inexact conception of the
present proletarian movement and an optical illusion as to the degree of
energy and revolutionary valor of the former movements.

Whatever be the concessions that the bourgeoisie can make in the present
economic order even it it be a very great reduction in the hours of
labor, it always remains true that the necessity of exploitation upon
which the whole present social order rests imposes limits beyond which
capital as a private instrument of production has no more reasons for
existence. If a concession to-day can allay one form of discontent in
the proletariat, the concession itself can do nothing less than to give
rise to the need of new and ever increasing concessions. The need of
labor legislation arose in England before the Chartist movement and it
had its first successes in the period which immediately followed the
fall of Chartism. the principles and the reasons of this movement in
their cause and their effects were studied in a critical manner by Marx
in Capital and they afterwards passed, through the International, into
the programmes of the different socialist parties. Finally this whole
process, concentrating itself into the demand for eight hours, became
with the 1st of May an international marshaling of the proletariat, and
a means for estimating its progress. On the other hand, the political
struggle in which the proletariat takes part democratizes its habits;
still more real democracy takes birth which, with time, will no longer
be able to adapt itself to the present political form. Being the organ a
society based on exploitation it is constituted as a bureaucratic
hierarchy, as a judicial bureaucracy and a mutual aid society of the
capitalists for the defense of their special privileges, the perpetual
income from the public debt, the rent of land and the interest on
capital in all its forms. Consequently the two facts, which according to
the discontented and the hypercritical seem to make us deviate
infinitely from the lines laid down by communism, become, on the
contrary, new means and new conditions which confirm these lines. The
apparent deviations from the revolution are, at bottom, the very thing
which is hastening it.

Moreover, we must not exaggerate the significance of the revolutionary
faith of the communists of fifty years ago. Given the political
situation of Europe, if they had a faith, it was that they were
precursors, and this they have been; they hoped that the political
conditions of Italy, Austria, Hungary, Germany and Poland might
approximate to modern forms, and this has happened later, in part, and
through other means; if they had a hope, it was that the proletarian
movement of France and England might continue to develop. The reaction
which intervened upset many things and stopped more than one development
which had already begun. It upset also the old revolutionary tactic, and
in these last years a new tactic has arisen. Therein lies all the
change. []{#[14]}^[\[14\]](#14.)^

The Manifesto was designed for nothing else than the first guiding
thread to a science and a practice which nothing but experience and time
could develop. It gives only the scheme and the rhythm of the general
march of the proletarian movement.

It is perfectly evident that the communist were influenced by the
experience of the two movements which they had before their eyes, that
of France, and especially the Chartist movement which the manifestation
of April 10th was soon to strike with paralysis. But this scheme does
not fix in any invariable fashion a tactic of war, which indeed had
already been made frequently. The revolutionists had often indeed
explained in the form of catechism what ought to be a simple consequence
of the development of events.

This scheme became more vast and complex with the development and
extension of the bourgeois system. The rhythm of the movement has become
more varied and slower because the laboring mass has entered on the
scene as a distinct, political party, which fact changes the manner and
the measure of their action and consequently their movement.

Just as in view of the improvement of modern weapons the tactic of
street riots has become inopportune, and just as the complexity of the
modern state shows the insufficiency of a sudden capture of a municipal
government to impose upon a whole people the will and the ideas of a
minority, no matter how courageous and progressive, even so, on its
side, the mass of the proletarians no longer holds to the word of
command of a few leaders, nor does it regulate its movements by the
instructions of captains who might upon the ruins of one government
raise up another. The laboring mass where it has developed politically
has made and is making its own democratic education. It is choosing its
representatives and submitting their action to its criticism. It
examines and makes its own the ideas and the propositions which these
representatives submit to it. It already knows, or it begins to
understand according to the situation in the various countries, that the
conquest of political power cannot and should not be made by others in
its name, and especially that it cannot be the consequence of a single
blow. In a word it knows, or it is beginning to understand that the
dictatorship of the proletariat which shall have for its task the
socialization of the means of production cannot be the work of a mass
led by a few and that it must be, and that it will be, the work of the
proletarians themselves when they have become in themselves and through
long practice a political organization.

The development and the extension of the bourgeois system have been
rapid and colossal in these last fifty years. It already invades sacred
and ancient Russia and it is creating, not only in America, Australia
and in India, but even in Japan, new centers of modern production, thus
complicating the conditions of competition and the entanglements of the
world market. The consequences of political changes have been produced,
or will not be long to wait for. Equally rapid and colossal has been the
progress of the proletariat. Its political education takes each day a
new step toward the conquest of political power. The rebellion of the
productive forces against the form of production, the struggle, of
living labor against accumulated labor, becomes every day more evident.
The bourgeois system is henceforth upon the defensive and it reveals it
decadence by this singular contradiction; the peaceful world of industry
has become a colossal camp in which militarism develops. The peaceful
period of industry has become by the irony of things the period of the
continuous invention of new engines of war.

Socialism has forced itself into the situation. Those semi-socialists,
even those charlatans who encumber with their presence the press and the
meetings of our party and who often are a nuisance to us, are a tribute
which vanity and ambitions of every sort render in their fashion to the
new power which rises on the horizon. In spite of the foreseen antidote
which scientific socialism is, the truth of which many people have not
come to understand, there is a group of quacks on the social question,
all having some particular specific to eliminate such or such a social
evil: land nationalization, monopoly of grains in the hands of the
State, democratic taxes, statization of mortgages, general strike, etc.
But social democracy eliminates all these fantasies because the
consciousness of their situation leads the proletarians when once they
have become familiar with the political arena to understand socialism in
an integral fashion. The come to understand that they should look for
only one thing, the abolition of wage labor; that there is but one form
of society which renders possible and even necessary the elimination of
classes, - the association which does not produce commodities, and that
this form of society is not longer the State, but its opposite, that is
to say, the technical and pedagogical administration of human society,
the self-government of labor. Behind the Jacobins are the gigantic
heroes of 1793 and their caricatures of 1848.

*Social democracy!* But is not that, say some, an evident attenuation of
the communist doctrine as it is formulated in the Manifesto in terms so
ringing and so decisive?

This is not the moment to recall that the phrase *social democracy* has
had in France many significations from 1837 to 1848, all of which were
based upon vague sentimentalism. Neither is it necessary to explain how
the Germans have been able in this nomenclature to sum up all the rich
and vast development of their socialism from the episode of Lassalle now
passed over and transformed up to our own days. It is certain that
*social democracy* can signify, has signified and signifies many things
which have not been, are not, and never will be, either critical
communism or the conscious march toward the proletarian revolution. It
is also certain that contemporary socialism even in the countries where
its development is most advanced, carries with it a great deal of dross
which it throws off little by little along the road. It is certain also,
in fine, that this broad designation of social democracy serves as an
escutcheon and a buckler to many intruders. But here we need to fix our
attention only upon certain points of capital importance.

We must insist upon the second term of the expression in order to avoid
any equivocation. Democratic was the constitution of the *Communist
League*; democratic was its fashion of welcoming and discussing each new
teaching; democratic was its intervention in the revolution of 1848 and
its participation in the rebellious resistance against the invasion of
reaction; democratic finally was the very way in which the League was
dissolved. In this first type of our present parties, in this first cell
so to speak of our complex organism, elastic and highly developed, there
was not only the consciousness of the mission to be accomplished as
precursor, but there was already the form and the method of association
which alone are suitable for the first initiators of the proletarian
revolution. It was not longer a sect; that form was already, in fact,
outgrown. The immediate and fantastic domination of the individual was
eliminated, what predominated was a discipline which had its source in
the experience of necessity and in the precise doctrine which must
proceed from the reflex consciousness of this necessity. It was the same
with the International, which appeared authoritarian only to those who
could not make their own authority prevail in it. It must be the same,
and it is so, in the working class parties and where this character is
not or cannot yet be marked, the proletarian agitation still elementary
and confused simple engenders illusions and is only a pretext for
intrigues, and when it is not so, then we have a passover where men of
understanding touch elbows with the madman and the spy; as for example
the society of The International Brothers which attached itself like a
parasite to the International and discredited it; or again the
co-operative which degenerates into a business and sells itself to
capitalists; the labor party which remains outside politics and which
studies the variations of the market to introduce its tactic of strikes
into the sinuosities of competition; or again a group of malcontents,
for the most part social outcasts and little bourgeois, who give
themselves up to speculations on socialism considered as one of the
phases of political fashion. Social democracy has met all these
impedimenta upon its way and it has been obliged to relieve itself of
them as it will have to do again from one time to another. The art of
persuasion does not always suffice. Oftener it was necessary and it is
necessary to resign ourselves and wait until the hard school of
disillusion serves to instruct, which it does better than reasonings do.

All these intrinsic difficulties of the proletarian movement, which the
wily bourgeoisie often than not stirs up of itself and which it makes
the most of, form a considerable part of the internal history of
socialism during these last years.

Socialism has not found impediments merely in the general conditions of
economic competition and in the resistance of the political power, but
also in the very conditions of the proletarian mass and in the
mechanism, sometimes obscure although inevitable of its slow varied,
complex movements, often antagonistic and contradictory. That prevents
many people from seeing the increasing reduction of all class struggles
to the single struggle between the capitalists and the proletarianized
workers.

Even as the Manifesto did not write, as the utopians did, the ethics and
the psychology of the future society, just so it did not give the
mechanism of that formation and of the development in which we find
ourselves. It is surely enough that these few pioneers have opened the
road. We must walk upon it to arrive at understanding and experience.
Moreover man is distinctively the experimental animal; that is why he
has a history, or rather that is why he makes his own history.

Upon this road of contemporary socialism which constitutes its
development because it is its experience, we have met the mass of the
peasants.

Socialism which at first kept itself practically and theoretically to
the study and experience of the antagonisms between capitalists and
proletarians in the circle of industrial production properly so called,
has turned its activity toward that mass in which *peasant stupidity*
blossoms. To capture the peasants is the question of the hour, although
the quintessential Schaeffle long ago mobilized the anti-collectivist
brains of the peasants for the defense of the existing order. The
elimination and the capture of domestic industry into the capitalist
form, the disappearance of small proprietorship, or its lessening
through mortgages, the disappearance of the communal domains, usury,
taxes and militarism, all this is beginning to work miracles even in
those brains assumed to be props of the existing order.

The Germans have been the pioneers in this field. They were brought to
it by the very fact of their immense expansion; from the cities they
have gone to the smallest centers and they thus arrive inevitably at the
frontiers of the country. Their attempts will be long and difficult;
this fact explains, excuses, and will excuse, the errors which have been
and will be committed. []{#[15]}^[\[15\]](#15.)^ As long as the peasant
shall not be gained over we shall always have behind us this *peasant
stupidity* which unconsciously repeats, and that because it is stupid,
the errors of the 18th Brumaire and the 2d of December. The development
of modern society in Russia will probably proceed on parallel lines with
this conquest of the country districts. When that country shall have
entered into the liberal era with all its imperfections and all its
disadvantages, with all the purely modern forms of exploitation and of
proletarianization, but also with the compensations and the advantages
of the political development of the proletariat, social democracy will
no longer have to fear the threat of unforeseen perils from without, and
it will at the same time have triumphed over the internal perils by the
capture of the peasants.

The example of Italy is instructive. This country after having opened
the capitalist era dropped out for several centuries from the current
history. It is a typical case of decadence which can be studied in a
precise fashion from original documents in all its phases. It partly
returned into history at the time of the Napoleonic domination. It
reconquered its unity and became a modern state after the period of the
reaction and conspiracies, and under circumstances known to all, and
Italy has ended by having all the vices of parliamentarism, of
militarism and of finance without having at the same time the forms of
modern production and the resulting capacity for competition on equal
terms. It cannot compete with countries where industry is more advanced
by reason of the absolute lack of coal and scarcity of iron, the lack of
technical ability,-and it is waiting, or hoping now, that the
application of electricity may permit it to regain the time lost. It is
this which gave the impulse to different attempts from Biella to Schio.
A modern state in a society almost exclusively agricultural and in a
country where agriculture is in great part backward, it is that which
gives birth to this general sentiment of universal discontent.

Thence came the incoherence and the inconsistency of the parties, the
rapid oscillations from demagogy to dictatorship, the mob, the
multitude, the infinite army of the parasites of politics, the makers of
fantastic projects. This singular social spectacle of a development
prevented, retarded, embarrassed and thus uncertain, is brought out in
bold relief by a penetrating spirit which, if it is not always the fruit
and the expression of a modern, broad and real culture nevertheless
bears within itself as the relic of an excellent civilization the mark
of great cerebral refinement. Italy has not been for reasons easy to
guess a suitable field for the indigenous formation of socialist ideas
and tendencies. The Italian Phillipe Buoanaroti, at first the friend of
the younger Robespierre, become the companion of Babeuf and later
attempted to re-establish Babeufism in France, after 1830. Socialism
made its first appearance in Italy at the time of the International, in
the confused and incoherent form of Bakunism; it was not, moreover, a
labor movement, but it was the work of the small bourgeois and
instinctive revolutionists. []{#[16]}^[\[16\]](#16.)^ In these last
years socialism has fixed itself in a form which *almost* reproduces the
general type of *social democracy*. []{#[17]}^[\[17\]](#17.)^ Now in
Italy the first sign of life which the proletariat gave is in the shape
of the rising of the Sicilian peasants followed by other revolts of the
same kind on the continent to which others will perhaps succeed in the
future. Is it not very significant?

After this incursion into the history of contemporary socialism we
gladly return to our precursors of fifty years ago, who put on record in
the Manifesto how they took possession of an advance post on the road of
progress. And that is true not merely of the theorizers, that is to say,
Marx and Engels. Both of these men would have exercised, under other
circumstances and at all times either by tongue or pen, a considerable
influence over politics and science such was the force and originality
of their minds and the extent of their knowledge even I they had never
met on their way the *Communist League*. But I am referring to all the
\"unknown\" according to the exclusive and vain jargon of bourgeois
literature:-of the shoemaker, Bauer, the tailors, Lessner and Eccarius,
the miniature painter, Pfaender, the watchmaker,
Moll, []{#[18]}^[\[18\]](#18.)^ of Lochner, etc., and many others who
were the first conscious initiators of our movement. The motto,
\"Workingmen of all countries, unite,\" remains their monument. The
passage of socialism from utopia to science marks the result of their
work. The survival of their instinct and of their first impulse in the
work of to-day is the ineffaceable title which these precursors have
acquired to the gratitude of all socialists.

As an Italian, I return so much the more willingly to these beginnings
of modern socialism because for me, at least, this recent warning of
Engels is not without importance. \"Thus the discovery that everywhere
and always political conditions and events find their explanation in
economic conditions would not have been made by Marx in 1845, but rather
by Loria in 1886. He has at least succeeded in impressing this belief
upon his compatriots, and since his book has appeared in French even
upon some Frenchmen and he may now go on inflated with pride and vanity
as if he had discovered an epoch-making historic theory until the
Italian socialists have time to despoil the illustrious Mr. Loria of the
peacock feathers which he has stolen. []{#[19]}^[\[19\]](#19.)^

I would willingly close here, but more remains to be said.

On all sides and on all camps protests arise and objections are urged
against historical materialism. And some times these voices are swelled
here and there by newly converted socialists, socialist who are
philosophical, socialists who are sentimental and sometimes hysterical.
Then reappears, as a warning, the \"question of the belly.\" Others
devote themselves to exercise of logical gymnastics with abstract
categories of egoism and altruism; for others again the inevitable
struggle for existence always turns up at the right moment.

Morality! But it is high time that we understand the lesson of this
morality of the bourgeois epoch in the fable of the bees by Mandeville,
who was contemporary with the first projection of classic economics.

And has not the politics of this morality been explained in classic
phrases that can never be forgotten by the first great political writer
of the capitalist epoch Machiavelli, who did not invent Machiavellism,
but who was its secretary and faithful and diligent editor. And as for
the logical tourney between egoism and altruism, has it not been in full
view from the time of the Reverend Malthus up to that empty, prolix and
tiresome reasoner, the indispensable Spencer? Struggle for existence!
But could you wish to observe, study and understand a struggle more
important for us than the one which has its birth and is taking on
gigantic proportions in the proletarian agitation? Perhaps you would
reduce the explanation of this struggle which is developing and working
in the supernatural domain of society, which man himself has created in
the course of history, through his labor, through improved processes and
through social institutions, and which man himself can change through
other forms of labor, processes and institutions,-- you would perhaps
reduce it to the simple explanation of the more general struggle in
which plant and animals, and men themselves in so far as they are
animals, are contending in the bosom of nature.

But let us return to our subject.

Critical communism has never refused, and it does not refuse, to welcome
the multiple and valuable suggestions, ideological, ethical, psychologic
and pedagogic which may come from the knowledge and from the study of
all forms of communism Phales of Chalcedon down to
Cabet. []{#[20]}^[\[20\]](#20.)^ More than this, it is by the study and
the knowledge of these forms that the consciousness of the separateness
of scientific socialism from all the rest becomes developed and fixed.
And in making this study who is there who will refuse to recognize that
Thomas More was a heroic soul and a great writer on socialism? Who will
not find in his heart a large tribute of admiration for Robert Owen who
first gave to the ethics of communism this indisputable principle, that
the character and morals of men are the necessary result of the
conditions in which they live and the circumstances which surround them?
And the partisans of critical communism believe it is their duty,
traversing history in thought, to claim fellowship with all the
oppressed, whatever may have been their destiny, which was that of
remaining oppressed and of opening the way after an ephemeral success
for the rule of new oppressors.

But the partisans of critical communism differentiate themselves clearly
on one point from all other forms or manners of communism, or of
socialism, ancient, modern or contemporaneous, and this point is of
capital importance.

The cannot admit the that ideologies of the past have remained without
effect and that the past attempts of the proletariat have been always
overcome by pure chance, by pure accident, by the effect of a caprice of
circumstances. All these ideologies although they reflected in fact the
sentiment directly due to social antitheses, that is to say, the real
class struggles, with a lofty sense of justice and a profound devotion
to an ideal, nevertheless all reveal ignorance of the true causes
against which they hurled themselves by a an act of revolt spontaneous
and often heroic. Thence their utopian character. We can moreover
explain why the oppressive conditions of other epochs although they were
more barbarous and cruel did not bring that accumulation of energy, that
concentration of force, or that continuity of resistance which is seen
to be realizing itself and developing in the proletariat of our time. It
is the change of society in its economic structure; it is the formation
of the proletariat in the bosom of the great industry and of the modern
state. It is the appearance of the proletariat upon the political
scene,-it is the new things, in fine, which have engendered the need of
new ideas. Thus critical communism is neither moralizer, nor preacher,
nor herald, nor utopian-it already holds the thing itself in its hands
and into the thing itself it has put its ethics and its idealism.

This orientation which seems harsh to the sentimentalists because it is
too true, too realistic and too real, permits us to retrace the history
of the proletariat and of the other oppressed classes which preceded it.
We see their different phases; we take account of the failures of
Chartism, of the Conspiracy of Equals and we explore still further back
to attempts at relief, to acts of resistance, and to wars,-to the famous
peasants\' war in Germany, to the Jacquerie and to Father Dolcino. In
all these facts and in all these events we discover forms and phenomena
relating to the future of the bourgeois in proportion as it tears to
pieces, overthrows, triumphs over and issues from the feudal system. We
can do the same with the class struggles of the ancient world but with
less clearness. This history of the proletariat and of the other
oppressed classes, of the vicissitudes of their struggles and their
revolts, is already a sufficient guide to assist us in understanding why
the ideologies of the communism of other epochs were premature.

If the bourgeoisie has not arrived everywhere at the final stage of its
evolution, it surely has arrived in certain countries at its
accomplishment. In fact, in the most advanced countries it is subjecting
the various older forms of production, either directly or indirectly, to
the action and to the law of capital. And thus it simplifies, or it
tends to simplify, the different class struggles of former times, which
then obscured each other by their multiplicity, into this single
struggle between capital which is converting into merchandise all the
products of human labor indispensable to life and the mass of
proletarians which sells its labor power,-now also become simple
merchandise. The secret of history is simplified. It is all prosaic. And
just as the present class struggle is the simplification of all other,
so likewise, the communism of the Manifesto simplifies into rigid and
general theoretical formulas the ideologic, ethic, pyschologic and
pedagogic suggestion of the other forms of communism not by denying but
by exalting them. All is prosaic and communism itself partakes of this
character, it is now a science.

Thus there are in the Manifesto neither rhetoric nor protestations. It
does not lament over pauperism to eliminate it. It sheds tears over
nothing. The tears are transformed of themselves into a spontaneous
revolutionary force. Ethics and idealism conceit henceforth in this, to
put the thought of science at the service of the proletariat. If this
ethics does not appear moral enough for the sentimentalists, usually
hysterical and silly, let them go and borrow altruism from its high
priest Spencer who will give a vague and insipid definition of it, such
as will satisfy them.

But, again, should the economic facto serve alone to explain the whole
of history. Historic factors! But that is an expression of empiricists
or ideologists who repeat Herder. Society is a complex whole or an
organism according to the expression of some who waste their time in
discussions over the value and the analogical use of this expression.
This *complexus* has formed itself and has changed several times. What
is the explanation of this change?

Even long before Feuerbach gave a final blow to the theological
explanation of history (man makes religion and not religion man) the old
Balzac []{#[21]}^[\[21\]](#21.)^ had made a satire of it by making men
the puppets of God. And had not Vico already recognized that Providence
does not act in history from without? And this same Vico, a century
before Morgan, had he not reduced history to a process which man himself
makes through successive experimentation consisting in the invention of
language, religion, customs and laws? Had not Lessing affirmed that
history is an education of the human race? Had not Rousseau seen that
ideas are born from needs. Had not Saint Simon guessed when he did not
lose himself in the distinction between organic and inorganic epochs the
real genesis of the Third Estate, and did not his ideas translated into
prose make of Augustin Thierry a reconstructor of historical research?
In the first fifty years of this century and notably in the period from
1830 to 1850 the class struggles which the ancient historians and those
of Italy during the Renaissance had described so clearly, instructed by
the experience of these struggles in the narrow domain of their own
urban republic had grown and reached on both sides of the Channel
greater proportions and an evidence always more palpable. Born in the
midst of the great industry, illuminated by the recollection and by the
study of the French revolution they have become intuitively instructive
because they found with more or less clearness and consciousness their
actual and suggested expression in the programmes of the political
parties: free exchange or tariffs on grain in England and so on. The
conception of history changed to the observer in France, on the right
wing as on the left wing of the literary parties, from Guizot to Louis
Blanc and to the modest Cabet. Sociology was the need of the time and if
it sought in vain its theoretic expression in August Comte, a belated
scholastic, it found its artist in Balzac who was the actual inventor of
class psychology. To put into the classes and into their frictions the
real subject of history and the movement of this in their movement,-this
was then on the point of being studied and discovered, and it was
necessary to fix a theory of this in precise terms.

Man has made his history not by a metaphorical evolution nor with a view
of walking on a line of preconceived progress. He has made it by
creating his own conditions, that is to say, by creating through his
labor an artificial environment, by developing successively his
technical aptitudes and by accumulating and transforming the products of
his activity in this new environment. We have but one single history,
which is actually made, and we cannot compare real history, which is
actually made, with another which is simply possible. Where shall we
find the laws of this formation and of this development. The very
ancient formations are not evident at first sight. But bourgeois society
because it is born recently and has not yet reach its full development,
even in all parts of Europe, bears within itself the embryonic traces of
its origin and its *processus*, and it puts them in full evidence in
countries where it is in process of birth before our eyes, as for
example in Japan. In so far as it is society which transforms all the
products of human labor into commodities by means of capital, society
which assumes the proletariat or creates it and which bears within
itself the anxiety, the trouble and the uncertainty of continuous
innovations, it is born in determined times according to clear methods
which can be indicated although they may be varied. In fact in different
countries it has different modes of development. In Italy, for example,
it begins before all the others and then stops. In England it is the
product of three centuries of economic expropriation of the old forms of
production, or of the old proprietorship, to speak the language of
jurists. In one country it elaborates itself little by little combining
itself with pre-existing forces, as was the case in Germany, and it
undergoes their influences through adaptation; in another country it
breaks its envelope and crushes out resistance violently, as happened in
France, where the great revolution gives us the most intense and the
most bewildering example of historic action that is known, and thus
forms the greatest school of sociology.

As I have already indicated this formation of modern or bourgeois
history has been summed up in rapid and masterly strokes in the
Manifesto, which has given its general anatomical profile with its
successive aspects, the trade guild, commerce, manufacture and the great
industry and has also indicated some of the organs and appliances of a
derived and complex character, law, political forms, etc. The elements
of the theory which was to explain history by the principle of the class
struggle where already implicitly contained in it.

This same bourgeois society which revolutionized the earlier forms of
production had thrown light upon itself and its *processus* in creating
the doctrine of its structure, economics. In fact it has not developed
in the unconsciousness which characterized primitive societies but in
the full light of the modern world beginning with the Renaissance.

Economics, as is known, was born by fragments, and its origin was
associated with that of the first bourgeoisie, which was that of
commerce and the great geographical discoveries, that is to say, it was
contemporary with the first and second phases of mercantilism. And it
was born to answer special questions: for example, is interest
legitimate? Is it advantageous for states and for nations to accumulate
money? It continued to grow, it occupied itself with the most complex
sides of the problem of wealth: it developed in the passage from
mercantilism to manufacture and then more rapidly and more resolutely in
the passage from the latter to the great industry. It was the
intellectual soul of the bourgeoisie which was conquering society. It
had already as discipline almost defined its general lines on the eve of
the French revolution; it was the sign of the rebellion against the old
forms of feudalism, the guild, privilege, limitations of labor, that is
to say it was the sign of liberty. The theory of \"natural right\" which
developed from the precursors of Grotius to Rousseau, Kant, and the
Constitution of 93, was nothing else than the duplicate and the
ideological complement of economics, to the extent that often the thing
and its complement are confounded in one in the mind and in the
postulates of writers; of this we have a typical example in the
Physiocrats.

In so far as it was a doctrine it separated, distinguished and analyzed
the elements and the forms of the *processus* of production, of
circulation and of distribution and reduced them all into categories:
money, money capital, interest, profit, land rent, wages, etc. It
marched, sure of itself, accumulating its analyses from Petty to
Ricardo. The sole mistress of the field, it met only rare objections. It
started from two hypotheses which it did not take the trouble to justify
since they appeared so evident; namely, that the social order which it
illustrated was the natural order, and that private property in the
means of production was one and the same thing with human liberty; all
of which made wage labor and the inferiority of the wage laborers into
necessary conditions. In other terms, it did not recognize the historic
character of the forms which it studied. The antitheses which it met on
its way in its attempt at systematization, after several vain attempts
it tried to eliminate logically as was the case with Ricardo in his
struggle against the income from land rents.

The beginning of the nineteenth century is marked by violent crises and
by those first labor movements which have their immediate origin in the
distress attending lockouts. The ideal of the \"natural order\" is
overthrown. Wealth has engendered poverty. The great industry in
changing all social relations has increased vices, maladies and
subjection. It has, in a word, caused degeneration. Progress has
engendered retrogression. What must be done that progress may engender
nothing else but progress, that is to say, prosperity, health, security,
education and intellectual development equal for all? With this question
Owen is wholly concerned and he shares with Fourier and Saint Simon this
characteristic that he no longer appeals to self-sacrifice and to
religion, and that he wishes to resolve and surmount the social
antitheses without diminishing the technical and industrial energy of
man, but rather to increase this. It is by this road that Owen became a
communist and he is the first who became so in the environment created
by modern industry. The antithesis rests entirely on the contradiction
between the mode of production and the mode of distribution. This
antithesis must, then, be suppressed in a society which produces
collectively. Owen becomes utopian. This perfect society must needs be
realized experimentally and to this he devotes himself with a heroic
constancy and unequaled self-sacrifice bringing a mathematical precision
even into his thoughts of its details.

The antithesis between production and distribution once discovered,
there arose in England from Thompson to Bray a series of writers of a
socialism which is not strictly utopian, but which should be qualified
as one-sided for its object is to correct the manifest vices of society
by as many appropriate remedies. []{#[22]}^[\[22\]](#22.)^

In fact the first stage of all those who are on the road toward
socialism is the discovery of the contradiction between production and
distribution. Then, these ingenuous questions immediately arise: Why not
abolish poverty? Why not eliminate lockouts? Why not suppress the middle
man? Why not favor the direct exchange of products in consideration of
the labor that they contain.? Why not give the worker the entire product
of his labor, etc. These demands reduce the *things*, tenacious and
resistant, of real life, into as many reasoning, and they have for their
object to combat the capitalist system as if it were a machine from
which one can take away or to which one can add pieces, wheels and
gearing.

The partisans of critical communism have broken definitely with all
these tendencies. They have been the successors and the continuers of
classical economics. []{#[23]}^[\[23\]](#23.)^ What is the doctrine of
the structure of present society? No one can combat this structure in
practice, in politics or in revolution without first taking an exact
account of its elements and its relations and making a fundamental study
of the doctrine which explains it. These forms, these elements and these
relations arise in certain historic conditions but they constitute a
system and a necessity. How can it be hoped to destroy such a system by
an act of logical negation and how eliminate it by reasoning? Eliminate
pauperism? But it is a necessary condition of capitalism. Give the
worker the entire product of his labor? But what would become of the
profit of capital, and where and how could the money expended in the
purchase of commodities be increased if among all the commodities which
it meets and with which it makes exchanges there were not a particular
one which returns to the buyer more than it costs him; and is not this
commodity precisely the labor power of the wage worker? The economic
system is not a tissue of reasonings but it is a sum and a complexus of
facts which engenders a complex tissue of relations. It is a foolish
thing to assume that this system of facts which the ruling class has
established with great pains through the centuries by violence, by
sagacity, by talent and by science will confess itself vanquished, will
destroy itself to give way to the demands of the poor and to the
reasonings of their advocates. How demand the suppression of poverty
without demanding the overthrow of all the rest? To demand of this
society that it shall change its law which constitutes its defense is to
demand and absurd thing. To demand of this State that it shall cease to
be the buckler and the defense of this society and of this law is
plunging into absurdities. []{#[24]}^[\[24\]](#24.)^ The one-sided
socialism which without being clearly utopian starts from the hypothesis
that society admits of certain errata without revolution, that is to say
without a fundamental change in the general elementary structure of
society itself, is a mere piece of ingenuity. This contradiction with
the rigid laws of the process of things is shown in all its evidence in
Proudhon, who, reproducing without knowing it, or copying directly, some
of the one-sided English socialists, wished to arrest and change
history, armed with a definition and a syllogism.

The partisans of critical communism recognized that history has a right
to follow its course. The bourgeois phase can be outgrown and it will
be. But as long as it exists it has its laws. The relativity of these
consists in the fact that they grow and develop in certain determined
conditions, but their relativity is not simply the opposite of
necessity, a mere appearance, a soap-bubble. These laws may disappear
and they will disappear by the very fact of the change of society, but
they do not yield to the arbitrary suggestion which demands a change,
proclaims a reform, or formulates a programme. Communism makes common
cause with the proletariat because in this resides the revolutionary
force which, bursts, breaks, shakes and dissolves the present social
form and creates in it, little by little, new conditions; or to be more
exact, the very fact of its movement shows to us that these new
conditions are already born.

The theory of the class struggle was found. It was seen to appear both
in the origins of the bourgeoisie (whose intrinsic *processus* was
already illustrated by the science of economics), and in this new
appearance of the proletariat. The relativity of economic laws was
discovered, but at the same time their relative necessity was
understood. Herein lies the whole method and justification of the new
materialistic conception of history. Those deceive themselves who,
calling it the economic interpretation of history, think they understand
it completely. That designation is better suited, and is only suited, to
certain analytic attempts,[]{#[25]}^[\[25\]](#25.)^ which, taken
separately and in a distinct fashion on the one side the economic forms
and categories, and on the other, for example, law, legislation,
politics, customs,-proceed to study the reciprocal influences of the
different sides of life considered in an abstract fashion. Quite
different is our position. Ours is the organic conception of history.
The totality of the unity of social life is the subject matter present
to our minds. It is economics itself which dissolves in the course of
one process, to reappear in as many morphological stages, in each of
which it serves as a substructure for all the rest. Finally, it is not
our method to extend the so-called economic factor isolated in an
abstract fashion over all the rest, as our adversaries imagine, but it
is, before everything else, to form and historic conception of economics
and to explain the other changes by means of its changes. There lies our
answer to all the criticisms which come to us from all the domains of
learned ignorance, not excepting the socialists who are insufficiently
grounded and who are sentimental or hysterical. And we explain our
position thus as Marx has done in his Capital, not the first book of
critical communism, but the last great book of bourgeois economics.

At the moment when the Manifesto was written the historic horizon did
not go beyond the classic world, the scarcely studied German antiquities
and the Biblical tradition which had only lately been reduced to the
prosaic conditions of all profane history. Our historic horizon is now
quite another thing, since it extends to the Aryan antiquities and to
the ancient deposits of Egypt and Mesopotamia which precede all the
Semitic traditions. And it extends still further back into prehistory,
that is to say, into unwritten history. Morgan has given us a knowledge
of ancient society, that is to say a pre-political society, and the key
to understand how from it came all the later forms marked by monogamy,
the development of the paternal family, the appearance of property,
first of the *gens,* then of the family, lastly individual, and by the
successive establishment of the alliances between *gentes* which are the
origin of the State. All this is illustrated by the knowledge of the
process of technique in the discovery and in the use of the means and
instruments of labor and by the understanding of the effect of this
process upon the social complexus, urging it in certain directions and
making it traverse certain stages. These discoveries may still be
corrected at certain points, notably by the study of the different
specific fashions according to which in different parts of the world the
passage from barbarism to civilization has been effected. But,
henceforth, one fact is indisputable, namely, that we have before our
eyes the general embryogenic record of human development from primitive
communism to those complex formations as at Athens or at Rome with their
constitutions of citizens arranged in classes according to census which
not long ago constituted the columns of Hercules for research into
written tradition. The classes which the Manifesto assumed have been
later resolved into their process of formation and in this can already
be recognized the plexus of reasons and of different economic causes for
the categories of the economic science of our bourgeois epoch. The dream
of Fourier to find a place for an epoch of civilization in the series of
long and vast process has been realized. A scientific solution has been
found for the problem of the origin of inequality among men which
Rousseau had tried to solve by arguments of an original dialectic,
relying however upon too few real data.

At two points, the extreme points for us, the human process is palpable.
One of these is the origin of the bourgeoisie, so recent and in the full
light of the science of economics; the other is the ancient formation of
society divided into classes, which marks the passage from higher
barbarism to civilization (the epoch of the State) to use expressions
employed by Morgan. All that is found between these two epochs is what
has, up to this time, formed the subject matter of the chroniclers, the
historians properly so-called, the jurists, the theologians and the
philosophers. We must not be over-hasty in tabulating it. At the very
beginning we must understand the economics relative to each
epoch,[]{#[26]}^[\[26\]](#26.)^ in order to explain specifically the
classes which develop in it, avoiding hypothetical and uncertain data
and taking care not to carry over our own conditions into each epoch.
For that, skilled fingers are needed. Thus, for example, what the
Manifesto says of the first origin of the bourgeoisie proceeding from
the serfs of the Middle Ages incorporated little by little into the
cities is not a general truth. This mode of origin is peculiar to
Germany and to the other countries which reproduce its process. It is
not the case either in Italy, nor in Southern France, nor in Spain,
which were the fields upon which began the first history of the
bourgeoisie, that is to say, of modern civilization. In this first phase
are found all the premises of the whole capitalist society as Marx
informed us in a note to the first volume of
Capital.[]{#[27]}^[\[27\]](#27.)^ This first phase which reaches its
perfect form in the Italian municipalities forms the pre-historic
background for that capitalist accumulation which Marx has explained
with so many characteristic details in the evolution of England. But I
will stop there.

The proletarians can have in view nothing but the future. That with
which all scientific socialists are primarily concerned is the present
in which are spontaneously developed and in which are ripening the
conditions of the future. The knowledge of the past is practically of
use and of interest only in so far as it throws light upon and explains
the present. For the moment it is enough to say that the partisans of
critical communism fifty years ago conceived the elements of the new and
definite philosophy of history. Soon this fashion of seeing will impose
itself because it will be impossible to think the contrary; and this
discovery will have the fate of Columbus\' egg. And perhaps before and
army so scientists has made an application of this conception to the
continuous narration of the whole history, the success of the
proletariat will have become such that the bourgeois epoch will appear
to all as something that must be left behind because it will nearly be
so in reality. *To understand is to leave behind* (Hegel).

When, fifty years ago, the Manifesto made of the proletarians, of the
unfortunates who excited pity, the predestined grave-diggers of the
bourgeoisie, the circumference of this burial place must have appeared
very small to the imagination of the writers who scarcely concealed in
the gravity of their style the idealism of their intellectual passion.
The probable circumference in their imagination then embraced only
France and England, and it would scarcely have touched the frontiers of
other countries, for instance, Germany. To-day the circumference appears
to us immense by reason of the rapid and colossal extension of the
bourgeois form of production which by inevitable reaction enlarges,
makes universal and multiplies the movement of the proletariat and
immensely expands the scene upon which is projected the picture of the
coming communism. The burial place extends as far as the eye can reach.
The more productive forces this magician calls forth, the more he
excites and prepares forces that must rebel against himself.

All those who were communists ideological, religious and utopian, or
even prophetic and apocalyptic in the past have always believed that the
reign of justice, equality and happiness was destined to have the world
for its theatre. To-day the word is invaded by civilization and
everywhere is developing that society which lives upon class antagonisms
and class domination, the form of bourgeois production (Japan may serve
us for an example.) The co-existence of the two nations in one and the
same state, which the divine Plato had already described, is
perpetuated. The earth will not be won over to communism to-morrow. But
as the confines of the bourgeois world enlarge, more numerous are those
who enter into it, abandoning and leaving behind the lower forms of
production,-and thus the attempt of communism gains in firmness and
precision. especially because in the domain and struggle of competition,
the deviations due to conquest and colonization are diminishing. The
proletarian International, while embryonic in the Communist League of
fifty years ago, henceforth becomes Interoceanic and it affirms on the
first of very May that the proletarians of the whole word are really and
actively united. The future grave-diggers of the bourgeoisie and their
descendants to many generations will ever remember the date of the
Communist Manifesto.

### Notes

[]{#1.}1. I refer to that form which the Manifesto designates ironically
under the name of \"German or \'True\' Socialism.\" This paragraph,
which is unintelligible for those who are not well versed in the German
philosophy of that epoch, notably in certain of its tendencies marked by
acute degeneracy, has, with good reason, been surpressed in the Spanish
translation. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B1%5D)^

[]{#2.}2. It is better to use the expression \"democratic socialization
of the means of production\" than that of \"collective property\"
because the latter implies a certain theoretical error in that, to begin
with, it substitutes for the real economic fact a juridical expression
and moreover in the mind of more than one it is confused with the
increase of monopolies, with the increasing statization of public
utilities and with all the other fantasmagoria of the ever recurring
State socialism, the whole effect of which is to increase the economic
means of oppression in the hands of the oppressing class.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B2%5D)^

[]{#3.}3. Twenty-five octavo pages in the original edition (London,
February, 1848) for a copy of which I am indebted to the special
kindness of Engels. I should say here in passing that I have resisted
the temptation to affix any bibliographical notes, references and
citations, for I should then have been making a work of scholarship, or
a book, rather than a simple essay. I hope the reader will take my word
for it that there are in this essay no allusions, or statements of fact
or opinion, which I could not substantiate with authorities.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B3%5D)^

[]{#4.}4. The \"Umrisse zu einer Kritik der National-ökonomie\" appeared
in the German-French Year Book, Paris, 1844, pp. 85-114; and his book on
\"The Condition of the Working Class in England\" at Leipzig in 1845.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B4%5D)^

[]{#5.}5. In these last years many jurists have thought they found in
the re-adjustment of the civil Code a practical means for ameliorating
the condition of the proletariat. But why have they not asked the pope
to become the head of the free thought league? The most delightful of
these is that Italian author who occupying himself with the class
struggle asks that by the side of the code which establishes the rights
of capital another be elaborated which should guarantee the rights of
labor. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B5%5D)^

[]{#6.}6. This development has been given in Marx\'s Capital which can
be considered as a philosophy of history.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B6%5D)^

[]{#7.}7. It was not until after the publication of the Italian edition
of this essay that I had at may disposal for some months a complete
collection of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for which I owe hearty thanks
to the Partei-Archiv of Berlin. The impression derived from this reading
surpasses expectation. It is desirable either that this journal which
now has become very rare, be reprinted entire or that the most important
articles and letters in it be reproduced.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B7%5D)^

[]{#8.}8. Misere de la Philosophie, by Karl Marx, Paris and Brussels,
1847; new edition, Paris, Giard and Briere, 1896.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B8%5D)^

[]{#9.}9. This is made up of articles which appeared in 1849 in the Neue
Rheinische Zeitung and which reproduced the lectures given by Marx to
the German Workingmen\'s Circle of Brussels in 1847. It has since been
published as a propaganda leaflet. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B9%5D)^

[]{#10.}10. See Chapter II. of the Manifesto.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B10%5D)^

[]{#11.}11. Zur Kritik der politischen ökonomie, Berlin, 1859, pp.
IV.-VI. of the preface. (Instead of retranslating this extract from the
French I have availed myself of the assistance of Comrade Hitch, who has
translated direct from the German of Marx.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B11%5D)^

[]{#12.}12. These articles which appeared in the Neue Rheinische
Politischokonomische Review, Hamburg, 1850, have recently been brought
together into a pamphlet by Engels (Berlin, 1895) under the title of
\"Die Klassenkampfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850.\" This little work has
a preface by Engels. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B12%5D)^

[]{#13.}13. Appeared for the first time in New York in 1852 in a review.
Several editions have since been made in Germany. A French translation
appeared in 1891 published by Delory, Lille.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B13%5D)^

[]{#14.}14. In the preface to the \"Class Struggle in France in
1848-50\" and elsewhere Engels treated fundamentally the objective
development of the new revolutionary tactic. (It is well to remember
that the first Italian edition of this essay appeared June 18th, and the
second, October 15, 1895. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B14%5D)^

[]{#15.}15. In my opinion this is the case in France. The recent
discussions of the agrarian progamme submitted to the deliberations of
the social democracy in Germany confirm the reasons which I have
indicated. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B15%5D)^

[]{#16.}16. It was otherwise in Germany. After 1830 socialism was
imported there and became a current literature; it underwent
philosophical alterations of which Gruen was the typical representative.
But already before the new doctrine socialism had received a
characteristic imprint which was proletarian, thanks to the propaganda
and the writings of Weitling. As Marx said in 1844 in the Paris
Vorwaerts, \"it was the giant in the cradle.\"
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B16%5D)^

[]{#17.}17. It is what many people call Marxism. Marxism is and remains
a doctrine. Parties can draw neither their name nor the justification
from a doctrine. \"I am no Marxist\" said-guess who? Marx himself.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B17%5D)^

[]{#18.}18. It is he who established the first relations between Marx
and the League and who served as the intermediary in the publication of
the Manifesto. He fell in the insurrection of 1849 at Murg.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B18%5D)^

[]{#19.}19. Marx\'s Capital, Vol. III., Hamburg, 1894, pp. xix-xx. The
date of 1845 refers principally to the book \"Die heilige Familie,
Frankfort, 1845,\" which was produced in collaboration by Marx and
Angels. This book is indispensable to an understanding of the
theoretical origin of historical materialism.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B19%5D)^

[]{#20.}20. I stop with Cabet who lived at the epoch of the Manifesto. I
do not think I ought to go as far as the sporadic forms of Bellamy and
Hertzka. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B20%5D)^

[]{#21.}21. The Balzac of the 17th century.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B21%5D)^

[]{#22.}22. It is these writers whom Menger thought he had discovered as
the authors of scientific socialism. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B22%5D)^

[]{#23.}23. It is for this reason that certain critics, Wieser for
example, propose to abandon Ricardo\'s theory of value because it leads
to socialism. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B23%5D)^

[]{#24.}24. Thus there arises notably in France the illusion of a social
monarchy which, succeeding the liberal epoch, should solve harmoniously
what is called the social question. This absurdity reproduces itself in
infinite varieties of socialism of the pulpit and State socialism. To
the different forms of ideological and religious utopianism is joined a
new form of bureaucratic and fiscal utopianism, the Utopia of the
idiots. ^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B24%5D)^

[]{#25.}25. For example in the essays of Th. Rogers.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B25%5D)^

[]{#26.}26. Who would have thought a few years ago of the discovery and
the authentic interpretation of an ancient Babylonian law?
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B26%5D)^

[]{#27.}27. Note 189, p. 740, of the 3rd German edition.
^[\[RETURN\ TO\ TEXT\]](#%5B27%5D)^

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcribed for the Marx / Engels Internet Archive in 1997 by Rob Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[The Antonio Labriola Archive](../index.htm)
