---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# A forecast of the coming revolution

#### Interview with Paul Lafargue

### (November 1904)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Socialist Standard**, November 1904.\
Transcribed by Adam Buick.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Amongst the best known leaders of Socialist thought is our comrade Paul
Lafargue, author of **The Evolution of Property**, **Socialism and the
Intellectuals**, and many other volumes and pamphlets of great value to
International Socialism. A visit to Paris brought us in touch with a
French comrade, through whose kindly offices we received an invitation
to visit the veteran debater at his pleasant retreat in a little village
some dozen miles from the French capital. Lafargue and his wife (once
known personally to English Socialists as Laura Marx) received us with
the true comradeship, which in palpable form made it plain that
"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity", is no empty phrase amongst Socialists.

Mindful of the interests of the Party, we secured from our comrade the
following interesting expression of his views upon some vital topics of
moment:

"The two countries which will benefit from the Russo-Japanese War", said
Lafargue, in answer to a query, "are America and England. Though the
Japs succeed in expelling Russia from Manchuria, they are at the same
time weakening themselves for a long period, and thus limiting their
capacity for industrial competition. Again, the financiers of England
and America -- principally the former -- will draw from Japan a great
deal even of such profit as may accrue to her in return for their
present assistance. Japan has for years been developing extraordinarily,
but the War hinders this. The resources she is squandering in war are
lost to industry."\
 

**And the results of all this upon our policy in the Far East,
comrade?**

The most important thing is the appearance of Japan upon the scene as
*the* strong power of the East, so strong that no European country can
compete with it. The rise of Japan marks the conclusion of European
piracy in the Far East. Nobody expected such an extraordinary power.
Further, Japan will organise China, industrially and politically.\
 

**What is your view, comrade, of the industrial position in Japan?**

The rise of Japan industrially has been so rapid that the horrors of
child and female labour in the England of the early nineteenth century
have been reproduced -- with the great difference that the intermediate
stages from the England of the fifteenth century were totally absent in
Japan. The psychological difference is enormous, and must produce a
revolt, but the form we cannot forecast. In England and France the
revolt was against the machine, and whilst this may not prove so in
Japan, this we know -- the Japs start with a Socialist movement such as
was not, and could not be, in England and France in the initial stages
of Capitalism. Just as the Japs adopt and adapt the ready-made science
of Europe, so the Social science of the New Age finds there a ready
soil. We may expect the Japanese people, who have shown such
extraordinary courage on the battlefield, to show in the Social struggle
the same indomitable energy and enterprise.\
 

**Now, as to the War again, comrade, what are its results upon Europe?**

This war has shown that Russia has made a fool of Europe with a show of
power. Particularly has Czarism befooled France. That show has enabled
her to draw from France about eleven milliards of francs (some
£400,000,000) by State loans and financial companies for the industrial
exploitation of Russia. The latter investments have been chiefly for
coal-mining and metal works. These found prosperity as long as the
Russian State was a huge customer for railway construction, &c, but in
so far as they have a revival, it is only the artificial stimulus of war
time, which will have its due reaction. Even now the lack of money is
strangling this revival. Either victory or defeat for Russia now means
revolution -- a bourgeois or constitutional revolution. The first thing
that the new power will have to do will be to proclaim the bankruptcy of
Russia -- as the best means to obtain credit. You will recollect a
similar process in the French Revolution. The new rulers of Russia will
be the more ready to declare this bankruptcy, in that the losers will
be, not the Russians but the French. The international effects will be
felt primarily in France, where the chief debt of Russia is held. The
fall of the present Russian political system will shake the whole fabric
of European society.\
 

**What is the likely effect upon Socialism in France of the loss of all
this capital through the fraud and folly of the bourgeois politicians
and the financial magnates who dominate them?**

Ah, *that* is the question. Remember the fuss about Panama involving
only 1½ milliards of francs. You will see why I anticipate great results
from the loss of some eight times as much. Only the Socialist Party of
France has opposed itself to the Franco-Prussian Alliances and denounced
it as a fraud upon the French people. The discrediting of all the
bourgeois parties must mean the immense growth of the party of the
Proletariat. Only the Socialist Party of France, the Revolutionists of
France, had the courage and insight to oppose the alliance with
despotism.\
 

**Very good, comrade; so much for the economic factors. What of other
forces?**

Russia is a compound of different nationalities. In the centre the
Slavs, surrounded by Poles, Finns, Caucasians, Armenians, &c, held down
by main force. These will spring into position again on the occasion of
the Revolution, and Poland principally (the Ireland of Russia), which
has never lost the sense of nationality, despite the tyranny of
centuries, will make her influence felt. She will want to reconstitute
her nationality with the Austrian and the German Poles. Thus I believe
that the next few years will bring us the European revolution, which, if
Socialists are sufficiently bold and well organised, will mean also the
Social Revolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This concluded, as far as the War is concerned, one of the most
instructive conversations in which I ever had the pleasure of
participating. In a future issue I hope to reproduce some expressions of
our comrade upon trade unionism, but with which it would be a pity to
complicate this article. The difference between the Socialists and the
pseudo-Socialists can easily be seen by a comparison of the
large-mindedness and grip of the situation disclosed by our comrade,
with the puny reflection of Capitalist sentimentality exhibited by
Jaurès in dealing with this same position. The attitude of the
Reformists in France sufficiently indicates the absurdity of the claim
of such superficial politicians to in any sense represent Socialism
either in France or elsewhere. Jaurès and his school are straining every
nerve in a "Stop the War" agitation, on the surface in the interests of
peace, but in reality designed to, if possible, stave off the evil day
of capitalist collapse. It was not for nothing that our comrades of the
Socialist Party of France moved the resolution at the recent
International Congress, which declared against compromise and intrigue
with capitalist parties. The Socialists of France have fought and are
fighting the same battle against treachery and folly of opportunism,
which we of The Socialist Party of Great Britain are waging in this
country.

I am sure every Socialist in England joins with us in reciprocating the
fraternal greetings extended by Paul and Laura Lafargue to the
unofficial representatives of British Socialism to whom this interview
was accorded.

  --- ----------------
      *H.J. Hawkins*
  --- ----------------

 \
[Top of the page](#top){#letter}\
 

### Correspondence

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Socialist Standard**, December 1904.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our comrade Hawkins forwards a copy of the following letter which he has
received:

  --- -------------------
      Draviel, 15.11.04
  --- -------------------

Dear Comrade, -- I have just received No.3 of **The Socialist
Standard**, containing your interview, and I am glad to find that you
have given a very full and faithful account thereof.

Trusting that the paper will be successful and with my best wishes and
our kind regards to Mrs Hawkins and yourself.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Yours fraternally\                |
|                                   | *Paul Lafargue*                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 23.6.2004
