Value, Price and Profit

[]{#c6}

### VI. Value and Labour

Citizens, I have now arrived at a point where I must enter upon the real
development of the question. I cannot promise to do this in a very
satisfactory way, because to do so I should be obliged to go over the
whole field of political economy. I can, as the French would say, but
"effleurer la question," touch upon the main points. The first question
we have to put is: What is the *value* of a commodity? How is it
determined?

At first sight it would seem that the value of a commodity is a thing
quite *relative*, and not to be settled without considering one
commodity in its relations to all other commodities. In fact, in
speaking of the value, the value in exchange of a commodity, we mean the
proportional quantities in which it exchanges with all other
commodities. But then arises the question: How are the proportions in
which commodities exchange with each other regulated? We know from
experience that these proportions vary infinitely. Taking one single
commodity, wheat, for instance, we shall find that a quarter of wheat
exchanges in almost countless variations of proportion with different
commodities. Yet, *its value remaining always the same*, whether
expressed in silk, gold, or any other commodity, it must be something
distinct from, and independent of, these *different rates of exchange*
with different articles. It must be possible to express, in a very
different form, these various equations with various commodities.

Besides, if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain
proportion, or the value of a quarter of wheat is expressed in a certain
amount of iron, I say that the value of wheat and its equivalent in iron
are equal to *some third thing*, which is neither wheat nor iron,
because I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different
shapes. Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore,
independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is
their common measure.

To elucidate this point I shall recur to a very simple geometrical
illustration. In comparing the areas of triangles of all possible forms
and magnitudes, or comparing triangles with rectangles, or any other
rectilinear figure, how do we proceed? We reduce the area of any
triangle whatever to an expression quite different from its visible
form. Having found from the nature of the triangle that its area is
equal to half the product of its base by its height, we can then compare
the different values of all sorts of triangles, and of all rectilinear
figures whatever, because all of them may be resolved into a certain
number of triangles.

The same mode of procedure must obtain with the values of commodities.
We must be able to reduce all of them to an expression common to all,
and distinguishing them only by the proportions in which they contain
that identical measure.

As the *exchangeable values* of commodities are only *social functions*
of those things, and have nothing at all to do with the *natural*
qualities, we must first ask: What is the common *social substance* of
all commodities? It is *labour*. To produce a commodity a certain amount
of labour must be bestowed upon it, or worked up in it. And I say not
only *labour*, but *social labour*. A man who produces an article for
his own immediate use, to consume it himself, creates a *product*, but
not a *commodity*. As a self-sustaining producer he has nothing to do
with society. But to produce a *commodity*, a man must not only produce
an article satisfying some *social* want, but his labour itself must
form part and parcel of the total sum of labour expended by society. It
must be subordinate to the *division of labour within society*. It is
nothing without the other divisions of labour, and on its part is
required to *integrate* them.

If we consider *commodities as values*, we consider them exclusively
under the single aspect of *realized, fixed*, or, if you like,
*crystallized social labour*. In this respect they can *differ* only by
representing greater or smaller quantities of labour, as, for example, a
greater amount of labour may be worked up in a silken handkerchief than
in a brick. But how does one measure *quantities of labour*? By the
*time the labour lasts*, in measuring the labour by the hour, the day,
etc. Of course, to apply this measure, all sorts of labour are reduced
to average or simple labour as their unit. We arrive, therefore, at this
conclusion. A commodity has *a value*, because it is a *crystallization
of social labour*. The *greatness* of its value, or its *relative*
value, depends upon the greater or less amount of that social substance
contained in it; that is to say, on the relative mass of labour
necessary for its production. The *relative values of commodities* are,
therefore, determined by the *respective quantities or amounts of
labour, worked up, realized, fixed in them*. The *correlative*
quantities of commodities which can be produced in the *same time of
labour* are *equal*. Or the value of one commodity is to the value of
another commodity as the quantity of labour fixed in the one is to the
quantity of labour fixed in the other.

I suspect that many of you will ask: Does then, indeed, there exist such
a vast or any difference whatever, between determining the values of
commodities by *wages*, and determining them by the *relative quantities
of labour* necessary for their production? You must, however, be aware
that the *reward* for labour, and *quantity* of labour, are quite
disparate things. Suppose, for example, *equal quantities of labour* to
be fixed in one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold. I resort to the
example because it was used by Benjamin Franklin in his first Essay
published in 1721, and entitled *A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and
Necessity of a Paper Currency*, where he, one of the first, hit upon the
true nature of value.

Well. We suppose, then, that one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold
are *equal values* or *equivalents*, because they are *crystallizations
of equal amounts of average labour*, of so many days\' or so many
weeks\' labour respectively fixed in them. In thus determining the
relative values of gold and corn, do we refer in any way whatever to the
*wages* of the agricultural labourer and the miner? Not a bit. We leave
it quite *indeterminate* how their day\'s or their week\'s labour was
paid, or even whether wage labour was employed at all. If it was, wages
may have been very unequal. The labourer whose labour is realized in the
quarter of wheat may receive two bushels only, and the labourer employed
in mining may receive one-half of the ounce of gold. Or, supposing their
wages to be equal, they may deviate in all possible proportions from the
values of the commodities produced by them. They may amount to
one-fourth, one-fifth, or any other proportional part of the one quarter
of corn or the one ounce of gold. Their *wages* can, of course, not
*exceed*, not be *more* than the values of the commodities they
produced, but they can be *less* in every possible degree. Their *wages*
will be *limited* by the *values* of the products, but the *values of
their products* will not be limited by the wages. And above all, the
values, the relative values of corn and gold, for example, will have
been settled without any regard whatever to the value of the labour
employed, that is to say, to *wages*. To determine the values of
commodities by the *relative quantities of labour fixed in them*, is,
therefore, a thing quite different from the tautological method of
determining the values of commodities by the value of labour, or by
*wages*. This point, however, will be further elucidated in the progress
of our inquiry.

In calculating the exchangeable value of a commodity we must add to the
quantity of labour *previously* worked up in the raw material of the
commodity, and the labour bestowed on the implements, tools, machinery,
and buildings, with which such labour is assisted. For example, the
value of a certain amount of cotton yarn is the crystallization of the
quantity of labour added to the cotton during the spinning process, the
quantity of labour previously realized in the cotton itself, the
quantity of labour realized in the coal, oil, and other auxiliary
substances used, the quantity of labour fixed in the steam-engine, the
spindles, the factory building, and so forth. Instruments of production
properly so-called, such as tools, machinery, buildings, serve again and
again for longer or shorter period during repeated processes of
production. If they were used up at once, like the raw material, their
whole value would at once be transferred to the commodities they assist
in producing. But as a spindle, for example, is but gradually used up,
an average calculation is made, based upon the average time it lasts,
and its average waste or wear and tear during a certain period, say a
day. In this way we calculate how much of the value of the spindle is
transferred to the yarn daily spin, and how much, therefore, of the
total amount of labour realized in a pound of yarn, for example, is due
to the quantity of labour previously realized in the spindle. For our
present purpose it is not necessary to dwell any longer upon this point.

It might seem that if the value of a commodity is determined by the
*quantity of labour bestowed upon its production*, the lazier a man, or
the clumsier a man, the more valuable his commodity, because the greater
the time of labour required for finishing the commodity. This, however,
would be a sad mistake. You will recollect that I used the word
"*social* labour," and many points are involved in this qualification of
"*social*." In saying that the value of a commodity is determined by the
*quantity of labour* worked up or crystallized in it, we mean *the
quantity of labour necessary* for its production in a given state of
society, under certain social average conditions of production, with a
given social average intensity, and average skill of the labour
employed. When, in England, the power-loom came to compete with the
hand-loom, only half the former time of labour was wanted to convert a
given amount of yarn into a yard of cotton or cloth. The poor hand-loom
weaver now worked seventeen or eighteen hours daily, instead of the nine
or ten hours he had worked before. Still the product of twenty hours of
his labour represented now only ten social hours of labour, or ten hours
of labour socially necessary for the conversion of a certain amount of
yarn into textile stuffs. His product of twenty hours had, therefore, no
more value than his former product of ten hours.

If then the quantity of socially necessary labour realized in
commodities regulates their exchangeable values, every increase in the
quantity of labour wanted for the production of a commodity must augment
its value, as every diminution must lower it.

If the respective quantities of labour necessary for the production of
the respective commodities remained constant, their relative values also
would be constant. But such is not the case. The quantity of labour
necessary for the production of a commodity changes continuously with
the changes in the productive powers of labour, the more produce is
finished in a given time of labour; and the smaller the productive
powers of labour, the less produce is finished in the same time. If, for
example, in the progress of population it should become necessary to
cultivate less fertile soils, the same amount of produce would be only
attainable by a greater amount of labour spent, and the value of
agricultural produce would consequently rise. On the other hand, if,
with the modern means of production, a single spinner converts into
yarn, during one working day, many thousand times the amount of cotton
which he could have spun during the same time with the spinning wheel,
it is evident that every single pound of cotton will absorb many
thousand times less of spinning labour than it did before, and
consequently, the value added by spinning to every single pound of
cotton will be a thousand times less than before. The value of yarn will
sink accordingly.

Apart from the different natural energies and acquired working abilities
of different peoples, the productive powers of labour must principally
depend: ---

Firstly. Upon the *natural* conditions of labour, such as fertility of
soil, mines, and so forth.

Secondly. Upon the progressive improvement of the *social powers of
labour*, such as are derived from production on a grand scale,
concentration of capital and combination of labour, subdivision of
labour, machinery, improved methods, appliance of chemical and other
natural agencies, shortening of time and space by means of communication
and transport, and every other contrivance by which science presses
natural agencies into the service of labour, and by which the social or
co-operative character of labour is developed. The greater the
productive powers of labour, the less labour is bestowed upon a given
amount of produce; hence the smaller the value of the produce. The
smaller the productive powers of labour, the more labour is bestowed
upon the same amount of produce; hence the greater its value. As a
general law we may, therefore, set it down that: ---

*The values of commodities are directly as the times of labour employed
in their production, and are inversely as the productive powers of the
labour employed.*

Having till now only spoken of *value*, I shall add a few words about
*price*, which is a peculiar form assumed by value.

Price, taken by itself, is nothing but the *monetary expression of
value*. The values of all commodities of the country, for example, are
expressed in gold prices, while on the Continent they are mainly
expressed in silver prices. The value of gold or silver, like that of
all other commodities is regulated by the quantity of labour necessary
for getting them. You exchange a certain amount of your national
products, in which a certain amount of your national labour is
crystallized, for the produce of the gold and silver producing
countries, in which a certain quantity of *their* labour is
crystallized. It is in this way, in fact by barter, that you learn to
express in gold and silver the values of all commodities, that is the
respective quantities of labour bestowed upon them. Looking somewhat
closer into the *monetary expression of value*, or what comes to the
same, the conversion of value into price, you will find that it is a
process by which you give to the *values* of all commodities an
*independent* and *homogeneous form*, or by which you express them as
quantities of equal social labour. So far as it is but the monetary
expression of value, price has been called *natural price* by Adam
Smith, "*prix necessaire*" by the French physiocrats.

What then is the relation between *value* and *market prices*, or
between *natural prices* and *market prices*? You all know that the
*market price* is the *same* for all commodities of the same kind,
however the conditions of production may differ for the individual
producers. The market price expresses only the *average amount of social
labour* necessary, under the average conditions of production, to supply
the market with a certain mass of a certain article. It is calculated
upon the whole lot of a commodity of a certain description.

So far the *market price* of a commodity coincides with its *value*. On
the other hand, the oscillations of market prices, rising now over,
sinking now under the value or natural price, depend upon the
fluctuations of supply and demand. The deviations of market prices from
values are continual, but as Adam Smith says:

"The natural price is the central price to which the prices of
commodities are continually gravitating. Different accidents may
sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and sometimes force
them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the obstacles
which hinder them from settling in this center of repose and
continuance, they are constantly tending towards it."

I cannot now sift this matter. It suffices to say the *if* supply and
demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will
correspond with their natural prices, that is to say with their values,
as determined by the respective quantities of labour required for their
production. But supply and demand *must* constantly tend to equilibrate
each other, although they do so only by compensating one fluctuation by
another, a rise by a fall, and *vice versa*. If instead of considering
only the daily fluctuations you analyze the movement of market prices
for longer periods, as Mr. Tooke, for example, has done in his *History
of Prices*, you will find that the fluctuations of market prices, their
deviations from values, their ups and downs, paralyze and compensate
each other; so that apart from the effect of monopolies and some other
modifications I must now pass by, all descriptions of commodities are,
on average, sold at their respective *values* or natural prices. The
average periods during which the fluctuations of market prices
compensate each other are different for different kinds of commodities,
because with one kind it is easier to adapt supply to demand than with
the other.

If then, speaking broadly, and embracing somewhat longer periods, all
descriptions of commodities sell at their respective values, it is
nonsense to suppose that profit, not in individual cases; but that the
constant and usual profits of different trades spring from the prices of
commodities, or selling them at a price over and above their *value*.
The absurdity of this notion becomes evident if it is generalized. What
a man would constantly win as a seller he would constantly lose as a
purchaser. It would not do to say that there are men who are buyers
without being sellers, or consumers without being producers. What these
people pay to the producers, they must first get from them for nothing.
If a man first takes your money and afterwards returns that money in
buying your commodities, you will never enrich yourselves by selling
your commodities too dear to that same man. This sort of transaction
might diminish a loss, but would never help in realizing a profit. To
explain, therefore, the *general nature of profits*, you must start from
the theorem that, on an average, commodities are *sold at their real
values*, and that *profits are derived from selling them at their
values*, that is, in proportion to the quantity of labour realized in
them. If you cannot explain profit upon this supposition, you cannot
explain it at all. This seems paradox and contrary to every-day
observation. It is also paradox that the earth moves round the sun, and
that water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth is
always paradox, if judged by every-day experience, which catches only
the delusive appearance of things.

[]{#c7}

### VII. Labour Power

Having now, as far as it could be done in such a cursory manner,
analyzed the nature of *value*, of the *value of any commodity
whatever*, we must turn our attention to the specific *value of labour*.
And here, again, I must startle you by a seeming paradox. All of you
feel sure that what they daily sell is their Labour; that, therefore,
Labour has a price, and that, the price of a commodity being only the
monetary expression of its value, there must certainly exist such a
thing as the *value of labour*. However, there exists no such thing as
the *value of labour* in the common acceptance of the word. We have seen
that the amount of necessary labour crystallized in a commodity
constitutes its value. Now, applying this notion of value, how could we
define, say, the value of a ten hours working day? How much labour is
contained in that day? Ten hours\' labour.

To say that the value of a ten hours working day is equal to ten hours\'
labour, or the quantity of labour contained in it, would be a
tautological and, moreover, a nonsensical expression. Of course, having
once found out the true but hidden sense of the expression "*value of
labour*," we shall be able to interpret this irrational, and seemingly
impossible application of value, in the same way that, having once made
sure of the real movement of the celestial bodies, we shall be able to
explain their apparent or merely phenomenal movements.

What the working man sells is not directly his *labour*, but his
*labouring power*, the temporary disposal of which he makes over to the
capitalist. This is so much the case that I do not know whether by the
English Laws, but certainly by some Continental Laws, the *maximum time*
is fixed for which a man is allowed to sell his labouring power. If
allowed to do so for any indefinite period whatever, slavery would be
immediately restored. Such a sale, if it comprised his lifetime, for
example, would make him at once the lifelong slave of his employer.

One of the oldest economists and most original philosophers of England
--- Thomas Hobbes --- has already, in his Leviathan, instinctively hit
upon this point overlooked by all his successors. He says: "*the value
or worth of a man* is, as in all other things, his *price*: that is so
much as would be given for the *use of his power*." Proceeding from this
basis, we shall be able to determine the *value of labour* as that of
all other commodities.

But before doing so, we might ask, how does this strange phenomenon
arise, that we find on the market a set of buyers, possessed of land,
machinery, raw material, and the means of subsistence, all of them, save
land in its crude state, the *products of labour*, and on the other
hand, a set of sellers who have nothing to sell except their labouring
power, their working arms and brains? That the one set buys continually
in order to make a profit and enrich themselves, while the other set
continually sells in order to earn their livelihood? The inquiry into
this question would be an inquiry into what the economists call
"*previous or original accumulation*," but which ought to be called
*original expropriation*. We should find that this so-called *original
accumulation* means nothing but a series of historical processes,
resulting in a *decomposition* of the *original union* existing between
the labouring Man and his Instruments of Labour. Such an inquiry,
however, lies beyond the pale of my present subject. The *separation*
between the Man of Labour and the Instruments of Labour once
established, such a state of things will maintain itself and reproduce
itself upon a constantly increasing scale, until a new and fundamental
revolution in the mode of production should again overturn it, and
restore the original union in a new historical form.

What, then, is the *value of labouring power*?

Like that of every other commodity, its value is determined by the
quantity of labour necessary to produce it. The labouring power of a man
exists only in his living individuality. A certain mass of necessaries
must be consumed by a man to grow up and maintain his life. But the man,
like the machine, will wear out, and must be replaced by another man.
Beside the mass of necessaries required for *his own* maintenance, he
wants another amount of necessaries to bring up a certain quota of
children that are to replace him on the labour market and to perpetuate
the race of labourers. Moreover, to develop his labouring power, and
acquire a given skill, another amount of values must be spent. For our
purpose it suffices to consider only *average* labour, the costs of
whose education and development are vanishing magnitudes. Still I must
seize upon this occasion to state that, as the costs of producing
labouring powers of different quality differ, so much differ the values
of the labouring powers employed in different trades. The cry for an
*equality of wages* rests, therefore, upon a mistake, is an inane wish
never to be fulfilled. It is an offspring of that false and superficial
radicalism that accepts premises and tries to evade conclusions. Upon
the basis of the wages system the value of labouring power is settled
like that of every other commodity; and as different kinds of labouring
power have different values, or require different quantities of labour
for their production, they *must* fetch different prices in the labour
market. To clamour for *equal or even equitable retribution* on the
basis of the wages system is the same as to clamour for *freedom* on the
basis of the slavery system. What you think just or equitable is out of
the question. The question is: What is necessary and unavoidable with a
given system of production? After what has been said, it will be seen
that the *value of labouring power* is determined by the *value of the
necessaries* required to produce, develop, maintain, and perpetuate the
labouring power.

[]{#c8}

### VIII. Production of Surplus Value

Now suppose that the average amount of the daily necessaries of a
labouring man require *six hours of average labour* for their
production. Suppose, moreover, six hours of average labour to be also
realized in a quantity of gold equal to 3s. Then 3s. would be the
*price*, or the monetary expression of the *daily value* of that man\'s
*labouring power*. If he worked daily six hours he would daily produce a
value sufficient to buy the average amount of his daily necessaries, or
to maintain himself as a labouring man.

But our man is a wages labourer. He must, therefore, sell his labouring
power to a capitalist. If he sells it at 3s. daily, or 18s. weekly, he
sells it at its value. Suppose him to be a spinner. If he works six
hours daily he will add to the cotton a value of 3s. daily. This value,
daily added by him, would be an exact equivalent for the wages, or the
price of his labouring power, received daily. But in that case *no
surplus value* or *surplus produce* whatever would go to the capitalist.
Here, then, we come to the rub.

In buying the labouring power of the workman, and paying its value, the
capitalist, like every other purchaser, has acquired the right to
consume or use the commodity bought. You consume or use the labouring
power of a man by making him work, as you consume or use a machine by
making it run. By buying the daily or weekly value of the labouring
power of the workman, the capitalist has, therefore, acquired the right
to use or make that labouring power during the *whole day or week*. The
working day or the working week has, of course, certain limits, but
those we shall afterwards look more closely at.

For the present I want to turn your attention to one decisive point. The
*value* of the labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour
necessary to maintain or reproduce it, but the *use* of that labouring
power is only limited by the active energies and physical strength of
the labourer. The daily or weekly *value* of the labouring power is
quite distinct from the daily or weekly exercise of that power, the same
as the food a horse wants and the time it can carry the horseman are
quite distinct. The quantity of labour by which the *value* of the
workman\'s labouring power is limited forms by no means a limit to the
quantity of labour which his labouring power is apt to perform. Take the
example of our spinner. We have seen that, to daily reproduce his
labouring power, he must daily reproduce a value of three shillings,
which he will do by working six hours daily. But this does not disable
him from working ten or twelve or more hours a day. But by paying the
daily or weekly *value* of the spinner\'s labouring power the capitalist
has acquired the right of using that labouring power during *the whole
day or week*. He will, therefore, make him work say, daily*, twelve
hours. Over and above* the six hours required to replace his wages, or
the value of his labouring power, he will, therefore, have to work *six
other hours*, which I shall call hours of *surplus labour*, which
surplus labour will realize itself in a *surplus value* and a *surplus
produce*. If our spinner, for example, by his daily labour of six hours,
added three shillings\' value to the cotton, a value forming an exact
equivalent to his wages, he will, in twelve hours, add six shillings\'
worth to the cotton, and produce *a proportional surplus of yarn*. As he
has sold his labouring power to the capitalist, the whole value of
produce created by him belongs to the capitalist, the owner *pro tem*.
of his labouring power. By advancing three shillings, the capitalist
will, therefore, realize a value of six shillings, because, advancing a
value in which six hours of labour are crystallized, he will receive in
return a value in which twelve hours of labour are crystallized. By
repeating this same process daily, the capitalist will daily advance
three shillings and daily pocket six shillings, one half of which will
go to pay wages anew, and the other half of which will form *surplus
value*, for which the capitalist pays no equivalent. It is this *sort of
exchange between capital and labour* upon which capitalistic production,
or the wages system, is founded, and which must constantly result in
reproducing the working man as a working man, and the capitalist as a
capitalist.

*The rate of surplus value*, all other circumstances remaining the same,
will depend on the proportion between that part of the working day
necessary to reproduce the value of the labouring power and the *surplus
time* or *surplus labour* performed for the capitalist. It will,
therefore, depend on the *ratio in which the working day is prolonged
over and above that extent*, by working which the working man would only
reproduce the value of his labouring power, or replace his wages.

[]{#c9}

### IX. Value of Labour

We must now return to the expression, "*value, or price of labour*." We
have seen that, in fact, it is only the value of the labouring power,
measured by the values of commodities necessary for its maintenance. But
since the workman receives his wages *after* his labour is performed,
and knows, moreover, that what he actually gives to the capitalist is
his labour, the value or price of his labouring power necessarily
appears to him as the *price* or *value of his labour itself*. If the
price of his labouring power is three shillings, in which six hours of
labour are realized, and if he works twelve hours, he necessarily
considers these three shillings as the value or price of twelve hours of
labour, although these twelve hours of labour realize themselves in a
value of six shillings. A double consequence flows from this.

Firstly. The *value or price of the labouring power* takes the semblance
of the *price or value of labour itself*, although, strictly speaking,
value and price of labour are senseless terms.

Secondly. Although one part only of the workman\'s daily labour is
*paid*, while the other part is *unpaid*, and while that unpaid or
surplus labour constitutes exactly the fund out of which *surplus value*
or *profit* is formed, it seems as if the aggregate labour was paid
labour.

This false appearance distinguishes *wages labour* from other
*historical* forms of labour. On the basis of the wages system even the
*unpaid* labour seems to be *paid* labour. With the *slave*, on the
contrary, even that part of his labour which is paid appears to be
unpaid. Of course, in order to work the slave must live, and one part of
his working day goes to replace the value of his own maintenance. But
since no bargain is struck between him and his master, and no acts of
selling and buying are going on between the two parties, all his labour
seems to be given away for nothing.

Take, on the other hand, the peasant serf, such as he, I might say,
until yesterday existed in the whole of East of Europe. This peasant
worked, for example, three days for himself on his own field or the
field allotted to him, and the three subsequent days he performed
compulsory and gratuitous labour on the estate of his lord. Here, then,
the paid and unpaid parts of labour were sensibly separated, separated
in time and space; and our Liberals overflowed with moral indignation at
the preposterous notion of making a man work for nothing.

In point of fact, however, whether a man works three days of the week
for himself on his own field and three days for nothing on the estate of
his lord, or whether he works in the factory or the workshop six hours
daily for himself and six for his employer, comes to the same, although
in the latter case the paid and unpaid portions of labour are
inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole
transaction is completely masked by the *intervention of a contract* and
the *pay* received at the end of the week. The gratuitous labour appears
to be voluntarily given in the one instance, and to be compulsory in the
other. That makes all the difference.

In using the word "*value of labour*," I shall only use it as a popular
slang term for "*value of labouring power*.\"

[]{#c10}

### X. Profit is Made by Selling a Commodity at its Value

Suppose an average hour of labour to be realized in a value equal to
sixpence, or twelve average hours of labour to be realized in six
shillings. Suppose, further, the value of labour to be three shillings
or the produce of six hours\' labour. If, then, in the raw material,
machinery, and so forth, used up in a commodity, twenty-four hours of
average labour were realized, its value would amount to twelve
shillings. If, moreover, the workman employed by the capitalist added
twelve hours of labour to those means of production, these twelve hours
would be realized in an additional value of six shillings. The *total
value of the product* would, therefore, amount to thirty-six hours of
realized labour, and be equal to eighteen shillings. But as the value of
labour, or the wages paid to the workman, would be three shillings only,
no equivalent would have been paid by the capitalist for the six hours
of surplus labour worked by the workman, and realized in the value of
the commodity. By selling this commodity at its value for eighteen
shillings, the capitalist would, therefore, realize a value of three
shillings, for which had paid no equivalent. These three shillings would
constitute the surplus value or profit pocketed by him. The capitalist
would consequently realize the profit of three shillings, not by selling
his commodity at a price *over and above* its value, but by selling it
*at its real value*.

The value of a commodity is determined by the *total quantity of labour*
contained in it. But part of that quantity of labour is realized in a
value for which and equivalent has been paid in the form of wages; part
of it is realized in a value for which NO equivalent has been paid. Part
of the labour contained in the commodity is *paid* labour; part is
*unpaid* labour. By selling, therefore, the commodity *at its value*,
that is, as the crystallization of the *total quantity of labour*
bestowed upon it, the capitalist must necessarily sell it at a profit.
He sells not only what has cost him an equivalent, but he sells also
what has cost him nothing, although it has cost his workman labour. The
cost of the commodity to the capitalist and its real cost are different
things.

I repeat, therefore, that normal and average profits are made by selling
commodities not *above*, but *at their real values*.

[]{#c11}

### XI. The Different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed

The *surplus value*, or that part of the total value of the commodity in
which the *surplus labour* or *unpaid labour* of the working man is
realized, I call *profit*. The whole of that profit is not pocketed by
the employing capitalist. The monopoly of land enables the landlord to
take one part of that *surplus value*, under the name of *rent*, whether
the land is used for agricultural buildings or railways, or for any
other productive purpose. On the other hand, the very fact that the
possession of the *instruments of labour* enables the employing
capitalist to produce a *surplus value*, or, what comes to the same, to
*appropriate to himself a certain amount of unpaid labour*, enables the
owner of the means of labour, which he lends wholly or partly to the
employing capitalist --- enables, in one word, the money-lending
capitalist to claim for himself under the name of *interest* another
part of that surplus value, so that there remains to the employing
capitalist *as such* only what is called *industrial* or *commercial
profit*.

By what laws this division of the total amount of surplus value amongst
the three categories of people is regulated is a question quite foreign
to our subject. This much, however, results from what has been stated.

*Rent, interest, and industrial profit* are only different names for
different parts of the *surplus value* of the commodity, or the *unpaid
labour enclosed in it*, and they are *equally derived from this source
and from this source alone*. They are not derived from *land* as such or
from *capital* as such, but land and capital enable their owners to get
their respective shares out of the surplus value extracted by the
employing capitalist from the labourer. For the labourer himself it is a
matter of subordinate importance whether that surplus value, the result
of his surplus labour, or unpaid labour, is altogether pocketed by the
employing capitalist, or whether the latter is obliged to pay portions
of it, under the name of rent and interest, away to third parties.
Suppose the employing capitalist to use only his own capital and to be
his own landlord, then the whole surplus value would go into his pocket.

It is the employing capitalist who immediately extracts from the
labourer this surplus value, whatever part of it he may ultimately be
able to keep for himself. Upon this relation, therefore between the
employing capitalist and the wages labourer the whole wages system and
the whole present system of production hinge. Some of the citizens who
took part in our debate were, there, wrong in trying to mince matters,
and to treat this fundamental relation between the employing capitalist
and the working man as a secondary question, although they were right in
stating that, under given circumstances, a rise of prices might affect
in very unequal degrees the employing capitalist, the landlord, the
moneyed capitalist, and, if you please, the tax-gatherer.

Another consequence follows from what has been stated.

That part of the value of the commodity which represents only the value
of the raw materials, the machinery, in one word, the value of the means
of production used up, forms *no revenue* at all, but replaces *only
capital*. But, apart from this, it is false that the other part of the
value of the commodity *which forms revenue*, or may be spent in the
form of wages, profits, rent, interest, is *constituted* by the value of
wages, the value of rent, the value of profits, and so forth. We shall,
in the first instance, discard wages, and only treat industrial profits,
interest, and rent. We have just seen that the *surplus value* contained
in the *commodity*, or that part of its value in which *unpaid labour*
is realized, resolves itself into different fractions, bearing three
different names.

But it would be quite the reverse of the truth to say that its value is
*composed* of, or *formed* by, the *addition* of the *independent values
of these three constituents*.

If one hour of labour realizes itself in a value of sixpence, if the
working day of the labourer comprises twelve hours, if half of this time
is unpaid labour, that surplus labour will add to the commodity a
*surplus value* of three shillings, that is of value for which no
equivalent has been paid. This surplus value of three shillings
constitutes the *whole fund* which the employing capitalist may divide,
in whatever proportions, with the landlord and the money-lender. The
value of these three shillings constitutes the limit of the value they
have to divide amongst them. But it is not the employing capitalist who
adds to the value of the commodity an arbitrary value for his profit, to
which another value is added for the landlord, and so forth, so that the
addition of these arbitrarily fixed values would constitute the total
value. You see, therefore, the fallacy of the popular notion, which
confounds the *decomposition of a given value* into three parts, with
the *formation* of that value by the addition of three *independent*
values, thus converting the aggregate value, from which rent, profit,
and interest are derived, into an arbitrary magnitude.

If the total profit realized by a capitalist is equal to 100 Pounds, we
call this sum, considered as *absolute* magnitude, the *amount of
profit*. But if we calculate the ratio which those 100 Pounds bear to
the capital advanced, we call this *relative* magnitude, the *rate of
profit*. It is evident that this rate of profit may be expressed in a
double way.

Suppose 100 Pounds to be the capital *advanced in wages*. If the surplus
value created is also 100 Pounds --- and this would show us that half
the working day of the labourer consists of *unpaid* labour --- and if
we measured this profit by the value of the capital advanced in wages,
we should say that the *rate of profit* amounted to one hundred percent,
because the value advanced would be one hundred and the value realized
would be two hundred.

If, on the other hand, we should not only consider the *capital advanced
in wages*, but the *total capital* advanced, say, for example, 500
Pounds, of which 400 Pounds represented the value of raw materials,
machinery, and so forth, we should say that the *rate of profit*
amounted only to twenty percent, because the profit of one hundred would
be but the fifth part of the *total* capital advanced.

The first mode of expressing the rate of profit is the only one which
shows you the real ratio between paid and unpaid labour, the real degree
of the *exploitation* (you must allow me this French word) *of labour*.
The other mode of expression is that in common use, and is, indeed,
appropriate for certain purposes. At all events, it is very useful for
concealing the degree in which the capitalist extracts gratuitous labour
from the workman.

In the remarks I have still to make I shall use the word *profit* for
the whole amount of the surplus value extracted by the capitalist
without any regard to the division of that surplus value between
different parties, and in using the words *rate of profit*, I shall
always measure profits by the value of the capital advanced in wages.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Next Section](ch03.htm) \| [Marx
Engels Archive](../../../index.htm) \| [Economics
Index](../../subject/economy/index.htm)
