Value, Price and Profit. Marx 1865

# Preface

The circumstances under which this paper was read are narrated at the
beginning of the work. The paper was never published during the lifetime
of Marx. It was found amongst his papers after the death of Engels.
Among many other characteristics of Marx, this paper shows two
especially. These are his patient willingness to make the meaning of his
ideas plain to the humblest student, and the extraordinary clearness of
those ideas. In a partial sense the present volume is an epitome of the
first volume of Capital. More than one of us have attempted to analyze
and simplify that volume, with not too much success perhaps. In fact, a
witty friend and commentator has suggested that what is now required is
an explanation by Marx of our explanations of him. I am often asked what
is the best succession of books for the student to acquire the
fundamental principles of Socialism. The question is a difficult one to
answer. But, by way of suggestion, one might say, first, Engels\'
*Socialism, Scientific And Utopian*, then the present work, the first
volume of Capital, and the Student\'s Marx. My small part in the
preparation of this work has been reading the manuscript, making a few
suggestions as to English forms of expression, dividing the work up into
chapters and naming the chapters, and revising the proofs for press. All
the rest, and by far the most important part, of the work has been done
by her whose name appears on the title page. The present volume has
already been translated into German.

Edward Aveling.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Study Guide](guide.htm) \| [Notes by Marx](notes.htm)\
[Marx Engels Archive](../../../index.htm) \| [Economics
Index](../../subject/economy/index.htm)
