---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Socialist Electioneering

### (February 1901)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, February 1901.\
Republished in **Red Banner**, No.21.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since the appearance of our last issue the Dublin branch of the Irish
Socialist Republican Party has been engaged in its third municipal
campaign. It is therefore fitting that we should place before our
readers a brief resume of the results of that election, as well as of
the principal lessons to be drawn therefrom.

On this occasion we were fortunate in having as our candidate a comrade
who held a high position in his trade union, and was also on the
executive of the Dublin Trades' and Labour Council, as well as being a
true and tried Socialist. Thus our comrade McLoughlin received the
endorsement of his fellow-tradesmen and trade unionists -- undoubtedly
the first time in Ireland on which either a trade union or a Trades'
Council publicly identified themselves with the electoral campaign of a
Socialist party. This fact was both an element of strength and a source
of distraction. It was an element of strength, because it disarmed the
prejudices of the trade unionists among the electors, and made them more
susceptible to the teachings of Socialism; it was a source of
distraction, because it temporarily admitted to our counsels many who,
not seeing farther than the success or failure of the moment, were ever
pressing upon the party and its candidate the supposed necessity of
temporising with the middle class in order to snatch an electoral
success. Needless to say such advice was promptly rejected. The
following remarks of Mr Connolly, when acting as chairman of the great
meeting in the Trades' Hall, defined exactly the position of the party
and its candidate towards such proposals:--

It has been said that the uncompromising working class position taken up
by Mr McLoughlin, in conformity with his Socialist principles, will
alienate many middle class voters, and so endanger his chances. But
those who use this argument do not understand Mr McLoughlin's position.
He does not wish to crawl into the Corporation (applause); he does not
wish to creep in there; he does not wish to smuggle himself in there
under false pretences. He wishes to go in standing erect on his own feet
as a man should; compromising no principle, yielding no point of his
programme; proud, conscientious and upright as a representative of the
working class should be, and if he cannot enter the Corporation in that
manner he is content to remain outside.

This language was new to the Dublin Trade Unionists; the enthusiasm with
which it was received, and the endorsement it received at the polls, was
proof enough of its soundness. Be it remembered that the Socialist
candidate was opposing the nominee of the "great Nationalist
organisation" the United Irish League; that the said nominee was
supported at his public meeting by three members of Parliament, viz.,
Tim Harrington, Pat O'Brien and P. White; that one of them stood all day
canvassing voters at the polling booth; that the Labour Electoral
Association supported the middle class candidate; that our enemies had
hired corps of paid canvassers and agents, whereas the Socialist
candidate had none but unpaid volunteer canvassers; that our enemies had
the funds of the capitalist class in the Ward to aid their candidature,
and the Socialist nothing but the coppers of poorly paid workers; that
all the prejudices of religion were played upon against us; when all
this is remembered, who can say that the poll of the Socialist
Republican -- defeating the Loyalist, and coming within 97 votes of
ousting the Home Ruler -- is not a result to be proud of and full of
promise for the future?

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.7.2005
