---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Loubet --

## and Other Things {#and-other-things .cr}

### (1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Socialist**, August 1903.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is a matter of common occurrence in Ireland when a perfervid orator
works himself and his hearers into a fever of enthusiasm to see some of
the auditory spring to their feet and exclaim, "'Tis a great day for
Ireland!" I fancy some such sentiment must have been in the mind of the
unemotional Englishman on the day the French President, M Loubet,
visited London. A great day for England! Aye, and, we are told, a
portent of peace and goodwill amongst the nations, as well as a proof of
the growth of democratic feeling amongst all classes in this country.
Certainly, looked at from the standpoint of a superficial observer, such
as the writers on London **Justice**, **Reynolds' Newspaper**, **Labour
Leader**, as well as the other organs of the classes, it did seem to be
a proof of the spread of democracy when we saw the head of a republican
government feted and fawned upon by the representatives of the power
which a little over a hundred years ago financed every tyrant in Europe
to make war upon the republican principles then first espoused by his
nation.

But trite as the truth is it is best to recall to our minds the fact it
embodies -- we are not living under the conditions of a hundred years
ago, and our friends who wrote such glowing passages about the
significance of the visit had better awaken to that fact and to the
necessity of discussing political happenings in the terms of to-day and
not of a past epoch. Since the era of the French Revolution the world
has changed in many things, and not the least in the economic conditions
which mould politics and diplomacy. When the governments of England and
monarchical Europe made war upon France they made war upon a country in
the grasp of a *revolutionary* capitalist class; the development of a
hundred years has transformed that French capitalist class from being
the rejuvenating agency of revolution and a menace to established order,
into a bulwark of economic conservatism and an ally of the most brutal
reaction. We have but to recall the history of the French Republic since
the overthrow of the Third Empire to realise that fact. That history is
but one long record of merciless repression of the working-class, and of
increasing intrigue against and war upon labour. A republic which saved
itself from the hands of the Parisian workers by the aid of the soldiers
of the German Empire, and celebrated its baptismal rites with the blood
of 30,000 butchered members of our class. A republic which, within the
past two years, under the rule of this 'messenger of peace', M Loubet,
has broken nearly a score of strikes by military force; which at
Martinique and Chalons has slaughtered French workmen for taking part in
strike processions; and at Marseilles ordered the sailors of its navy to
act the scab upon the merchant sailors on strike. It only required the
visit to Russia last year and to London this to emphasise the fact that
the revolutionary tradition has departed from France, and that her
rulers have finally merged themselves in the ruck of European
exploiters.

The visit is however not without its uses. It serves once more to
illustrate the insincerity and hypocrisy of the leaders of the London
SDF. When we remember that that body has for the past few months been
endeavouring to cover up the tracks of their treachery in voting for M
Millerand, by denouncing his continued presence in the French Cabinet,
and then see them shouting aloud to the people of England to welcome M
Loubet, the French President, we cannot but believe that the spectacle
will compel the more honest of their following to inquire, Why all this
denunciation of the servant, and such effusive praise of the master?

Our readers will know how to treat the sentimental slop of Belfort Bax
in **Reynolds' Newspaper**, and the inanities of Hyndman and the
**Justice** writers when they understand what really is the purport of
the visit so much eulogised. To the thinking mind the purport of that
visit is clear. It was to ratify the formation of a new secret alliance
between Russia, France and England. This is at once apparent when we
remember what has happened in international politics within the past few
months. We had the visit of M Loubet to Russia, the visit of King Edward
to Paris, the silence of both France and England over the question of
the continued occupation of Manchuria by Russia in spite of all treaties
to the contrary, the open threat to Germany by Mr Chamberlain when
introducing his protectionist proposals, and the present visit of the
President to King Edward. And now at the time of writing we have in all
the press the statement that the Tsar intends visiting London, but has
been advised by the diplomacy of this country to postpone his visit
until the King first visits Russia, which visit would help to hide the
real significance of his projected journey. This hastiness of the Tsar
was, in fact, nearly 'giving the game away', as his more lowly brothers
in crime would phrase it.

It is really amusing to see how such a blatant Russophobist as Mr
Hyndman joins with the pack in halloaing in favour of this latest move
of the Muscovite; how Mr Belfort Bax, who in his own felicitous
phraseology, has wasted "gallons of good ink" in demonstrating the utter
imbecility of the theories of the noble-minded political republicans of
the 1848 period, now calls upon the democracy to worship at the shrine
of the head of a bastard republicanism; how, in short, the truculent
declamation of the "Class War" has given way to a shout of "Vive
l'entente cordiale" between the national heads of capitalist society.
The Tsar -- whose Cossacks brutally murdered hundreds of working-class
men, women and children in the factory towns of Russia last year; the
President -- whose soldiery are hurled at every strike, whose prefects,
as at Carmaux, override the benificent proposals of every Socialist city
council; the King -- whose class legislation has made trade-unionism a
farce or a fraud, and whose police at that very moment in Dublin were
breaking the heads of a peaceful procession, yea, surely these are fit
objects for the reverential admiration of the SDF. When we contemplate
the antics of these men, our erstwhile 'leaders', the wonder is not that
the Socialist movement in these countries has made so little headway,
but that it has made any headway at all.

All this blundering on the part of the SDF leaders, to whom political
blundering has become a second nature (we all remember how Hyndman
blundered over the South African war and patted Chamberlain on the back,
until the restiveness of the rank and file brought him to his senses),
all this blundering will have a good effect if it is instrumental in
causing Socialists to revise their theories on France and the French
revolutionary tradition. Personally the writer believes that the
influence which that tradition exerts upon the minds of Socialists is
disastrous to our movement. The theatrical splendour and gorgeousness of
that outburst has hypnotised the Socialist mind, and even when
theoretically clear upon its economic character we find many of our
writers and speakers still thinking and acting politically in terms of
that past revolution. As a result we find imported into our movement,
and in too many instances overlaying it, a whole host of theories of
political action, tactics, and strategy which are foreign to our
principles and destructive of our class spirit. This is not only the
case in this country, it is so in the United States also, as well as in
continental European countries. The sneaking fondness for any man who
'talks physical force', even when he does it to cloak semi-reactionary
principles, the concession of 'honesty of purpose' to every man who
mouths radical phraseology, the idea (the fruitful mother of treason) of
building a Socialist Party upon the working 'people', instead of upon
the working *class*, the vague but harmful belief that irreligion is
necessarily linked with social revolution, and religious orthodoxy with
capitalism, the tendency to rush off into all manner of speculations
about the future, and the desire to exclude all who do not agree with
the speculation upon the tendency resultant from the economic change, in
short, all those wrong tendencies which spring from the habit of
regarding revolution mainly from the standpoint of *destruction*,
instead of from the standpoint of *building* and *construction*, are our
baneful inheritance from the first French Revolution. It is because of
that mental inheritance, those wrong tendencies, that we so often find
in the socialist movement men whose whole conception of duty is that of
the iconoclast -- the image-breaker -- and who, having such a
conception, naturally tend to regard as socialistic everything which
wages war upon present institutions. Such was perforce the nature of the
French Revolution, which, being capitalist and therefore individualist,
found the 'logical centre' of the universe in each man's brain, and
worked outward to shape the world.

Such is not the nature of the impending Social Revolution which must
seek the logical centre of society in the tool of industry, and is only
concerned with those institutions or principles which are based upon its
development. The capitalist French revolutionist had to fight to destroy
the institution of his enemy; the social revolutionist has to fight in
order to give the economic institutions of his enemy room to grow; the
capitalist revolutionist of France dreaded the development of feudalism,
the Socialist revolutionist hails with delight every fresh development
of capitalism. This point of difference places our revolution at the
very extremities of the poles of thought and tactics from that of the
men of 1789 in France, yet the fact that these men killed a king and
queen, ie, destroyed something, is often sufficient to blind men to-day
to the utter inapplicability of their tactics to present day
requirements.

We have to remember that the French Revolution was an uprising of the
capitalist class, that their tactics may not be our tactics, and that
their victory added another to the list of our enemies in power.

Then we will understand the visit of Loubet -- and other things.

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### Appendix

## Platform of the Socialist Labour Party

The Socialist Labour Party is a political organisation seeking to
establish political and social freedom for all, and seeing in the
conquest by the Socialist Working Class of all the governmental and
administrative powers of the nation the means to the attainment of that
end.

It affirms its belief that political and social freedom are not two
separate and unrelated ideas, but are two sides of the one great
principle, each being incomplete without the other.

The course of society politically has been from warring but democratic
tribes within each nation to a united government under an absolutely
undemocratic monarchy. Within this monarchy again developed revolts
against its power, revolts at first seeking to limit its prerogatives
only, then demanding the inclusion of certain classes in the governing
power, then demanding the right of the subject to criticise and control
the power of the monarch, and finally, in the most advanced countries
this movement culminated in the total abolition of the monarchical
institution, and the transformation of the subject into the citizen.

In industry a corresponding development has taken place. The independent
producer, owning his own tools and knowing no master, has given way
before the more effective productive powers of huge capital,
concentrated in the hands of the great capitalist. The latter,
recognising no rights in his workers, ruled as an absolute monarch in
his factory. But within the realm of capital developed a revolt against
the power of the capitalist. This revolt, taking the form of trade
unionism, has pursued in the industrial field the same line of
development as the movement for political freedom has pursued in the
sphere of national government. It first contented itself with protests
against excessive exactions, against all undue stretchings of the power
of the capitalist; then its efforts broadened out to demands for
restrictions upon the absolute character of such power, ie, by claiming
for trade unions the right to make rules for the workers in the
workshop; then it sought to still further curb the capitalist's power by
shortening the working day, and so limiting the period during which the
labourer may be exploited. Finally, it seeks by Boards of Arbitration to
establish an equivalent in the industrial world for that compromise in
the political world by which, in constitutional countries, the monarch
retains his position by granting a parliament to divide with him the
duties of governing, and so hides while securing his power. And as in
the political history of the race the logical development of progress
was found in the abolition of the institution of monarchy, and not in
its mere restriction, so in industrial history the culminating point to
which all efforts must at last converge lies in the abolition of the
capitalist class, and not in the mere restriction of its powers.

The Socialist Labour Party, recognising these two phases of human
development, unites them in its programme, and seeks to give them a
concrete embodiment by its demand for a Socialist Republic.

It recognises in all past history a preparation for this achievement,
and in the industrial tendencies of to-day it hails the workings out of
those laws of human progress which bring that object within our reach.

The concentration of capital in the form of trusts at the same time as
it simplifies the operations of capital and increases the effectiveness
of human labour, also simplifies the task we propose that society shall
undertake, viz.: the dispossession of the capitalist class, and the
administration of all land and instruments of industry as social
property, of which all shall be co-heirs and owners.

As to-day the organised power of the State theoretically guarantees to
every individual his political rights, so in the Socialist Republic the
power and productive forces of organised society will stand between
every individual and want, guaranteeing that right to life without which
all other rights are but mockery. Short of the complete dispossession of
the capitalist class which this implies there is no hope for the
workers, but in the hands of men who recognise that fact all proposals
which maintain against the claims of capital the rights of the
community, when coupled with the assertion of the interests of labour as
the superior interests of the community, may serve as a good agitational
basis for such preliminary skirmishing as will necessarily precede the
final overthrow of the capitalist system.

Of such a character are the following proposals:--

> ### The Class War
>
> 1.  The legal restriction of the hours of labour to eight per day or
>     less, according to the development of labour-saving machinery.
> 2.  The abolition of all child labour under seventeen years of age.
> 3.  Graduated income-tax upon all income derived from capitalist
>     property. Funds from same to be applied to
>     -   (*a*) Old age pensions for all.
>     -   (*b*) Free maintenance for all school children.
>
>  
>
> ### Public Ownership
>
> 1.  Right of all national and municipal employees to elect their
>     immediate superiors and to be represented upon all public
>     departments directing their industry.
> 2.  Nationalisation and municipalisation of all industries upon above
>     basis.
>
>  
>
> ### Political
>
> 1.  The abolition of all hereditary authority.
> 2.  The degree of connection of any civilised people with our rule to
>     be left to the vote of that people themselves, free from external
>     pressure.
> 3.  Extension of the franchise and full political rights to all
>     adults, male and female; also to the military and naval forces.

But we must again warn the working class that all these measures are in
themselves economically insufficient, and are but the temporary
expedients of the passing moment. As the struggle between the workers
and their exploiters develops all programmes will tend to become
superfluous, and in the final issue the watchword of either side in the
conflict will find expression in fidelity to a principle rather than in
measures which are but details of administration.

#### Speed the Day

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
