---
layout: default
title: 
---
Karl Korsch (1923)

# Marxism and Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Marxism and Philosophy*, Monthly Review Press, 1970,
reproduced in its entirety;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by [Andy
Blunden](../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/ablunden.htm) for the
Value_of_Knowledge archive, 1998;\
[Proofed and corrected]{.info}: by Chris Clayton 2006.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Until very recently, neither bourgeois nor Marxist thinkers had much
appreciation of the fact that the relation between Marxism and
philosophy might pose a very important theoretical and practical
problem. For professors of philosophy, Marxism was at best a rather
minor sub-section within the history of nineteenth-century philosophy,
dismissed as ['The Decay of
Hegelianism'](../../../reference/archive/hegel/help/1841.htm). But
'Marxists' as well tended not to lay great stress on the 'philosophical
side' of their theory, although for quite different reasons. Marx and
Engels, it is true, often indicated with great pride that historically
the German workers' movement had inherited the legacy of [classical
German
philosophy](../../../archive/marx/works/1880/soc-utop/ch02.htm){target="_top"}
in 'scientific socialism'. But they did not mean by this that scientific
socialism or communism were primarily 'philosophies'. They rather saw
the task of their 'scientific socialism' as that of definitively
overcoming and superseding the form and content, not only of all
previous bourgeois idealist philosophy, but thereby of philosophy
altogether. Later I shall have to explain in more detail what, according
to the original conception of Marx and Engels, the nature of this
supersession was or was intended to be. For the moment I merely record
that historically this issue simply ceased to be a problem as far as
most later Marxists were concerned. The manner in which they dealt with
the question of philosophy can best be described in the vivid terms in
which Engels once described [Feuerbach's attitude to Hegelian
philosophy](../../../archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/hegel.htm#44H2):
Feuerbach simply ['shoved' it 'unceremoniously
aside'](../../../archive/marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/ch01.htm#015).
In fact, very many later Marxists, apparently in highly orthodox
compliance with the masters' instructions, dealt in exactly the same
unceremonious way not only with Hegelian philosophy but with philosophy
as a whole. Thus, for example, Franz Mehring more than once laconically
described his own orthodox Marxist position on the question of
philosophy by saying that he accepted the 'rejection of all philosophic
fantasies' which was the precondition for the masters' (Marx and Engels)
immortal accomplishments'. This statement came from a man who could with
justice say that he had 'concerned himself with the philosophical
origins of Marx and Engels more thoroughly than anyone else', and it is
extremely significant for the generally dominant position on all
philosophical problems found among the Marxist theoreticians of the
Second International (1889-1914). The prominent Marxist theoreticians of
the period regarded concern with questions that were not even
essentially philosophical in the narrower sense, but were only related
to the general epistemological and methodological bases of Marxist
theory, as at most an utter waste of time and effort. Of course, whether
they liked it or not, they allowed discussion of such philosophical
issues within the Marxist camp and in some circumstances they took part
themselves. But when doing so they made it quite clear that the
elucidation of such problems was totally irrelevant to the practice of
proletarian class struggle, and would always have to remain so. Such a
conception was, however, only self-evident and logically justified given
the premise that Marxism as a theory and practice was in essence totally
unalterable and involved no specific position on any philosophical
questions whatever.

This meant that it was not regarded as impossible, for example, for a
leading Marxist theoretician to be a follower of Arthur Schopenhauer in
his private philosophical life.

During that period, therefore, however great the contradictions between
Marxist and bourgeois theory were in all other respects, on this one
point there was an apparent agreement between the two extremes.
Bourgeois professors of philosophy reassured each other that Marxism had
no philosophical content of its own -- and thought they were saying
something important *against* it. Orthodox Marxists also reassured each
other that their Marxism by its very nature had nothing to do with
philosophy -- and thought they were saying something important *in
favour* of it. There was yet a third trend that started from the same
basic position; and throughout this period it was the only one to
concern itself somewhat more thoroughly with the philosophical side of
socialism. It consisted of those 'philosophising socialists' of various
kinds who saw their task as that of 'supplementing' the Marxist system
with ideas from *Kulturphilosophie* or with notions from Kant, Dietzgen
or Mach, or other philosophies. Yet precisely because they thought that
the Marxist system needed philosophical supplements, they made it quite
clear that in their eyes too Marxism in itself lacked philosophical
content.

Nowadays it is rather easy to show that this purely *negative*
conception of the relation between Marxism and philosophy, which we have
shown to be held in apparent unanimity by bourgeois scholars as well as
by orthodox Marxists, arose in both cases from a very superficial and
incomplete analysis of historical and logical development. However, the
conditions under which they both came to this conclusion *in part*
diverge greatly, and so I want to describe them separately. It will then
be clear that in spite of the great difference between the motives on
either side, the two sets of causes do coincide in one crucial place.
Among *bourgeois scholars* in the second half of the nineteenth century
there was a total disregard of Hegel's philosophy, which coincided with
a complete incomprehension of the relation of philosophy to reality, and
of theory to practice, which constituted the living principle of all
philosophy and science in Hegel's time. On the other hand *Marxists*
simultaneously tended in exactly the same way increasingly to forget the
original meaning of the dialectical principle. Yet it was this that the
two young Hegelians, Marx and Engels, when they were turning away from
Hegel in the 1840s, had quite deliberately rescued from German idealist
philosophy and transferred to the materialist conception of history and
society.

First I shall summarise the reasons why, since the middle of the
nineteenth century, *bourgeois* philosophers and historians have
progressively abandoned the dialectical conception of the history of
philosophy; and why they have therefore been incapable of adequately
analysing and presenting the independent essence of Marxist philosophy
and its significance within the general development of
nineteenth-century philosophy.

One could perhaps argue that there were much more immediate reasons for
the disregard and misinterpretation of Marxist philosophy, and that
there is therefore absolutely no need for us to explain its suppression
by reference to the abandonment of the dialectic. It is true that in
nineteenth-century writing on the history of philosophy, a conscious
class instinct undeniably contributed to the perfunctory treatment of
Marxism, and, what is more, to a similar treatment of such bourgeois
'atheists' and 'materialists' as David Friedrich Strauss, Bruno Bauer
and Ludwig Feuerbach. But we would only have a very crude idea of what
in reality constitutes a very complex situation if we simply accused
bourgeois philosophers of having consciously subordinated their
philosophy, or history of philosophy, to class interest. There are of
course instances which do correspond to this crude thesis. But in
general the relation of the philosophical representatives of a class to
the class which they represent is a good deal more complex. In his
*Eighteenth Brumaire* Marx deals specifically with interconnections of
this kind. He says there that the class as a whole creates and forms 'an
entire superstructure of distinct and peculiarly formed sentiments,
illusions, modes of thought and views of life' out of its 'material
foundations'. A part of the superstructure that is 'determined by class'
in this way, yet is particularly remote from its 'material and economic
foundation', is the philosophy of the class in question. This is most
obvious as regards its content; but it also applies in the last instance
to its formal aspects. If we want to understand the complete
incomprehension of the philosophical content of Marxism on the part of
bourgeois historians of philosophy, and really to understand it in
Marx's sense of the word -- that is 'materialistically and therefore
scientifically' we must not be content to explain this phenomenon
directly and immediately by its 'earthly kernel' (namely class
consciousness and the economic interests which it conceals 'in the last
instance'). Our task is to show in detail the *mediations* of the
process whereby even those bourgeois philosophers and historians who
sincerely try to investigate 'pure' truth with the greatest
'objectivity' are bound completely to overlook the philosophical content
of Marxism or are only able to interpret it in an inadequate and
superficial way. For our purposes the most important of these mediations
is undoubtedly the fact that since the middle of the nineteenth century
the whole of bourgeois philosophy, and especially, the bourgeois writing
of the history of philosophy, has for socioeconomic reasons abandoned
Hegelian philosophy and the dialectical method. It has returned to a
method of philosophy, and of writing the history of philosophy, which
renders it almost impossible for it to make anything 'philosophical' out
of a phenomenon like Marx's scientific socialism.

In the normal presentations of the history of the nineteenth-century
philosophy which emanate from bourgeois authors, there is a gap at a
specific point which can only be overcome in a highly artificial manner,
if at all. These historians want to present the development of
philosophical thought in a totally ideological and hopelessly
undialectical way, as a pure process of the 'history of ideas'. It is
therefore impossible to see how they can find a rational explanation for
the fact that by the 1850s Hegel's grandiose philosophy had virtually no
followers left in Germany and was totally misunderstood soon afterwards,
whereas as late as the 1830s even its greatest enemies (Schopenhauer or
Herbart) were unable to escape its overpowering intellectual influence.
Most of them did not even try to provide such an explanation, but were
instead content to note in their annals the disputes following Hegel's
death under the utterly negative rubric of 'The Decay of Hegelianism'.
Yet the content of these disputes was very significant and they were
also, by today's standards, of an extremely high formal philosophical
level. They took place between the various tendencies of Hegel's school,
the Right, the Centre and the different tendencies of the Left,
especially Strauss, Bauer, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels. To close this
period, these historians of philosophy simply set a kind of absolute
'end' to the Hegelian philosophic movement. They then begin the 1860s
with the return to Kant (Helmholtz, Zeller, Liebmann, Lange) which
appears as a new epoch of philosophical development, without any direct
connection to anything else. This kind of history of philosophy has
three great limitations, two of which can be revealed by a critical
revision that itself remains more or less completely within the realm of
the history of ideas. Indeed, in recent years more thorough
philosophers, especially
[Dilthey](../../../reference/subject/philosophy/works/ge/dilthey.htm)
and his school, have considerably expanded the limited perspective of
normal histories of philosophy in these two respects. These two limits
can therefore be regarded as having been overcome in principle, although
in practice they have survived to this day and will presumably continue
to do so for a very long time. The third limit, however, cannot in any
way be surpassed from within the realm of the history of ideas;
consequently it has not yet been overcome even in principle by
contemporary bourgeois historians of philosophy.

The first of these three limits in the bourgeois history of philosophy
during the second half of the nineteenth century can be characterised as
a 'purely philosophical' one. The ideologues of the time did not see
that the ideas contained in a philosophy can live on not only in
philosophies, but equally well in positive sciences and social practice,
and that this process precisely began on a large scale with Hegel's
philosophy. The second limit is a 'local' one, and was most typical of
German professors of philosophy in the second half of the last century:
these worthy Germans ignored the fact that there were other philosophers
beyond the boundaries of Germany. Hence, with a few exceptions, they
quite failed to see that the Hegelian system, although pronounced dead
in Germany for decades, had continued to flourish in several foreign
countries, not only in its content but also as a system and a method. In
the development of the history of philosophy over recent decades, these
first two limits to its perspective have in principle been overcome, and
the picture painted above of the standard histories of philosophy since
1850 has of late undergone considerable improvement. However, bourgeois
philosophers and historians are quite unable to overcome a third
limitation on their historical outlook, because this would entail these
'bourgeois' philosophers and historians of philosophy abandoning the
*bourgeois class standpoint* which constitutes the most essential *a
priori* of their entire historical and philosophical science. For what
appears as the purely 'ideal' development of philosophy in the
nineteenth century can in fact only be fully and essentially grasped by
relating it to the concrete historical development of bourgeois society
as a whole. It is precisely this relation that bourgeois historians of
philosophy, at their present stage of development, are incapable of
studying scrupulously and impartially.

This explains why right up to the present day certain phases of the
general development of philosophy in the nineteenth century have had to
remain 'transcendent' for these bourgeois historians of philosophy. It
also explains why there are still certain curious 'blank patches' on the
maps of contemporary bourgeois histories of philosophy (already
described in connection with the 'end' of the Hegelian movement in the
1840s and the empty space after it, before the 'reawakening' of
philosophy in the 1860s). It also becomes intelligible why bourgeois
histories of philosophy today no longer have any coherent grasp even of
a period of German philosophy whose concrete essence they previously had
succeeded in understanding. In other words, neither the development of
philosophical thought *after* Hegel, nor the preceding evolution of
philosophy from Kant to Hegel, can be understood as a mere chain of
ideas. Any attempt to understand the full nature and meaning of this
whole later period -- normally referred to in history books as the epoch
of 'German idealism' -- will fail hopelessly so long as certain
connections that are vital for its whole form and course are not
registered, or are registered only superficially or belatedly. These are
the connections between the 'intellectual movement' of the period and
the 'revolutionary movement' that was contemporary with it.

In Hegel's *History of Philosophy* and other works there are passages
describing the nature of the philosophy of his immediate predecessors --
Kant, Fichte, and Schelling -- which are valid for the whole period of
so-called 'German idealism' including its crowning 'conclusion', the
Hegelian system itself. They are also applicable to the later conflicts
in the 1840s between the various Hegelian tendencies. Hegel wrote that
in the philosophic systems of this fundamentally revolutionary epoch,
'revolution was lodged and expressed as if in the very form of their
thought'. Hegel's accompanying statements make it quite clear that he
was not talking of what contemporary bourgeois historians of philosophy
like to call a revolution in thought -- a nice, quiet process that takes
place in the pure realm of the study and far away from the crude realm
of real struggles. The greatest thinker produced by bourgeois society in
its revolutionary period regarded a 'revolution in the form of thought'
as an objective component of the total social process of a real
revolution. Only two peoples, the German and the French -- despite or
precisely because of their contrasts -- took part in this great epoch of
world history, whose deepest essence is grasped by the philosophy of
history. Other nations took no inward part in it: their governments and
peoples merely played a political role. This principle swept Germany as
thought, spirit and concept; in France it was unleashed in effective
reality. What reality there was in Germany, however, appeared as a
violent result of external conditions and as a reaction to them. A few
pages further on, when presenting the philosophy of Kant, Hegel returns
to the same theme:

'Rousseau already placed the Absolute in Freedom; Kant possesses the
same principle, only in a more theoretical version. The French regard it
from the point of view of will, for they have a proverb '*Il a la tête
pres du bonnet'* (He is hot-headed). France has a sense of reality, of
accomplishment, because ideas there are translated more directly into
action; consequently men there have applied themselves practically to
reality. However much freedom in itself is concrete, in France it was
applied to reality in an undeveloped and abstract form; and to establish
abstraction in reality is to destroy that reality. The fanaticism of
freedom, when the people took possession of it, became terrible. In
Germany the same principle aroused the interest of consciousness but was
only developed in a theoretical manner. We have all kinds of commotions
within us and about us; but through them all the German head prefers to
let its sleeping cap sit quietly where it is and silently carries on its
operations beneath it -- Immanuel Kant was born in Königsberg in 1724",
and so on.

These passages from Hegel affirm a principle which renders intelligible
the innermost nature of this great period of world history: the
dialectical relation between philosophy and reality. Elsewhere Hegel
formulated this principle in a more general way, when he wrote that
every philosophy can be nothing but '*its own epoch comprehended in
thought*.' Essential in any event for a real understanding of the
development of philosophical thought, this axiom becomes even more
relevant for a revolutionary period of social evolution. Indeed, it is
exactly this that explains the fate which irresistibly overtook the
further development of philosophy and the historical study of philosophy
by the *bourgeois class* in the nineteenth century. In the middle of the
nineteenth century this class ceased to be revolutionary in its social
*practice*, and by an inner necessity it thereby also lost the ability
to comprehend in *thought* the true dialectical interrelation of ideas
and real historical developments, above all of philosophy and
revolution. In social practice, the revolutionary development of the
bourgeoisie declined and halted in the middle of the nineteenth century.
This process found its ideological expression in the apparent decline
and end of philosophical development, on which bourgeois historians
dwell to this day. A typical example of this kind of thinking is the
comment of Überweg and Heinze, who begin the relevant section of their
book by saying that philosophy found itself at this time 'in a state of
general exhaustion', and 'increasingly lost its influence on cultural
activity'. According to Überweg , this sad occurrence was due primarily
to 'tendencies of psychological revulsion', whereas all 'external
moments' had only a 'secondary effect'. This famous bourgeois historian
of philosophy explains the character of these 'tendencies of
psychological revulsion' to himself and his readers as follows: 'People
became tired of both inflated idealism and of metaphysical speculation
(!) and wanted spiritual nourishment that had more substance to it.' The
philosophic developments of the nineteenth century appear at once in a
totally different form (even from the standpoint of the history of ideas
a more adequate one) if they are tackled resolutely and thoroughly with
a dialectical method, even in the undeveloped and only partly conscious
form in which Hegel used it -- in other words in the form of Hegel's
idealist dialectic as opposed to Marx's materialist dialectic.

Viewed in this perspective, the revolutionary movement in the realm of
ideas, rather than abating and finally ceasing in the 1840s, merely
underwent a deep and significant change of character. Instead of making
an *exit,* classical German philosophy, the ideological expression of
the revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie, made a *transition* to a
new science which henceforward appeared in the history of ideas as the
general expression of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat: the
theory of 'scientific socialism' first founded and formulated by Marx
and Engels in the 1840s. Bourgeois historians of philosophy have
hitherto either entirely ignored this essential and necessary relation
between German idealism and Marxism, or they have only conceived and
presented it inadequately and incoherently. To grasp it properly, it is
necessary to abandon the normal abstract and ideological approach of
modern historians of philosophy for an approach that need not be
specifically Marxist but is just straightforwardly dialectical, in the
Hegelian and Marxist sense. If we do this, we can see at once not only
the interrelations between German idealist philosophy and Marxism, but
also their internal necessity. Since the Marxist system is the
theoretical expression of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat,
and German idealist philosophy is the theoretical expression of the
revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie, they must stand intelligently
and historically (i.e. ideologically) in the same relation to each other
as the revolutionary movement of the proletariat as a class stands to
the revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie, in the realm of social
and political practice. There is one unified historical process of
historical development in which an 'autonomous' proletarian class
movement emerges from the revolutionary movement of the third estate,
and the new materialist theory of Marxism 'autonomously' confronts
bourgeois idealist philosophy. All these processes affect each other
reciprocally. The emergence of Marxist theory is, in Hegelian-Marxist
terms, only the 'other side' of the emergence of the real proletarian
movement; it is both sides together that comprise the concrete totality
of the historical process.

This dialectical approach enables us to grasp the four different trends
we have mentioned -- the revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie,
idealist philosophy from Kant to Hegel, the revolutionary class movement
of the proletariat, and the materialist philosophy of Marxism -- as four
moments of a single historical process. This allows us to understand the
real nature of the new science, theoretically formulated by Marx and
Engels, which forms the general expression of the independent
revolutionary movement of the proletariat. This materialist philosophy
emerged from the most advanced systems of revolutionary bourgeois
idealism; and it is now intelligible why bourgeois histories of
philosophy had either to ignore it completely or could only understand
its nature in a negative and - literally -- inverted sense. The
essential practical aims of the proletarian movement cannot be realised
within bourgeois society and the bourgeois State. Similarly, the
philosophy of this bourgeois society is unable to understand the nature
of the general propositions in which the revolutionary movement of the
proletariat has found its independent and self-conscious expression. The
bourgeois standpoint has to stop in theory where it has to stop in
social practice -- as long as it does not want to cease being a
'bourgeois' standpoint altogether, in other words, supersede itself.
Only when the history of philosophy surmounts this barrier does
scientific socialism cease to be a transcendental 'Beyond' and become a
possible object of comprehension. The peculiarity, however, that greatly
complicates any correct understanding of the problem of 'Marxism and
philosophy' is this: it appears as if in the very act of surpassing the
limits of a bourgeois position -- an act indispensable to grasp the
essentially new philosophical content of Marxism -- *Marxism itself at
once superseded and annihilated as a philosophical object.*

At the outset of this investigation we stated that Marx and Engels, the
founders of scientific socialism, were far from wanting to construct a
new philosophy. In contrast to bourgeois thinkers, on the other hand,
they were both fully aware of the close historical connection between
their materialist theory and bourgeois idealist philosophy. According to
Engels, socialism in its *content* is the product of *new* conceptions
that necessarily arise at a definite stage of social development within
the proletariat as a result of its material situation. But it created
its own specific scientific *form* (which distinguishes it from utopian
socialism) by its link with German idealism, especially the
philosophical system of Hegel. [Socialism, which developed from utopia
to
science](../../../archive/marx/works/1880/soc-utop/ch02.htm){target="_top"},
formally *emerged* from German idealist philosophy. Naturally, this
(formal) philosophical *origin* did not mean that socialism therefore
had to remain a philosophy in its *independent form and further
development.* From 1845 onwards, at the latest, Marx and Engels
characterised their new materialist and scientific standpoint as no
longer philosophical. It should be remembered here that all philosophy
was for them equivalent to bourgeois philosophy. But it is precisely the
significance of this equation of all philosophy with bourgeois
philosophy that needs to be stressed. For it involves much the same
relationship as that of Marxism and the State. Marx and Engels not only
combated one specific historical form of the State, but historically and
materialistically they equated the State as such with the bourgeois
State and they therefore declared the abolition of the State to be the
political aim of communism. Similarly, they were not just combating
specific philosophical systems -- they wanted eventually to overcome and
supersede philosophy altogether, by scientific socialism. It is here
that find the major contradiction between the 'realistic' (i.e.
dialectically materialist) conception of Marxism and the 'ideological
humbug of jurists and others' (Marx) characteristic of Lassalleanism and
all earlier and later versions of 'vulgar socialism'. The latter
basically never surpassed the 'bourgeois level', i.e. the standpoint of
bourgeois society.

Any thorough elucidation of the relationship between 'Marxism and
philosophy' must start from the unambiguous statements of Marx and
Engels themselves that a necessary result of their new
dialectical-materialist standpoint was the supersession, not only of
bourgeois idealist philosophy, but *simultaneously* of all philosophy
*as such.* It is essential not to obscure the fundamental significance
of this Marxist attitude towards philosophy by regarding the whole
dispute as a purely verbal one -- implying that Engels simply bestowed a
new name on certain epistemological principles known in Hegelian
terminology as 'the philosophical aspect of sciences', which were,
substantially preserved in the materialist transformation of the
Hegelian dialectic. There are, of course, some formulations in Marx and
especially the later Engels which appear to suggest this. But it is easy
to see that philosophy itself is not abolished by a mere abolition of
its name. Such purely terminological points must be dismissed in any
serious examination of the relationship between Marxism and philosophy.
The problem is rather how we should understand the abolition of
philosophy of which Marx and Engels spoke -- mainly in the 1840s, but on
many later occasions *as well.* How should this process be accomplished,
or has it already been accomplished? By what actions? At what speed? And
for whom? Should this abolition of philosophy be regarded as
accomplished so to speak once and for all by a single intellectual deed
of Marx and Engels? Should it be regarded as accomplished only for
Marxists, or for the whole proletariat, or for the whole of humanity ?
Or should we see it (like the abolition of the State) as a very long and
arduous revolutionary process which unfolds through the most diverse
phases? If so, what is the relationship of Marxism to philosophy so long
as this arduous process has not yet attained its final goal, the
abolition of philosophy?

If the question of the relationship of Marxism to philosophy is posed
like this, it becomes clear that we are not dealing with senseless and
pointless reflections on issues that have long been resolved. On the
contrary, the problem remains of the greatest theoretical and practical
importance. Indeed, it is especially crucial in the present stage of the
proletarian class struggle. Orthodox Marxists behaved for many decades
as if no problem was involved at all, or at most only one which would
always remain immaterial to the practice of the class struggle. It is
now this position itself which appears highly dubious -- all the more so
in the light of the peculiar parallelism between the two problems of
Marxism and Philosophy and Marxism and State. It is well known that the
latter, as Lenin says in *State and Revolution* 'hardly concerned the
major theoreticians and publicists of the Second International'. This
raises the question: if there is a definite connection between the
abolition of the State and the abolition of the philosophy, is there
also a connection between the neglect of these two problems by the
Marxists of the Second International? The problem can be posed more
exactly. Lenin's bitter criticism of the debasement of Marxism by
opportunism connects the neglect of the problem of the State by the
Marxists of the Second International to a more general context. Is this
context also operative in the case of Marxism and philosophy? In other
words, is the neglect of the problem of philosophy by the Marxists of
the Second International also related to the fact that *'problems of
revolution in general hardly concerned them'?*

To clarify the matter, we must make a more detailed analysis of the
nature and causes of the greatest crisis that has yet occurred in the
history of Marxist theory and which in the last decade has split
Marxists into three hostile camps.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, the long period of purely
evolutionary development of capitalism came to an end, and a new epoch
of revolutionary struggle began. Because of this change in the practical
conditions of class struggle, there were increasing signs that Marxist
theory had entered a critical phase. It became obvious that the
extraordinarily banal and rudimentary vulgar-Marxism of the epigones had
an extremely inadequate awareness of even the totality of its own
problems, let alone any definite positions on a whole range of questions
outside them. The crisis of Marxist theory showed itself most clearly in
the problem of the attitude of social revolution towards the State. This
major issue had never been seriously posed in practice since the defeat
of the first proletarian revolutionary movement in 1848, and the
repression of the revolt of the Commune of 1871. It was put concretely
on the agenda once again by the World War, the first and second Russian
Revolutions of 1917, and the collapse of the Central Powers in 1918. It
now became clear that there was no unanimity whatever within the camp of
Marxism on such major issues of transition and goal as the seizure of
State power by the proletariat, the 'dictatorship of the proletariat',
and the final 'withering away of the State' in communist society. On the
contrary, no sooner were all these questions posed in a concrete and
unavoidable manner, than there emerged at least three different
theoretical positions on them, all of which claimed to be Marxist. Yet
in the pre-war period, the most prominent representatives of these three
tendencies -- respectively Renner, Kautsky and Lenin -- had not only
been regarded as Marxists but as orthodox Marxists. For some decades
there had been an apparent crisis in the camp of the Social Democrat
parties and trade unions of the Second International; this took the
shape of a conflict between orthodox Marxism and revisionism. But with
the emergence of different socialist tendencies over these new
questions, it became clear that this apparent crisis was only a
provisional and illusory version of a much deeper rift that ran through
the orthodox Marxist front itself. On one side of this rift, there
appeared Marxist neo-reformism which soon more or less amalgamated with
the earlier revisionism. On the other side, the theoretical
representatives of a new revolutionary proletarian party unleashed a
struggle against both the old reformism of the revisionists and the new
reformism of the 'Centre', under the battle-cry of restoring pure or
revolutionary Marxism.

This crisis erupted within the Marxist camp at the outbreak of the World
War. But it would be an extremely superficial and undialectical
conception of the historical process, thoroughly non-Marxist and
non-materialist, indeed not even Hegelian-idealist -- to attribute it
merely to the cowardice, or deficient revolutionary convictions, of the
theoreticians and publicists who were responsible for this
impoverishment and reduction of Marxist theory to the orthodox
vulgar-Marxism of the Second International. Yet it would be equally
superficial and undialectical to imagine that the great polemics between
Lenin, Kautsky and other 'Marxists' were merely intended to restore
Marxism, by faithfully re-establishing the Marxist doctrine. Hitherto we
have only used the dialectical method, which Hegel and Marx introduced
into the study of history, to analyse the philosophy of German idealism
and the Marxist theory that *emerged* from it. But the only really
materialist and therefore scientific method (Marx) of pursuing this
analysis is to apply it to *the further development of* Marxism up to
the present. This means that we must try to understand every change,
development and revision of Marxist theory, since its original emergence
-- from the philosophy of German Idealism, as a necessary product of its
epoch (Hegel). More precisely, we should seek to understand their
determination by the totality of the historico-social process of which
they are a general expression (Marx). We will then be able to grasp the
real origins of the degeneration of Marxist theory into vulgar-Marxism.
We may also discern the meaning of the passionate yet apparently
'ideological' efforts of the Marxist theorists of the Third
International today to restore 'Marx's genuine doctrine'.

If we thus apply Marx's principle of dialectical materialism to the
whole history of Marxism, we can distinguish three major stages of
development through which Marxist theory has passed *since* its birth --
inevitably so in the context of the concrete social development of this
epoch. The first phase begins around 1843, and corresponds in the
history of ideas to the [*Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of
Right*](../../../archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm){target="_top"}.
It ends with the Revolution of 1848 -- corresponding to the *Communist
Manifesto.* The second phase begins with the bloody suppression of the
Parisian proletariat in the battle of June 1848 and the resultant
crushing of all the working class's organisations and dreams of
emancipation 'in a period of feverish industrial activity, moral
degeneration and political reaction', as Marx masterfully describes it
in his *Inaugural Address* of 1864. We are not concerned here with the
social history of the working-class as a whole, but only with the
internal development of Marxist theory in its relation to the general
class history of the proletariat. Hence the second period may be said to
last approximately to the end of the century, leaving out all the less
important divisions (the foundation and collapse of the First
International; the interlude of the Commune; the struggle between
Marxists and Lassalleaner; the Anti-socialist laws in Germany; trade
unions; the founding of the Second International. The third phase
extends from the start of this century to the present and into an
indefinite future.

Arranged in this way, the historical development of Marxist theory
presents the following picture. The first manifestation of it naturally
remained essentially unchanged in the minds of Marx and Engels
themselves throughout the later period, although in their *writings* it
did not stay entirely unaltered. In spite of all their denials of
philosophy, this first version of the theory is permeated through and
through with philosophical thought. It is a theory of *social
development* seen and comprehended as a living totality; or, more
precisely, it is a theory of *social revolution,* comprehended and
practised as a living totality. At this stage there is no question
whatever of dividing the economic, political and intellectual moments of
this totality into separate branches of knowledge, even while every
concrete peculiarity of each separate moment is comprehended analysed
and criticised with historical fidelity. Of course, it is not only
economics, politics and ideology, but also the historical process and
conscious social action that continue to make up the living unity of
'revolutionary practice' *([Theses on
Feuerbach](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm){target="_top"}*).
The best example of this early and youthful form of Marxist theory as
the theory of social revolution is obviously the *Communist Manifesto.*

It is wholly understandable from the viewpoint of the materialist
dialectic that this original form of Marxist theory could not subsist
unaltered throughout the long years of the second half of the nineteenth
century (which was in practice quite unrevolutionary). Marx's remark in
the [*Preface to the Critique of political
Economy*](../../../archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface-abs.htm)
on mankind as a whole is necessarily also true for the working class,
which was then slowly and antagonistically maturing towards its own
liberation: 'It always sets itself only such problems as it can solve;
since, looking at the matter more closely it will always be found that
the problem itself arises only when the material conditions for its
solution are already present or are at least understood to be in the
process of emergence'. This dictum is not affected by the fact that a
problem which supersedes present relations may have been formulated in
an anterior epoch. To accord theory an autonomous existence outside the
objective movement of history would obviously be neither materialist nor
dialectical in the Hegelian sense; it would simply be an idealist
metaphysics. A dialectical conception comprehends every form without
exception in terms of the flow of this movement, and it necessarily
follows from it that Marx's and Engels's theory of social revolution
inevitably underwent considerable changes in the course of its further
development. When Marx in 1864 drafted the *Inaugural Address* and the
*Statutes of the First International* he was perfectly conscious of the
fact that time was needed for the reawakened movement to permit the old
audacity of language. This is of course true not only for language but
for all the other components of the theory of the movement. Therefore
the scientific socialism of the *Capital* of 1867-94 and the other later
writings of Marx and Engels represent an expression of the general
theory of Marxism, which is in many ways a different and more developed
one than that of the direct revolutionary communism of the *Manifesto*
of 1847-8 -- or for that matter, *The Poverty of Philosophy, The Class
Struggles in France* and *The Eighteenth Brumaire.* Nevertheless, the
central characteristic of Marxist theory remains essentially unaltered
even in the later writings of Marx and Engels. For in its later version,
as scientific socialism, the Marxism of Marx and Engels remains the
inclusive whole of a theory of social revolution. The difference is only
that in the later phase the various components of this whole, its
economic, political and ideological elements, scientific theory and
social practice, are further separated out. We can use an expression of
Marx's and say that the umbilical cord of its natural combination has
been broken. In Marx and Engels, however, this never produces a
multiplicity of independent elements instead of the whole. It is merely
that another combination of the components of the system emerges
developed with greater scientific precision and built on the
infrastructure of the critique of political economy. In the writings of
its creators, the Marxist system itself never dissolves into a sum of
separate branches of knowledge, in spite of a practical and outward
employment of its results that suggests such a conclusion. For example,
many bourgeois interpreters of Marx and some later Marxists thought they
were able to distinguish between the historical and the
theoretico-economic material in Marx's major work *Capital;* but all
they proved by this is that they understood nothing of the real method
of Marx's critique of political economy. For it is one of the essential
signs of his dialectical materialist method that this distinction does
not exist for it; it is indeed precisely a theoretical comprehension of
history. Moreover, the unbreakable interconnection of theory and
practice, which formed the most characteristic sign of the first
communist version of Marx's materialism, was in no way abolished in the
later form of his system. It is only to the superficial glance that a
pure theory of thought seems to have displaced the practice of the
revolutionary will. This revolutionary will is latent, yet present, in
every sentence of Marx's work and erupts again and again in every
decisive passage, especially in the first volume of *Capital.* One need
only think of the famous seventh section of Chapter 24 on the historical
tendency of capital accumulation.

On the other hand, it has to be said that the supporters and followers
of Marx, despite all their theoretical and methodological avowals of
historical materialism, in fact divided the theory of social revolution
into fragments. The correct materialist conception of history,
understood theoretically in a dialectical way and practically in a
revolutionary way, is incompatible with separate branches of knowledge
that are isolated and autonomous, and with purely theoretical
investigations that are scientifically objective in dissociation from
revolutionary practice. Yet later Marxists came to regard scientific
socialism more and more as a set of purely scientific observations,
without any *immediate* connection to the political or other practices
of class struggle. Sufficient proof of this is one writer's account of
the relation between Marxist science and politics, who was in the best
sense a representative Marxist theoretician of the Second International.
In December 1909, Rudolph Hilferding published his *Finance Capital*
which attempts to 'understand scientifically' the economic aspects of
the most recent development of capitalism 'by inserting these phenomena
into the theoretical system of classical political economy'. In the
introduction he wrote:

'Here it need only be said that for Marxism the study of politics itself
aims only at the discovery of causal connections. Knowledge of the laws
governing a society of commodity production reveals at once the
determinants of the will of the classes of this society. For a Marxist,
the task of scientific politics -- a politics which describes causal
connections -- is to discover these determinants of the will of classes.
Marxist politics, like Marxist theory, is free of value-judgements. It
is therefore false simply to identify Marxism with socialism, although
it is very common for Marxists and non-Marxists to do so. Logically
Marxism, seen only as a scientific system and therefore apart from its
historical effects, is only a theory of the laws of motion of society,
which the Marxist conception of history formulated in general, while
Marxist economics has applied it to the age of commodity production. The
advent of socialism is a result of tendencies that develop in a society
that produces commodities. But insight into the correctness of Marxism,
which includes insight into the necessity of socialism, is in no way a
result of value judgements and has no implications for practical
behaviour. It is one thing to acknowledge a necessity and quite another
to place oneself at the service of this necessity. It is more than
possible that a man may be convinced of the final victory of socialism,
and yet decides to fight against it. The insight into the laws of motion
of society provided by Marxism ensures superiority to whoever has
mastered them. The most dangerous opponents of socialism are undoubtedly
those who have profited most from its experience.'

According to Hilferding, Marxism is a theory which is logically 'a
scientific, objective and free science, without value judgements'. He
has no difficulty in explaining the remarkable fact that people so often
identify it with the struggle for socialism by invoking the 'insuperable
reluctance of the ruling class to accept the results of Marxism' and
therefore to take the 'trouble' to study such a 'complicated system'.
'Only in this sense is it the science of the proletariat and the
opponent of bourgeois economics, since it otherwise holds unflinchingly
to the claim made by every science of the objective and general validity
of its conclusions'. Thus the materialist conception of history, which
in Marx and Engels was essentially a dialectical one, eventually become
something quite undialectical in their epigones. For one tendency, it
has changed into a kind of heuristic principle of specialised
theoretical investigation. For another, the fluid methodology of Marx's
materialist dialectic freezes into a number of theoretical formulations
about the causal interconnection of historical phenomena in different
areas of society -- in other words it became something that could best
be described as a general systematic sociology. The former school
treated Marx's materialist principle as merely a subjective basis for
reflective judgement in Kant's sense, while the latter dogmatically
regarded the teachings of Marxist 'sociology' primarily as an economic
system, or even a geographical and biological one. All these
deformations and a row of other less important ones were inflicted on
Marxism by its epigones in the second phase of its development, and they
can be summarised in one all-inclusive formulation: a unified general
theory of social revolution was changed into criticisms of the bourgeois
economic order, of the bourgeois State, of the bourgeois system of
education, of bourgeois religion, art, science and culture. These
criticisms no longer necessarily develop by their very nature into
revolutionary practices they can equally well develop, into all kinds of
attempts at *reform,* which fundamentally remain within the limits of
bourgeois society and the bourgeois State, and in actual practice
usually did so. This distortion of the revolutionary doctrine of Marxism
itself -- into a purely theoretical critique that no longer leads to
practical revolutionary action, or does so only haphazardly -- is very
clear if one compares the *Communist Manifesto* or even the 1864
*Statutes of the First International* drawn up by Marx, to the
programmes of the Socialist Parties of Central and Western Europe in the
second half of the nineteenth century, and especially to that of the
German Social Democratic Party. It is well known how bitterly critical
Marx and Engels were of the fact that German Social Democracy made
almost entirely *reformist* demands in the political as well as cultural
and ideological fields in their Gotha (1875) and Erfurt (1891)
programmes. These documents contained not a whiff of the genuine
materialist and revolutionary principle in Marxism. Indeed, towards the
end of the century this situation led to the assaults of revisionism on
orthodox Marxism. Eventually, at the start of the twentieth century, the
first signs of the approaching storm heralded a new period of conflicts
and revolutionary battles, and thereby led to the decisive crisis of
Marxism in which we still find ourselves today.

Both processes may be seen as necessary phases of a total ideological
and material development -- once it is understood that the decline of
the original Marxist theory of social revolution into a theoretical
critique of society without any revolutionary consequences is for
dialectical materialism a necessary expression of parallel changes in
the social practice of the proletarian struggle. Revisionism appears as
an attempt to express in the form of a coherent theory the reformist
character acquired by the economic struggles of the trade unions and the
political struggles of the working class parties, under the influence of
altered historical conditions. The so-called orthodox Marxism of this
period (now a mere vulgar-Marxism) appears largely as an attempt by
theoreticians, weighed down by tradition, to maintain the theory of
social revolution which formed the first version of Marxism, in the
shape of pure-theory. This theory was wholly abstract and had no
practical consequences - it merely sought to reject the new reformist
theories, in which the real character of the historical movement was
then expressed as un-Marxist. This is precisely why, in a new
revolutionary period, it was the orthodox Marxists of the Second
International who were inevitably the least able to cope with such
questions as the relation between the State and proletarian revolution.
The revisionists at least possessed a theory of the relationship of the
'working people' to the State, although this theory was in no way a
Marxist one. Their theory and practice had long since substituted
political, social and cultural reforms within the bourgeois State for a
social revolution that would seize, smash and replace it by the
dictatorship of the proletariat. The orthodox Marxists were content to
reject this solution to the problems of the transitional period as a
violation of the principles of Marxism. Yet with all their orthodox
obsession with the abstract letter of Marxist theory they were unable to
preserve its original revolutionary character. Their scientific
socialism itself had inevitably ceased to be a theory of social
revolution. Over a long period, when Marxism was slowly spreading
throughout Europe, it had in fact no practical revolutionary task to
accomplish. Therefore problems of revolution had ceased, even in theory,
to exist as problems of the real world for the great majority of
Marxists, orthodox as well as revisionist. As far as the reformists were
concerned these problems had disappeared completely. But even for the
orthodox Marxists they had wholly lost the immediacy with which the
authors of the *Manifesto* had confronted them, and receded into a
distant and eventually quite transcendental *future.* In this period
people became used to pursuing here and now policies of which
revisionism may be seen as the theoretical expression. Officially
condemned by party congresses, this revisionism was in the end accepted
no less officially by the trade unions. At the beginning of the century,
a new period of development put the question of social revolution back
on the agenda as a realistic and terrestrial question in all its vital
dimensions. Therewith purely theoretical orthodox Marxism -- till the
outbreak of the World War the officially established version of Marxism
in the Second International -- collapsed completely and disintegrated.
This was, of course, an inevitable result of its long internal decay. It
is in this epoch that we can see in many countries the beginnings *of
third period of development,* above all represented by Russian Marxists,
and often described by its major representatives as a 'restoration' of
Marxism.

This transformation and development of Marxist theory has been effected
under the peculiar ideological guise of a return to the pure teaching of
original or true Marxism. Yet it is easy to understand both the reasons
for this guise and the real character of the process which is concealed
by it. What theoreticians like Rosa Luxemburg in Germany and Lenin in
Russia have done, and are doing, in the field of Marxist theory is to
liberate it from the inhibiting traditions of the Social Democracy of
the second period. They thereby answer the practical needs of the new
revolutionary stage of proletarian class struggle, for these traditions
weighed 'like a nightmare' on the brain of the working masses whose
objectively revolutionary socioeconomic position no longer corresponded
to these evolutionary doctrines. The apparent revival of original
Marxist theory in the Third International is simply a result of the fact
that in a new revolutionary period not only the workers' movement
itself, but the theoretical conceptions of communists which express it,
must assume an explicitly revolutionary form. This is why large sections
of the Marxist system, which seemed virtually forgotten in the final
decades of the nineteenth century, have now come to life again. It also
explains why the leader of the Russian Revolution could write a book a
few months before October in which he stated that his aim was 'in the
first place to *restore* the correct Marxist theory of the State'.
Events themselves placed the question of the dictatorship of the
proletariat on the agenda as a practical problem. When Lenin placed the
same question theoretically on the agenda at a decisive moment, this was
an early indication that the internal connection of theory and practice
within revolutionary Marxism had been consciously re-established. A
fresh examination of the problem of Marxism and philosophy would also
seem to be an important part of this restoration. A negative judgement
is clear from the start. The minimisation of philosophical problems by
most Marxist theoreticians of the Second International was only a
*partial* *expression* of the loss of the practical, revolutionary
character of the Marxist movement which found its *general expression
in* the simultaneous decay of the living principles of dialectical
materialism in the vulgar-Marxism of the epigones. We have already
mentioned that Marx and Engels themselves always denied that scientific
socialism was any longer a philosophy. But it is easy to show
irrefutably, by reference to the sources, that what the revolutionary
dialecticians Marx and Engels meant by the opposite of philosophy was
something very different from what it meant to later vulgar-Marxism.
Nothing was further from them than the claim to impartial, pure,
theoretical study, above class differences, made by Hilferding and most
of the other Marxists of the Second International. The scientific
socialism of Marx and Engels, correctly understood, stands in far
greater contrast to these pure sciences of bourgeois society (economics,
history or sociology) than it does to the philosophy in which the
revolutionary movement of the Third Estate once found its highest
theoretical expression. Consequently, one can only wonder at the insight
of more recent Marxists who have been misled by a few of Marx's
well-known expressions and by a few of the later Engels, into
interpreting the Marxist abolition of philosophy as the replacement of
this philosophy by a system of abstract and undialectical positive
sciences. The real contradiction between Marx's scientific socialism and
all bourgeois philosophy *and sciences* consists entirely in the fact
that scientific socialism is the theoretical expression of a
revolutionary process, which will end with the total abolition of these
bourgeois philosophies and sciences, together with the abolition of the
material relations that find their ideological expression in them.

A re-examination of the problem of Marxism and philosophy is therefore
very necessary, even on the theoretical level, in order to restore the
correct and full sense of Marx's theory, denatured and banalised by the
epigones. However, just as in the case of Marxism and the State, this
theoretical task really arises from the needs and pressures of
revolutionary practice. In the period of revolutionary transition, after
its seizure of power, the proletariat must accomplish definite
revolutionary tasks in the ideological field, no less than in the
political and economic fields -- tasks which constantly interact with
each other. The scientific theory of Marxism must become again what it
was for the authors of the *Communist Manifesto* -- not as a simple
*return* but as a *dialectical development:* a theory of social
revolution that comprises all areas of society as a totality. Therefore
we must solve in a dialectically materialist fashion not only 'the
question of the relationship of the State to social revolution and of
social revolution to the State' (Lenin), but also the 'question of the
relationship of ideology to social revolution and of social revolution
to ideology'. To avoid these questions in the period before the
proletarian revolution leads to opportunism and creates a crisis within
Marxism, just as avoidance of the problem of State and revolution in the
Second International led to opportunism and indeed provoked a crisis in
the camp of Marxism. To evade a definite stand on these ideological
problems of the transition can have disastrous political results in the
period after the proletarian seizure of State power, because theoretical
vagueness and disarray can seriously impede a prompt and energetic
approach to problems that then arise in the ideological field. The major
issue of the relation of the proletarian revolution to *ideology* was no
less neglected by Social Democrat theoreticians than the political
problem of the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.
Consequently in this new revolutionary period of struggle it must be
posed anew and the correct -- dialectical and revolutionary --
conception of original Marxism must be restored. This task can only be
resolved by first investigating the problem which led Marx and Engels to
the question of ideology: how is *philo*sophy related to the social
revolution of the proletariat and how is the social revolution of the
proletariat related to philosophy? An answer to this question is
indicated by Marx and Engels themselves and may be deduced from Marx's
materialist dialectics. It will lead us on to a larger question: how is
Marxist materialism related to *ideology* in general?

What is the relation of the scientific socialism of Marx and Engels to
philosophy? 'None', replies vulgar-Marxism. In this perspective it is
precisely the new materialist and scientific standpoint of Marxism which
has refuted and superseded the old idealist philosophical standpoint.
All philosophical ideas and speculations are thereby shown to be unreal
-- vacuous fantasies which still haunt a few minds as a kind of
superstition, which the ruling class has a concrete material interest in
preserving. Once capitalism is overthrown the remains of these fantasies
will disappear at once.

One has only to reflect on this approach to philosophy in all its
shallowness, as we have tried to do, to realise at once that such a
solution to the problem of philosophy has nothing in common with the
spirit of Marx's modern dialectical materialism. It belongs to the age
in which that 'genius of bourgeois stupidity', Jeremy Bentham, explained
'Religion' in his Encyclopedia with the rubric 'crude superstitious
opinions'. It is part of an atmosphere which was created in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and which inspired Eugen Dühring
to write that in a future society, constructed according to his plans,
there would be no religious cults -- for a correctly understood system
of sociability would *suppress* all the apparatus needed for spiritual
sorcery, and with it all the essential components of these cults. The
outlook with which modern or dialectical materialism -- the new and only
scientific view of the world according to Marx and Engels -- confronts
these questions is in complete contrast to this shallow, rationalist and
negative approach to ideological phenomena such as religion and
philosophy. To present this contrast in all its bluntness one can say:
it is essential for modern dialectical materialism [to grasp
philosophies and other ideological systems in theory as
realities](../../../archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch04.htm), and to treat
them in practice as such. In their early period Marx and Engels began
their whole revolutionary activity by struggling against the reality of
philosophy; and it will be shown that, although later they did radically
alter their view of how philosophical ideology was related to other
forms within ideology as a whole, they always treated ideologies --
including philosophy -- as concrete realities and not as empty
fantasies.

In the 1840s Marx and Engels began the revolutionary struggle --
initially on a theoretical and philosophical plane for the emancipation
of the class which stands 'not in partial opposition to the
consequences, but in total opposition to the premises' of existing
society as a whole. They were convinced that they were thereby attacking
an extremely important part of the existing social order. In the
editorial of the *Rheinische Zeitung* in 1842, Marx had already stated
that 'philosophy does not stand outside the world, just as the brain
does not stand outside man merely because it is not in his stomach'. He
repeats this later in the Introduction to the *Critique of Hegel's
Philosophy of Right:* 'Previous philosophy itself belongs to this world
and is its, albeit idealist, elaboration. This is the work of which
fifteen years later, in the Preface to the *Critique of Political
Economy,* Marx said that in it he definitively accomplished the
transition to his later materialist position. Precisely when Marx, the
dialectician, effected this transition from the idealist to the
materialist conception, he made it quite explicit that the practically
oriented political party in Germany at the time, which *rejected* all
philosophy, was making as big a mistake as the theoretically oriented
political party, which *failed to condemn philo*sophy as such. The
latter believed that it could combat the reality of the German world
from a purely philosophical standpoint, that is, with propositions that
were derived in one way or another from philosophy (much as Lassalle was
later to do by invoking Fichte). It forgot that the philosophical
standpoint itself was part of this dominant German world. But the
practically oriented political party was basically trapped by the same
limitation because it believed that the negation of philosophy 'can be
accomplished by turning one's back on philosophy, looking in the
opposite direction and mumbling some irritable and banal remarks about
it'. It too did not regard 'philosophy as part of German reality'. The
theoretically oriented party erroneously believed that 'it could realise
philosophy in practice without superseding it in theory'. The
practically oriented party made a comparable mistake by trying to
supersede philosophy in practice without realising it in theory -- in
other words, without grasping it as a reality.

It is clear in what sense Marx (and Engels who underwent an identical
development at the same time -- as he and Marx often later explained)
had now really surpassed the merely philosophical standpoint of his
student days; but one can also see how this process itself still had a
philosophical character. There are three reasons why we can speak of a
surpassal of the philosophical standpoint. First, Marx's theoretical
standpoint here is not just partially opposed to the consequences of all
existing German philosophy, but is in total opposition to its premises;
(for both Marx and Engels this philosophy was always more than
sufficiently represented by Hegel). Second, Marx is opposed not just to
philosophy, which is only the head or ideal elaboration of the existing
world, but to this world as a totality. Third, and most importantly,
this opposition is not just theoretical but is also practical and
active. 'The philosophers have only interpreted the world, our task is
to change it', announces the last of the *Theses on Feuerbach.*
Nevertheless, this general surpassal of the purely philosophical
standpoint still incorporates a philosophical character. This becomes
clear, once one realises how little this new proletarian science differs
from previous philosophy in its theoretical character, even though Marx
substitutes it for bourgeois idealist philosophy as a system radically
distinct in its orientation and aims. German idealism had constantly
tended, *even on the theoretical level,* to be more than just a theory
or philosophy. This is comprehensible in the light of its relation to
the revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie (discussed above), and
will be studied further in a later work. This tendency was typical of
Hegel's predecessors -- Kant, Schelling and especially Fichte. Although
Hegel himself to all appearances reversed it, he too in fact allotted
philosophy a task that went beyond the realm of theory and became in a
certain sense practical. This task was not of course to change the
world, as it was for Marx, but rather to reconcile Reason as a
self-conscious Spirit with Reason as an actual Reality, by means of
concepts and comprehension. German idealism from Kant to Hegel did not
cease to be philosophical when it affirmed this universal role (which is
anyway what is colloquially thought to be the essence of any
philosophy). Similarly it is incorrect to say that Marx's materialist
theory is no longer philosophical merely because it has an aim that is
not simply theoretical but is also a practical and revolutionary goal.
On the contrary, the dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels is by
its very nature a philosophy through and through, as formulated in the
eleventh thesis on Feuerbach and in other published and unpublished
writings of the period. It is a revolutionary philosophy whose task is
to participate in the revolutionary struggles waged in all spheres of
society against the whole of the existing order, by fighting in one
specific area -- philosophy. Eventually, it aims at the concrete
abolition of philosophy as part of the abolition of bourgeois social
reality as a whole, of which it is an ideal component. In Marx's words:
'Philosophy cannot be abolished without being realised.' Thus just when
Marx and Engels were progressing from Hegel's dialectical idealism to
dialectical materialism, it is clear that the abolition of philosophy
did not mean for them its simple rejection. Even when their later
positions are under consideration, it is essential to take it as a
constant starting point that Marx and Engels were dialecticians before
they were materialists. The sense of their materialism is distorted in a
disastrous and irreparable manner if one forgets that Marxist
materialism was dialectical from the very beginning. It always remained
a historical and dialectical materialism, in contrast to Feuerbach's
abstract-scientific materialism and all other abstract materialisms,
whether earlier or later, bourgeois or vulgar-Marxist. In other words,
it was a materialism whose theory comprehended the totality of society
and history, and whose practice overthrew it. It was therefore possible
for philosophy to become a less central component of the
socio-historical process for Marx and Engels, in the course of their
development of materialism, than it had seemed at the start. This did in
fact occur. But no really dialectical materialist conception of history
(certainly not that of Marx and Engels) could cease to regard
philosophical ideology, or ideology in general, as a material component
of general socio-historical reality -- that is, a real part which had to
be grasped in materialist theory and overthrown by materialist practice.

In his *Theses on Feuerbach* Marx contrasts his new materialism not only
to philosophical idealism, but just as forcefully to every existing
materialism. Similarly, *in all their later writings,* Marx and Engels
emphasised the contrast between their dialectical materialism and the
normal, abstract and undialectical version of materialism. They were
especially conscious that this contrast was of great importance for any
theoretical interpretation of so-called mental or ideological realities,
and their treatment in practice. Discussing mental representations in
general, and the method necessary for a concrete and critical history of
religion in particular, Marx states:

"It is in fact much easier to uncover the earthly kernel within nebulous
religious ideas, through analysis, than it is to do the opposite, to see
how these heavenly forms develop out of actual concrete relations."

The latter is the only materialist and therefore scientific method. A
theoretical method which was content in good Feuerbachian fashion to
reduce all ideological representations to their material and earthly
kernel would be abstract and undialectical. A revolutionary practice
confined to direct action against the terrestrial kernel of nebulous
religious ideas, and unconcerned with overthrowing and superseding these
ideologies themselves, would be no less so. When vulgar-Marxism adopts
this abstract and negative attitude to the reality of ideologies, it
makes exactly the same mistake as those proletarian theoreticians, past
and present, who use the Marxist thesis of the economic determination of
legal relations, state forms and political action, to argue that the
proletariat can and should confine itself to direct economic action
alone. It is well known that Marx strongly attacked tendencies of this
kind in his polemics against Proudhon and others. In different phases of
his life, wherever he came across views like this, which still survive
in contemporary syndicalism, Marx always emphasised that this
'transcendental underestimation' of the State and political action was
completely unmaterialist. It was therefore theoretically inadequate and
practically dangerous.

This dialectical conception of the relationship of economics to politics
became such an unalterable part of Marxist theory that even the
vulgar-Marxists of the Second International were unable to deny that the
problem of the revolutionary transition existed, at least *in theory,*
although they ignored the problem *in practice.* No orthodox Marxist
could even in principle have claimed that a theoretical and practical
concern with politics was unnecessary for Marxism. This was left to the
syndicalists, some of whom invoke Marx, but none of whom have ever
claimed to be orthodox Marxists. However, many good Marxists did adopt a
theoretical and practical position on the reality of ideology which was
identical to that of the syndicalists. These materialists are with Marx
in condemning the syndicalist refusal of political action and in
declaring that the social movement must include the political movement.
They often argue against anarchists that even after the victorious
proletarian revolution, and in spite of all the changes undergone by the
bourgeois State, politics will long continue to be a reality. Yet these
very people fall straight into the anarcho-syndicalist 'transcendental
underestimation' of ideology when they are told that *intellectual*
struggle in the ideological field cannot be replaced or eliminated by
the social movement of proletariat alone, or by its social and political
movements combined. Even today most Marxist theoreticians conceive of
the efficacy of so-called intellectual phenomena in a purely negative,
abstract and undialectical sense, when they should analyse this domain
of social reality with the materialist and scientific method moulded by
Marx and Engels. Intellectual life should be conceived in union with
social and political life, and social being and becoming (in the widest
sense, as economics, politics or law) should be studied in union with
social consciousness in its many different manifestations, as a real yet
also ideal (or 'ideological') component of the historical process in
general. Instead all consciousness is approached with totally abstract
and basically metaphysical dualism, and declared to be a reflection of
the one really concrete and material developmental process, on which it
is completely dependent (even if relatively independent, still dependent
in the last instance).

Given this situation, any theoretical attempt to restore what Marx
regarded as the only scientific, dialectical materialist conception and
treatment of *ideological* realities, inevitably encounters even greater
theoretical obstacles than an attempt to restore the correct Marxist
theory of the State. The distortion of Marxism by the epigones in the
question of the *State and politics* merely consisted in the fact that
the most prominent theoreticians of the Second International never dealt
concretely enough with the most vital political problems of the
revolutionary transition. However, they at least agreed in abstract, and
emphasised strongly in their long struggles against anarchists and
syndicalists that, for materialism, not only the economic structure of
society, which underlay all other socio-historical phenomena, but also
the juridical and political superstructure of Law and the State were
*realities.* Consequently, they could not be ignored or dismissed in an
anarcho-syndicalist fashion: they had to be overthrown in reality by a
political revolution. In spite of this, many vulgar-Marxists to this day
have never, even in theory, admitted that intellectual life and forms of
social consciousness are comparable realities. Quoting certain
statements by Marx and especially Engels they simply explain away the
*intellectual (ideological) structures of society* as a *mere
pseudo-reality* which only exists in the minds of ideologues -- as
error, imagination and illusion, devoid of a genuine object. At any
rate, this is supposed to be true for all the so-called 'higher'
ideologies. For this conception, political and legal representatives may
have an ideological and unreal character, but they are at least related
to something real -- the institutions of Law and the State, which
comprise the superstructure of the society in question. On the other
hand, the 'higher' ideological representations (men's religions,
aesthetic and philosophical conceptions) correspond to no real object.
This can be formulated concisely, with only a slight caricature, by
saying that for vulgar-Marxism there are *three degrees of reality:* (i)
the economy, which in the last instance is the only objective and
totally non-ideological reality; (2) Law and the State, which are
already somewhat less real because clad in ideology, and (3) pure
ideology which is objectless and totally unreal ('pure rubbish').

To restore a genuine dialectically materialist conception of
intellectual reality, it is first necessary to make a few mainly
terminological points. The key problem to settle here is how in general
to approach the relationship of consciousness to its object.
Terminologically, it must be said that it never occurred to Marx and
Engels to describe social consciousness and intellectual life merely as
ideology. Ideology is only a false consciousness, in particular one that
mistakenly attributes an autonomous character to a partial phenomena of
social life. Legal and political representations which conceive Law and
the State to be independent forces above society are cases in point. In
the passage where Marx is most precise about his terminology, he says
explicitly that within the complex of material relations that Hegel
called civil society, [\"the social relations of production \... the
economic structure of society forms the real foundation on which arise
juridical and political superstructures and to which determinate forms
of social consciousness
correspond"](../../../archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface-abs.htm).
In particular, these forms of social consciousness which are no less
real than Law and the State, include commodity fetishism, the concept of
value, and other economic representations derived from them. Marx and
Engels analysed these in their critique of political economy. What is
strikingly characteristic of their treatment is that they never refer to
this basic economic ideology of bourgeois society as an ideology. In
their terminology only \"the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or
philosophical forms of consciousness" are ideological. Even these need
not be so in all situations, but become so only under specific
conditions which have already been stated. The special position now
allotted to forms of economic consciousness marks the new conception of
philosophy which distinguishes the fully matured dialectical materialism
of the later period from its undeveloped earlier version. The
theoretical and practical criticisms of philosophy is henceforward
relegated to the second, third, fourth or even last but one place in
their critique of society. The 'critical philosophy' which the Marx of
the *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher* saw as his essential task became a
more radical critique of society, which went to the roots of it through
a critique of political economy. Marx once said that a critic could
'*start from any form of philosophical and practical consciousness* and
develop from the specific forms of existent reality, its true reality
and final end'. But he later became aware that no juridical relations,
constitutional structures or forms of social consciousness can be
understood in themselves or even in Hegelian or post-Hegelian terms of
the general development of the human Spirit. For they are *rooted* in
the material conditions of life that form 'the material basis and
skeleton' of social organisation as a whole. A radical critique of
bourgeois society can no longer start from 'any' form of theoretical or
practical consciousness whatever, as Marx thought as late as 1843. It
must start from the particular forms of consciousness which have found
their scientific expression in the political economy of bourgeois
society. Consequently the critique of political economy is theoretically
and practically the first priority. Yet even this deeper and more
radical version of Marx's revolutionary critique of society never ceases
to be a critique of the *whole* of bourgeois society and so of *all* its
forms of consciousness. It may seem as if Marx and Engels were later to
criticise philosophy only in an occasional and haphazard manner. In
fact, far from neglecting the subject, they actually developed their
critique of it in a more profound and radical direction. For proof, it
is only necessary to re-establish the full revolutionary meaning of
Marx's critique of political economy, as against certain mistaken ideas
about it which are common today. This may also serve to clarify both its
place in the whole system of Marx's critique of society, and its
relation to his critique of ideologies like philosophy.

It is generally accepted that the critique of political economy -- the
most important theoretical and practical component of the Marxist theory
of society -- includes not only a critique of the material relations of
production of the capitalist epoch but also of its specific forms of
social consciousness. Even the pure and impartial 'scientific science'
of vulgar-Marxism acknowledges this. Hilferding admits that scientific
knowledge of the economic laws of a society is also a 'scientific
politics' in so far as it shows 'the determinant factors which define
the *will of the classes* in this society'. Despite this relation of
economics to politics, however, in the totally abstract and
undialectical conception of vulgar-Marxism, the critique of political
economy has a purely theoretical role as a 'science'. Its function is to
criticise the errors of bourgeois economics, classical or vulgar. By
contrast, a proletarian political party uses the results of critical and
scientific investigation for its practical ends - ultimately the
overthrow of the real economic structure of capitalist society and of
its relations of production. (On occasion, the results of this Marxism
can also be used against the proletarian party itself, as by Simkhovitch
or Paul Lensch.)

The major weakness of vulgar socialism is that, in Marxist terms, it
clings quite 'unscientifically' to a naive realism -- in which both
so-called common sense, which is the 'worst metaphysician', and the
normal positivist science of bourgeois society, draw a sharp line of
division between consciousness and its object. Neither are aware that
this distinction had ceased to be completely valid even for the
transcendental perspective of critical philosophy, and has been
completely superseded in dialectical philosophy. At best, they imagine
that something like this might be true of Hegel's idealist dialectic. It
is precisely this, they think, that constitutes the 'mystification'
which the dialectic according to Marx, 'suffered at Hegel's hands'. It
follows therefore for them that this mystification must be completely
eliminated from the rational form of the dialectic: the materialist
dialectic of Marx. In fact, we shall show, Marx and Engels were very far
from having any such dualistic metaphysical conception of the
relationship of consciousness to reality -- not only in their first
(philosophical) period but also in their second (positive-scientific)
period. It never occurred to them that they could be misunderstood in
this dangerous way. Precisely because of this, they sometimes did
provide considerable pretexts for such misunderstandings in certain of
their formulations (although these can easily be corrected by a hundred
times as many other formulations). For the *coincidence of consciousness
and reality* characterises every dialectic, including Marx's dialectical
materialism. Its consequence is that the material relations of
production of the capitalist epoch only are what they are in combination
with the forms in which they are reflected in the pre-scientific and
bourgeois-scientific consciousness of the period; and they could not
subsist in reality without these forms of consciousness. Setting aside
any philosophical considerations, it is therefore clear that *without
this coincidence of consciousness and reality, a critique of political*
*economy could never have become the major component of a theory of
social revolution.* The converse follows. Those Marxist theoreticians
for whom Marxism was no longer essentially a theory of social revolution
could see no need for this dialectical conception of the coincidence of
reality and consciousness: it was bound to appear to them as
theoretically false and unscientific.

In the different periods of their revolutionary activity, Marx and
Engels speak of the relationship of consciousness to reality at the
economic level, or the higher levels of politics and law, or on the
highest levels of art, religion and philosophy. It is always necessary
to ask in what direction these remarks are aimed (they are nearly
always, above all in the late period, only remarks!). For their import
is very different, depending on whether they are aimed at Hegel's
idealist and speculative method or at 'the ordinary method', essentially
Wolff's metaphysical method, which has become fashionable once again.
After Feuerbach had 'dispatched speculative concepts', the latter
re-emerged in the new natural-scientific materialism of Büchner, Vogt
and Moleschott and 'even bourgeois economists wrote large rambling
books' inspired by it. From the outset, Marx and Engels had to clarify
their position only with regard to the first, Hegelian method. They
never doubted that they had issued from it. Their only problem was how
to change the Hegelian dialectic from a method proper to a superficially
idealist, but secretly materialist conception of the world into the
guiding principle of an explicitly materialist view of history and
society. Hegel had already taught that a philosophico-scientific method
was not a mere form of thought which could be applied indiscriminately
to any content. It was rather 'the structure of the whole presented in
its pure essence'. Marx made the same point in an early writing: 'Form
has no value if it is not the form of its content.' As Marx and Engels
said, it then became a logical and methodological question of 'stripping
the dialectical method of its idealist shell and presenting it in the
simple form in which it becomes the only correct form of intellectual
development'. Marx and Engels were confronted with the abstract
speculative form in which Hegel bequeathed the dialectical method and
which the different Hegelian schools had developed in an even more
abstract and formal way. They therefore made vigorous
counter-statements, such as: all thought is nothing but the
'transformation of perceptions and representations into concepts'; even
the most general categories of thought are only 'abstract, unilateral
relations of a living totality that is already given'; an object which
thought comprehends as real 'remains as before, independent and external
to the mind. Nevertheless, all their lives they rejected the
undialectical approach which counterposes the thought, observation,
perception and comprehension of an immediately given reality to this
reality, as if the former were themselves also immediately given
independent essences. This is best shown by a sentence from Engels'
attack on Dühring, which is doubly conclusive because it is widely
believed that the later Engels degenerated into a thoroughly
naturalistic-materialist view of the world by contrast to Marx, his more
philosophically literate companion. It is precisely in one of his last
writings that Engels, in the same breath as he describes thought and
consciousness as products of the human brain and man himself as a
product of nature, also unambiguously protests against the wholly
'naturalistic' outlook which accepts consciousness and thought 'as
something given, something straightforwardly opposed to Being and to
Nature'. The method of Marx and Engels is not that of an abstract
materialism, but of a dialectical materialism: it is therefore the only
scientific method. For Marxism, pre-scientific, extra-scientific and
scientific consciousness no longer exist over and against the natural
and (above all) social-historical world. They exist within this world as
a real and objective component of it, if also an 'ideal' one. This is
the first specific difference between the materialist dialectic of Marx
and Engels, and Hegel's idealist dialectic. Hegel said that the
theoretical consciousness of an individual could not 'leap over' his own
epoch, the world of his time. Nevertheless he inserted the world into
philosophy far more than he did philosophy into the world. This first
difference between the Hegelian and Marxist dialectic is very closely
related to a second one. As early as 1844 Marx wrote in *The Holy
Family*:

'Communist workers well know that property, capital, money, wage-labour
and such like, far from being idealist fantasies are highly practical
and objective products of their own alienation; they must be transcended
in a practical and objective way so that man can become man, not only in
thought and in consciousness, but in his (social) Being and in his
life.'

This passage states with full materialist clarity that, given the
unbreakable interconnection of all real phenomena in bourgeois society
as a whole, its forms of consciousness cannot be abolished through
thought alone. These forms can only be abolished in thought and
consciousness by a simultaneous *practico-objective overthrow* of the
material relations of production themselves, which have hitherto been
comprehended through these forms. This is also true of the highest forms
of social consciousness, such as religion, and of medium levels of
social being and consciousness, such as the family. This consequence of
the new materialism is implied in the [*Critique of Hegel's Philosophy
of
Right*](../../../archive/marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/ch01.htm){target="_top"},
and is explicitly and comprehensively developed in the *Theses on
Feuerbach* which Marx wrote in 1845 to clarify his own ideas.

['The question of whether objective truth corresponds to human thought
is not a theoretical question but a practical one. Man must prove the
truth -- that is, the reality, the power, and the immanence of his
thought, in practice. The dispute about the reality or unreality of
thought thought isolated from practice is purely
scholastic.'](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm#003)

It would be a dangerous misunderstanding to think that this means that
criticism in practice merely replaces criticism in theory. Such an idea
merely replaces the philosophical abstraction of pure theory with an
opposite anti-philosophical abstraction of an equally pure practice. It
is not in 'human practice' alone, but only ['in human practice and in
the comprehension of this
practice'](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm#017) that
Marx as a dialectical materialist locates the rational solution of all
mysteries that 'lure theory into mysticism'. The translation of the
dialectics from its mystification by Hegel to the ['rational
form'](../../../archive/marx/works/1867-c1/p3.htm#3b) of Marx's
materialist dialectic essentially means that it has become the guiding
principle of a single theoretical-practical and critical-revolutionary
activity. It is a 'method that is by its very nature critical and
revolutionary'.

Even in Hegel 'the theoretical was essentially contained in the
practical'. 'One must not imagine that man thinks on the one hand and
wills on the other, that he has Thought in one pocket and Will in
another; this would be a vacuous notion'. For Hegel, the practical task
of the Concept in its 'thinking activity' (in other words, philosophy)
does not lie in the domain of ordinary ['practical human and sensuous
activity'](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm#001)
(Marx). It is rather 'to grasp what is, for that which is, is Reason'.\"
By contrast, Marx concludes the self-clarification of his own
dialectical method with the eleventh [*Thesis on
Feuerbach:*](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm#017)

'The philosophers have only *interpreted* the world, it is now a
question of *changing* it.'

This does not mean, as the epigones imagine, that all philosophy is
shown to be mere fantasy. It only expresses a categorical rejection of
all theory, philosophical or scientific, that is not *at the same time*
practice -- real, terrestrial immanent, human and sensuous practice, and
not the speculative activity of the philosophical idea that basically
does nothing but comprehend itself. [Theoretical criticism and practical
overthrow are here inseparable activities, not in any abstract sense but
as a concrete and real alteration of the concrete and real world of
bourgeois
society](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/german-ideology/ch01d.htm){target="_top"}.
Such is the most precise expression of the new materialist principle of
the scientific socialism of Marx and Engels.

We have now shown the real consequences of the dialectical materialist
principle for a Marxist conception of the relationship of consciousness
to reality. By the same token, we have shown the error of all abstract
and undialectical conceptions found among various kinds of
vulgar-Marxists in their theoretical and practical attitudes to
so-called intellectual reality. Marx's dictum is true not just of forms
of economic consciousness in the narrower sense, but all forms of social
consciousness: they are not mere chimeras, but 'highly objective and
highly practical' social realities and consequently 'must be abolished
in a practical and objective manner'. The naively metaphysical
standpoint of sound bourgeois common sense considers thought independent
of being and defines truth as the correspondence of thought to an object
that is external to it and 'mirrored' by it. It is only this outlook
that can sustain the view that all forms of economic consciousness (the
economic conceptions of a pre-scientific and unscientific consciousness,
as well as scientific economics itself) have an objective meaning
because they correspond to a reality (the material relations of
production which they comprehend) whereas all higher forms of
representation are merely objectless fantasies which will automatically
dissolve into their essential nullity after the overthrow of the
economic structure of society, and the abolition of its juridical and
political superstructure. Economic ideas themselves only *appear* to be
related to the material relations of production of bourgeois society in
the way an image is related to the object it reflects. In fact they are
related to them in the way that a specific, particularly defined part of
a whole is related to the other parts of this whole. Bourgeois economics
belongs with the material relations of production to bourgeois society
as a totality. This totality also contains political and legal
representations and their apparent objects, which bourgeois politicians
and jurists - the 'ideologues of private property' (Marx) -- treat in an
ideologically inverted manner as autonomous essences. Finally, it also
includes the higher ideologies of the art, religion and philosophy of
bourgeois society. If it seems that there are no objects which these
representations can reflect, correctly or incorrectly, this is because
economic, political or legal representations do not have particular
objects which exist independently either, isolated from the other
phenomena of bourgeois society. To counterpose such objects to these
representations is an abstract and ideological bourgeois procedure. They
merely express bourgeois society as a totality in a particular way, just
as do art, religion and philosophy. Their ensemble forms the *spiritual
structure* of bourgeois society, which corresponds to its economic
structure, just as its legal and political superstructure corresponds to
this same basis. All these forms must be subjected to the revolutionary
social criticism of scientific socialism, which embraces the whole of
social reality. They must be criticised in theory and overthrown in
practice, together with the economic, legal and political structures of
society and at the same time as them. Just as political action is not
rendered unnecessary by the economic action of a revolutionary class, so
intellectual action is not rendered unnecessary by either political or
economic action. On the contrary it must be carried through to the end
in theory and practice, as revolutionary scientific criticism and
agitational work before the seizure of state power by the working class,
and as scientific organisation and ideological dictatorship after the
seizure of state power. If this is valid for intellectual action against
the forms of consciousness which define bourgeois society in general, it
is especially true of philosophical action. Bourgeois consciousness
necessarily sees itself as apart from the world and independent of it,
as pure critical philosophy and impartial science, just as the bourgeois
State and bourgeois Law appear to be above society. This consciousness
must be philosophically fought by the revolutionary materialistic
dialectic, which is the philosophy of the working class. This struggle
will only end when the whole of existing society and its economic basis
have been totally overthrown in practice, and this consciousness has
been totally surpassed and abolished in theory. --- 'Philosophy cannot
be abolished without being realised.'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Further Reading:

[Biography](../../../glossary/people/k/o.htm#korsch-karl){target="_top"}
\| [Theses on
Feuerbach](../../../archive/marx/works/1845/theses/theses.htm){target="_top"}
\| [1967 Preface](../../../archive/lukacs/index.htm){target="_top"} to
*History & Class Consciousness*, Lukacs\
[Kautsky](../../../archive/kautsky/index.htm){target="_top"} \|
[Stalin](../../../reference/archive/stalin/index.htm){target="_top"} \|
[A Philosophical
\'Discussion\'](../../../reference/archive/smith-cyril/works/millenni/ch02.htm),
Cyril Smith 1998

[Karl Korsch Archive](../index.htm){target="_top"}
