---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)  \>  [New
Evangel](index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The New Evangel

 

### The Economic Basis of Politics

#### The Stomach, not the Brain

**Workers' Republic**, 12 August 1899

Nothing more strikingly illustrates the crude and unscientific theories
of the ordinary middle class politician than the desperate attempts at
present being made to build up a great political party in Ireland on the
lines of the late Home Rule movement. Apparently all sections of the
Home Rule party are possessed with the belief that great political
movements can be constructed at will, and that an effective, aggressive
political force may have its origin, not deep down in the daily life of
the people, but in the brains of some half dozen gentlemen in
parliament. Viewed from this standpoint the toiling multitudes are mere
automata, and the really effective national force is to be found in the
men whom the Home Rule press and orators point out to the multitude as
leaders. The truth that the political movements of a country spring from
the pulsations of its economic life; that all political parties are the
instruments of a class, and are great and powerful only in the
proportion in which the development of the struggle for existence forces
their particular class interest upon the majority of the nation as a
dominant factor in their daily life -- all this seems to a quite unheard
of philosophy amongst capitalist politicians.

Yet a slight survey of the history of the world in general, or of
Ireland in particular, could not fail to bring the truth of this
eminently Socialist doctrine home to the mind of the thoughtful student
of events. The great political organisations which have successfully
revolutionised the systems of governments under which they lived, have
had their origin, not in the brains of mighty leaders, but in the daily
and hourly needs of the multitude, and have acquired force and power
only in so far as those needs became sharp and pressing enough to goad
that sluggard multitude to action. When at such a crisis there arose a
man lucky enough, or astute enough, to make himself the mouthpiece of
the discontented multitude; to coin its inarticulate groanings into
political phraseology, and give its hunger-inspired desire for change in
intelligent formulation, then such a man became a 'great leader', and
the organisation following the course he advocated the leading political
force. To the minds of the superficial middle class thinkers -- always
ready to believe that the world turned around their heroes and
successful persons as upon its axis -- the leaders had created the
movement which they led; to the mind of the scientific Socialist the
leaders and the movements were both the product of the quickening of
intellect caused by social conditions adversely affecting the life of
the people at large.

Examine the great revolutionary movements of history and you find that
in all cases they sprang from unsatisfactory social conditions, and had
their origin in a desire for material well being. In other words, the
seat of progress and source of revolution is not in the brain, but in
the stomach. The fact that this truth has hitherto been obscured, or
even denied; that the pioneers of progress uniformly clothed their
political demands in the most idealistic language and the most flowery
phraseology; or that they constantly appealed for the support of 'all
unselfish and generous souls', rather than to commonplace interests,
only proves that we are all too prone to hide even from ourselves the
real nature of our impelling desires, and, even when most stubbornly
following our grossest instincts, to throw around our actions all the
glamour of 'spiritual cravings', or 'patriotic hopes'.

The power and unconquerable optimism of the socialist party is due to
their recognition of this materialist basis of history, this economic
basis of polities. Knowing that their ultimate ideal and immediate
demands are in a line with the progress of the human race towards
prosperity, and that every scheme for better social conditions at all
likely to effect its purpose must be of the nature of a step in their
direction, Socialists cannot lose courage, because even in the midst of
temporary defeat they know that the needs of the workers, who are in the
majority, will eventually impel them into line with the
Social-Revolutionary forces. From this fact our Irish politicians -- and
revolutionists -- may gain, not comfort, perhaps, but wisdom. The
history of the American Revolution, the French Revolution, the Irish
Volunteers, the risings of 1798, 1848, and the Irish Land League, all
bear out our argument upon the economic basis of great political
movements.

The American Revolution was a revolt against the action of England in
throttling the infant industries of America, and came to a head with a
tax upon tea -- all 'base' material reasons; the French Revolution was
the revolt of an oppressed and famished people against outworn, medieval
landlordism (feudalism) and the vexatious taxes upon industry imposed by
a corrupt Court; the Irish Volunteer movement was, in its anti-English
aspect, a revolt of the Irish manufacturing class against the
restrictions put upon their trade by England, -- "*Free Trade*, or else"
was the motto they hung up on their cannon, and when that one point was
gained all the 'patriotic enthusiasm' of the leaders vanished; Grattan
termed the Volunteers, upon whose backs he had climbed to political
eminence, 'an armed rabble', and the whole movement collapsed as
suddenly as it had arisen -- the economic basis being gone the
patriotism was no longer evident. 1798 was an abortive Irish edition of
the French Revolution -- despite the lying twaddle of the present day
about the society of United Irishmen being a 'Union of *All Classes*',
there is not in history any record of a movement, except the Paris
Commune, in which the classes and the masses were so sharply divided;
1848 found its inspiration in the promptings of famine -- and its
failure in the total incapacity of the doctrinaire Young Irelanders to
understand the difference between revolutionary action and 'heroic'
posings; the Land League found its inspiration in a partial failure of
the crops, and in the newly developed competition of America -- and the
collapse of the Land League came with reduced rents and partial
prosperity.

In every case the social condition of the mass of the people was the
determining factor in political activity. Where the mass of the people
find existing conditions intolerable, and imagine they see a way out,
there will be a great political movement; where the social conditions
are not so abnormally acute no amount of political oratory, nor yet
co-operation of leaders, can produce a movement.

The great Labour uprising at the Irish Local Government elections of
1898 sprang up spontaneously without a leader, and despite the political
parties; when the men who supported it have realised the futility of
trying to effect any great improvement in their condition by the action
of local bodies, they will seek for a political party which can express
their class interests upon national basis -- and seeking it find the
Socialist Party, ready and equipped for the task. By our action to-day
we are preparing the ground for more aggressive revolutionary action
when the working class of Ireland at last recognise in our principles
the embodiment of their hopes; firmly grounded upon our knowledge of the
economic basis of all political action, we confidently await the day
when the ever-increasing pressure of capitalist society shall bring the
workers into our ranks and the destinies of the nation into our hands.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
