---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)  \>  [New
Evangel](index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The New Evangel

 

### Socialism And Political Reformers

**Workers' Republic**, 8 July 1899

Among the many developments of Socialist activity at which the man in
the street is apt to be astonished, perhaps none are more difficult to
comprehend at first sight than the implacable hostility shown by the
Socialist parties of the world towards the political parties hitherto
identified with the agitation for political reform. The uninitiated find
it hard to understand why there should be such marked hostility between
parties, both of whom place on their programme planks of political
reform seemingly almost identical in character; why the Socialist party,
which represents the most revolutionary ideas of our day, should seek
the downfall of political reform parties with a zest and eagerness which
the most bigoted Conservative could never hope to excel. It is observed
that wherever the Socialist party is strong, as in Germany, France, or
Belgium, it is the Liberal party -- the party of mere political
reformers -- which has been the first to suffer in loss of prestige and
membership in exact proportion as Socialism has advanced.

Strange, though the circumstance may seem to the unreflective mind, it
is but what might have been expected to result from the appearance upon
the political field of a force which like the Socialist party had at
once a programme of political reform embracing all and more than the old
reform parties had striven for, and a programme embodying demands for
economic changes which receive no support from middle-class reformers,
though a crying necessity of the times. The development of acute
economic problems, side by side with the extension of the franchise --
economic problems are, in fact, most acute in the politically freest
countries -- has borne in upon the minds of the working-class voters the
conviction that, except as a means to an end, political freedom is a
valueless acquisition for their class. They therefore demand the right
to use that political power in the direction of their own class
interests, but on making such demand are surprised to see their quondam
middle-class leaders the first to denounce them and call upon the State
to oppose them. When this point has been reached, as in the countries
above named and to a lesser degree in England and America, the
thoughtful observer of politics cannot but see that middle-class parties
of reform have outlived their usefulness; that whatever political change
is still required to establish the democracy in power can be sought for
as well under the banner of the new political force of Socialism as
under the old banner of Liberalism, and that this new power by basing
its agitation upon the material wants of the producing class gathers to
its aid a potential power, in the passion and self-interest of the
majority of the nation, which the mere doctrinaires -- Liberal, Radical,
or Republican -- could never hope to rally. Therefore political reform
parties decay as the Socialist Parties thrive; the latter early the
political demands of the former on their banner side by side with the
economic demands of their class, and thus deprived of their sole reason
for existence the capitalist reform parties lose their attraction for
the multitude -- now pressing eagerly onward to the inspiration of a new
and better hope.

On the other hand Conservatism is, as a party, secure of an existence as
long as the present system lasts. It may be set down as an axiom that
there will always be a Conservative party as long as there is tyranny
and privilege to conserve. Hence we find the old reform parties shedding
their members at both ends -- the wealthier section falling over into
the ranks of Conservatism, in order to strengthen the only party able to
defend their monopolies, and the working class section joining hands
with the Socialists as the only party embracing the cause alike of
political and industrial liberty. The Socialists are naturally desirous
of hastening this process, in order that the political battlefield may
be left clear and open for the final struggle between the only two
parties possessed of a logical reason for existence -- the Conservative
party defending the strongholds of monarchy, aristocracy and capitalism;
and the Socialist party storming those strongholds in the interest of
human freedom. This consummation cannot be realised as long as there
exists a political party which, like the Liberals of England and the
Continent, and the Home Rule parties of Ireland, attempts to blend the
principles of progress and reaction -- now blatantly declaring for
political freedom, now vigorously defending economic slavery. Therefore
the Socialists uniformly seek the discomfiture of Liberalism, regarding
it as a buffer between the contending forces of tyranny and freedom; and
hence the clear-sighted workmen of the Continent have already reduced
that once formidable party to a mere cypher in politics, and win ore
long completely wipe it out of existence.

The fact is not without its lesson to us here in Ireland. We too have
so-called parties of reform -- Home Rule in all its phases is now but a
cloak for the designs of the middle class desirous of making terms with
the Imperial Government it pretends to dislike. It is but capitalist
Liberalism, speaking with an Irish accent. As such it is the enemy of
every effort at working-class emancipation, and if the workers of
Ireland as are alive to the interests of their class as are their
brethren on the Continent, they will help build up that Socialist Party
which is destined to march over the grave of Home Rule Liberalism to the
final assault and destruction of the strongholds of oppression.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
