---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)  \>  [New
Evangel](index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The New Evangel

 

### Socialism and Religion

#### The Known and the Unknowable

**Workers' Republic**, 17 June 1899

Perhaps upon no point are the doctrines of Socialism so much
misunderstood, and so much misrepresented, as in their relation to
Religion. When driven into a corner upon every other point at issue;
when from the point of view of economics, of politics, or of morality,
he is worsted in argument, this question of Religion invariably forms
the final entrenchment of the enemy of Socialism -- especially in
Ireland.

"But it is opposed to Religion," constitutes the last words, the
ultimate shift, of the supporters of capitalism, driven from every other
line of defence but stubbornly refusing to yield. "Socialism is Atheism,
and all Socialists are Atheists," or "Your Socialism is but a fine name
to cover your Atheism in its attack upon the Church;" all these phrases
are so commonly heard in the course of every dispute upon the merits or
demerits of the Socialist doctrine that we require no apology for
introducing them here in order to point their illogical character. So
far from it being true that Socialism and Atheism are synonymous terms,
it is a curious and instructive fact that almost all the prominent
propagandists of Freethought in our generation have been, and are, most
determined enemies of Socialism. The late Charles Bradlaugh, in his time
the most aggressive Freethinker in England, was to the last resolute and
uncompromising in his hatred of Socialism; G.W. Foote, the present
editor of the **Freethinker**, the national organ of English Secularism,
is a bitter enemy of Socialism, and the late Colonel Bob Ingersoll, the
chief apostle of Freethought doctrine in the United States, was well
known as an apologist of capitalism.

On the continent of Europe many other quite similar cases might he
recorded, but those already quoted will suffice, as being those most
easily verified by our readers. It is a suggestive and amusing fact that
in the motley ranks of the defenders of Capitalism the professional
propagandists of Freethought are comrades-in-arms of His Holiness the
Pope; the ill-reasoned and inconclusive Encyclicals lately issued
against Socialism make of the hierarchy of the Catholic Church belated
camp followers in the armies marching under the banners raised by the
agnostic exponents of the individualist philosophy. Obviously, even the
meanest intelligence can see that there need be no identity of thought
between the Freethinker as such, and the Socialist as a Socialist. From
what then does the popular misconception arise? In the first instance
from the interested attempt of the propertied classes to create such a
prejudice against Socialism as might deter the working class giving ear
to its doctrines -- an attempt too often successful; and in the second
instance, from a misconception of the attitude of the Socialist party
towards the theological dogma in general. The Socialist Party of Ireland
prohibits the discussion, of theological or anti-theological questions
at its meetings, public or private. This is in conformity with the
practice of the chief Socialist parties of the world, which have
frequently, in Germany for example, declared Religion to be a private
matter, and outside the scope of Socialist action. Modern Socialism, in
fact, as it exists in the minds of its leading exponents, and as it is
held and worked for by an increasing number of enthusiastic adherents
throughout the civilised world, has an essentially material,
matter-of-fact foundation. We do not mean that its supporters are
necessarily materialists in the vulgar, and merely anti-theological,
sense of the term, but that they do not base their Socialism upon any
interpretation of the language or meaning of Scripture, nor upon the
real or supposed intentions of a beneficent Deity. They as a party
neither affirm or deny those things, but leave it to the individual
conscience of each member to determine what beliefs on such questions
they shall hold. As a political party they wisely prefer to take their
stand upon the actual phenomena of social life as they can be observed
in operation amongst us to-day, or as they can be traced in the recorded
facts of history. If any special interpretation of the meanings of
Scripture tends to influence human thought in the direction of
Socialism, or is found to be on a plane with the postulates of Socialist
doctrine, then the scientific Socialist considers that the said
interpretation is stronger because of its identity with the teachings of
Socialism, but he does not necessarily believe that Socialism is
stronger, or its position more impregnable, because of its theological
ally. He realises that the facts upon which his Socialist faith are
based are strong enough in themselves to withstand every shock, and
attacks from every quarter, and therefore while he is at all times
willing to accept help from every extraneous source, he will only accept
it on one condition, viz., that he is not to be required in return to
identify his cause with any other whose discomfiture might also involve
Socialism in discredit. This is the main reason why Socialists fight shy
of theological dogmas and religions generally: because we feel that
Socialism is based upon a series of facts requiring only unassisted
human reason to grasp and master all their details, whereas Religion of
every kind is admittedly based upon 'faith' in the occurrence in past
ages of a series of phenomena inexplicable by any process of mere human
reasoning. Obviously, therefore, to identify Socialism with Religion
would be to abandon at once that universal, non-sectarian character
which to-day we find indispensable to working-class unity, as it would
mean that our members would be required to conform to one religious
creed, as well as to one specific economic faith -- a course of action
we have no intention of entering upon as it would inevitably entangle us
in the disputes of the warring sects of the world, and thus lead to the
disintegration of the Socialist Party.

Socialism, as a party, bases itself upon its knowledge of facts, of
economic truths, and leaves the building up of religious ideals or
faiths to the outside public, or to its individual members if they so
will. It is neither Freethinker nor Christian, Turk nor Jew, Buddhist
nor Idolator, Mahommedan nor Parsee -- it is only *human*.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
