---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)  \>  [New
Evangel](index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The New Evangel

 

### State Monopoly versus Socialism

**Workers' Republic**, 10 June 1899

One of the most significant signs of our times is the readiness with
which our struggling middle class turns to schemes of State or Municipal
ownership and control, for relief from the economic pressure under which
it is struggling. Thus we find in England demands for the
nationalisation of the telephone system, for the extension of municipal
enterprise in the use of electricity, for the extension of the parcel
system in the Post Office, for the nationalisation of railways and
canals. In Ireland we have our middle class reformers demanding state
help for agriculture, state purchase of lands, arterial draining, state
construction of docks, piers and harbours, state aid for the fishing
industry, state control of the relations between agricultural tenant and
landlord, and also nationalisation of railways and canals. There is a
certain section of Socialists, chiefly in England, who never tire of
hailing all such demands for state activity as a sign of the growth of
the Socialist spirit among the middle class, and therefore worthy of all
the support the working-class democracy can give. In some degree such a
view seems justifiable. The fact that large sections of the capitalist
class join in demanding the intervention of the State in industry is a
sure sign that they, at least, have lost the overweening belief in the
all-sufficiency of private enterprise which characterised their class a
generation ago; and that they have been forced to recognise the fact
that there are a multitude of things in which the 'brain',
'self-reliance', and 'personal responsibility' of the capitalist are
entirely unnecessary. To argue that, since in such enterprises the
private property-holder is dispensed with, therefore he can be dispensed
with in all other forms of industrial activity, is logical enough and we
really fail to see in what manner the advocates of capitalist society
can continue to clamour for such state ownership as that alluded to --
ownership in which the private capitalist is seen to be superfluous, and
yet continue to argue that in all other forms of industry the private
capitalist is indispensable. For it must be remembered that every
function of a useful character performed by the State or Municipality
to-day was at one time performed by private individuals for profit, and
in conformity with the then generally accepted belief that it could not
be satisfactorily performed except by private individuals.

But all this notwithstanding, we would, without undue desire to carp or
cavil, point out that to call such demands 'Socialistic' is in the
highest degree misleading. Socialism properly implies above all things
the co-operative control by the workers of the machinery of production;
without this co-operative control the public ownership by the State is
not Socialism -- it is only State capitalism. The demands of the
middle-class reformers, from the Railway Reform League down, are simply
plans to facilitate the business transactions of the capitalist class.
State Telephones -- to cheapen messages in the interest of the middle
class who are the principal users of the telephone system; State
Railways -- to cheapen carriage of goods in the interest of the
middle-class trader; State-construction of piers, docks, etc. -- in the
interest of the middle-class merchant; in fact every scheme now advanced
in which the help of the State is invoked is a scheme to lighten the
burden of the capitalist -- trader, manufacturer, or farmer. Were they
all in working order to-morrow the change would not necessarily benefit
the working class; we would still have in our state industries, as in
the Post Office to-day, the same unfair classification of salaries, and
the same despotic rule of an irresponsible head. Those who worked most
and hardest would still get the least remuneration, and the rank and
file would still be deprived of all voice in the ordering of their
industry, just the same as in all private enterprises.

Therefore, we repeat, state ownership and control is not necessarily
Socialism -- if it were, then the Army, the Navy, the Police, the
Judges, the Gaolers, the Informers, and the Hangmen, all would all be
Socialist functionaries, as they are State officials -- but the
ownership by the State of all the land and materials for labour,
combined with the co-operative control by the workers of such land and
materials, would be Socialism.

Schemes of state and municipal ownership, if unaccompanied by this
co-operative principle, are but schemes for the perfectioning of the
mechanism of capitalist government-schemes to make the capitalist regime
respectable and efficient for the purposes of the capitalist; in the
second place they represent the class-conscious instinct of the business
man who feels that capitalist should not prey upon capitalist, while all
may unite to prey upon the workers. The chief immediate sufferers from
private ownership of railways, canals, and telephones are the middle
class shop-keeping element, and their resentment at the tariffs imposed
is but the capitalist political expression of the old adage that "dog
should not eat dog."

It will thus be seen that an immense gulf separates the 'nationalising'
proposals of the middle class from the 'socialising' demands of the
revolutionary working class. The first proposes to endow a Class State
-- repository of the political power of the Capitalist Class -- with
certain powers and functions to be administered in the common interest
of the possessing class; the second proposes to subvert the Class State
and replace it with the Socialist State, representing organised society
-- the Socialist Republic. To the cry of the middle class reformers,
"make this or that the property of the government," we reply, "yes, in
proportion as the workers are ready to make the government their
property."

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
