---
layout: default
title: 
---
# POTATO-BUG EXTERMINATOR

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Feb. 7, 1914\

A Mr. Frank Koester has made his bow to the public with an "original
system by which the small manufacturer may reenter the field."

There is no subject more catchy than that just now. The proper answer
would settle the social question from bottom up.

What is the trick? Simplicity itself. It is to weld the small
manufacturers of the land into one gigantic nationwide corporation. In
other words, the small manufacturers, who, as Secretary of Commerce
Redfield said to the employing lithographers in convention assembled at
Washington, were working with inefficient machinery and could not expect
to hold out---these employers of inefficient machinery will be out of
their troubles by pooling their back number implements.

One summer, another ingenious gentleman announced that, for 25 cents, he
would furnish any applicant with an unfailing potato-bug exterminator.
Those who sent their quarter promptly received a neatly printed little
sheet, which set forth:

"Get two thin mapleboards, 4 by 5. Plant them perfectly smooth. Pick up
your potato-bug. Place it in the exact center of one of the boards. Then
put the other board on top of the first so as to cover it exactly. Then
press the two boards."

Wonder whether the potato-buggist was Frank Koester?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
