---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1905

### Socialism and Internationalism

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Social Democrat*, 1905, Vol. 9. no. 10, 15 Oct 1905,
pp. 606-607, continued from last month;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Ted Crawford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The country's flag is a *commercial asset,* said the celebrated patriot,
Cecil Rhodes, but this commercial asset only represents the economic and
political interests of the capitalist classes. The middle-class only
beats the big drum in praise of love of country and honour of the flag
in order to beguile the proletariat, so that it should sacrifice itself
in defence of the riches which the middle-class has stolen.

The ruling classes of the Republics of Greece and Rome did not make use
of the patriotic charlatanism of the middle-class, because they
jealously kept to themselves the privilege of governing, and of
defending their country. They neither allowed the working classes or the
slaves the right of carrying arms. If it were necessary to arm slaves to
defend the country they were first made free men and given land. Never
in history was there such fervent patriotism, which did not hesitate to
sacrifice the individual for the good of the community.

The modern middle-class adopted a different method. First it formed
armies of mercenaries, as in England, or by conscription, as in France.
And now it still successfully bamboozles the proletariat.

The proletariat will not really have a fatherland till it has
politically and economically displaced the middle-class. This can only
be done by each nation in turn, and it is for this reason that the
proletariat is national, as the Communistic Manifesto explains.

The middle-class is nationalist, since it must exploit the proletariat
of its own nation, but at a certain time of the economic development it
must assume a certain international character, in order that the surplus
of goods which it has captured from the wage-earners may be sold. If the
proletariat of a nation in order to throw off the yoke of the governing
class must be organised nationally and rise nationally, yet it will be
unable to attain its final emancipation until there has been effected an
international agreement with the proletariats of other capitalist
nations. Any social revolution must necessarily be international. The
middle class of the eighteenth century was only able to overthrow the
aristocracy and seize power by proclaiming the brotherhood of nations
and by calling on them to make common cause against tyrants; to be a
patriot meant for middle-class revolutionists not to love France,
Germany or Italy, but to love the revolution. When the revolution was
over the middle-class became again nationalist in order to organise
nationally its dictature and its class exploitation. The revolutionary
proletariat will have neither to keep its ancient nationalities nor to
constitute new ones, because by becoming free it will abolish classes:
the world will be its fatherland.

PAUL LAFARGUE.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
