---
layout: default
title: 
---
# SAILING UNDER FALSE COLORS

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
June 6, 1903\

T he capitalist class, in the despair of its approaching doom,
misrepresents socialism as an arbitrary scheme of society, whose
adoption would destroy individuality!

"Socialism," it declares, "would degrade us all to one dead level
regardless of individual aptitude or merit. Capitalism, on the other
hand, exalts the individual, promotes his rights and duties, and all
else that appertains to him and his happiness. Down with socialism! Up
with capitalism!"

How does capitalist fact verify capitalist contention?

In the promotion of capitalist enterprise the stock corporation plays a
most important part. The stock corporation is a collective means of
capitalizing great industries. Without the stock corporation, the trust
and other large aggregations of capital made necessary by industrial
evolution would be impossible.

As a collective means of capitalizing industry, the stock corporation
has rendered the individual capitalist superfluous, by merging him into
the stockholder, and by making stocks, not individuals, count in voting
on its policies and affairs. Likewise has the stock corporation made it
possible for a few---those controlling a majority of the stocks---to
dominate the minority stockholders, who may be and generally are the
majority of the stockholders, in their interest, thus trampling on the
individuality of the many in the mire of economic aggrandizement of the
few.

The newspapers of the day, in printing the protest of Gustave Loeb
against the reorganization plan of the shipbuilding trust, are now
giving point to these facts---are, in brief, throwing a strong light on
the triumph of "individuality" under capitalism.

Loeb denounces the reorganization plan as a confiscation of the property
of the bondholders, and calls upon the other bondholders to refuse to
give their assent to it. Should they, however, give their assent, his
property will be confiscated---where then is his individuality? Should
they not give their assent, what becomes of the property and the
individuality of those favoring reorganization?

In neither case is there any appeal to individuality or a recognition of
individual rights. The appeal is to a majority of bonds, controlled by a
few. Should these decide for reorganization, then reorganization it will
be. Should they decide against reorganization, then reorganization it
will not be. The individual will not count, but the majority of the
bonds of the few controlling the corporation will.

Capitalism is a fraud within a fraud. Proclaiming itself
individualistic, it organizes collectively in order to promote the aims
of a few.

Socialism, on the other hand, is genuineness itself. Believing that
industry is collective in organization and operation, it proclaims
itself in favor of collective ownership and control.

By these means it would secure to labor the products of its toil, now
confiscated by the few, and, in this way, preserve to the workers, the
majority of the population, a greater individuality than that which they
now attain.

With freedom from the economic pressure due to the capitalist control of
industry, such as socialism alone can provide (since it is in accord
with evolution), individuality will achieve proportions hitherto
unattained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
