---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1887

### The Boulanger Question

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *le Socialiste*, July 23, 1887;\
[Translated]{.info}: by [Mitchell
Abidor](../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/mabidor.htm).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our era has seen many marvels: electric light, the telephone, the
bourgeoisie represented by the ministry it deserves, the crooked
trinity: Rouvier-Heredia-Etienne ^[\[1\]](#n1)^, and others still. But
these extraordinary phenomena are surpassed, are erased by the
stupefying popularity of the illustrious Boulanger, the great general
who writes epic letters ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ while awaiting victory; the
ebullient captain whose pistol missed the royalist Lareinty
^[\[3\]](#n3)^, but whose saber worked wonders against the Parisians in
1871. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

The name of Boulanger is circulating around France, as once did that of
the late Gambetta. The Caesar from Cahors ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ got into a
balloon, happy as he could be to leave besieged Paris: the general, pale
and undone by his triumph, leaves by locomotive without saying a word to
the crowd that acclaims him. I'm mistaken: he cried out, "Give me
something to drink," like Gargantua when he was born. Though it was less
curious to hear a guy with hair on his chain call out, "Give me
something to drink," nevertheless the Déroulèdists ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ and
the Boulangistes, in order to preserve that memorable phrase, on July
14th sang these words to the well-known tune:

"It's a drink that we need!!"

Boulanger's popularity is colossal and grows every day. We could be
frightened by it if we didn't remember that the popularity of the man
who for the opportunists incarnates national defense couldn't hold out
against two months in power and a meeting in Belleville.^[\[7\]](#n7)^
Balloons are more quickly deflated than they are inflated.

The true guilty parties for the extravagant and grotesque popularity of
this general without victories are not those who are accused. Rochefort
^[\[8\]](#n8)^, Déroulède, Meyer ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ of "La Lanterne," Laur
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ of "La France," Laguerre ^[\[11\]](#n11)^and others
sang the praises of Boulanger, but the reactionaries of all colors and
M. Bismarck, closely allied, invented this thunderbolt of war who
faints, and loses his head and its footing when his admirers surround
him.

The general's titles to the admiration of his contemporaries don't take
long to enumerate: he took a few measures which, if they displeased
officers, satisfied the soldiers, who they think the officers think take
sufficient care of when they are stupefied with the discipline of a lion
tamer; he expelled the d'Orleans family; and finally, like the prince
president, he pranced about on his horse, who is almost as popular as
him. These remarkable acts earned him well deserved applause, which
would nevertheless have gone unheard amidst the noise of Paris without
the incomprehensible and unreasonable hatred of the royalists and
opportunists.

M. de Bismarck, who isn't naïve and foolish enough to be frightened by a
general from the Grand Duchy of Gerolstein,^[\[12\]](#n12)^ but who is
sly enough to simulate fright in order to scare the philistines of the
Reichstag and have them vote as he wants, has enrolled in the
anti-Boulangiste camp with Grévy, Ferry and the rest.

And then came the Schnaebele Affair ^[\[13\]](#n13)^; the unheard of
brutality of the Prussian government, capable of arousing the
indignation of the most apathetic, awakens the patriotism that Déroulède
and his pals were beginning to kill with ridiculousness. And Boulanger,
who the soldiers love and who the opportunists and royalists hate,
stoked by the radical and intransigent press, becomes the hero of the
day, the idol of the braying and chauvinist crowd.

The opportunists speak of Caesarism, and it is they who launched
Boulanger, who only ever asked to be a useless minister and friend to
all.

The opportunists speak of Ceasarism, but isn't the working class well
and truly under the saber's regime? If the proletariansset in motion in
Anzin, Decazevuille, Vierzon or Montluçon the praetorian troops of the
bourgeoisie hasten there with sabers and cannons to terrorize the
country.

This despotism against the workers is the good despotism, the liberal
and bourgeois despotism that should be developed in order to keep the
proletarian in a state of subjection. But the reactionaries only cry out
about Caesarism through fear at seeing Boulanger play at radicalism.
They benevolently impute evil intentions to this good sword-bearer who
will make the radicals pay dearly for their enthusiasm.

But while the opportunists scream before they are burned, they are
organizing the military despotism. On July 14 Paris was already in a
state of siege; the troops were already in position. Along the quays, on
the bridges and public squares, platoons of infantrymen and cavalry were
massed, sabers and rifles in hand, ready to charge. In that mixed crowd
of women and children, what a frightful massacre they were determined to
carry out! Why ? In order to maintain in the presidency the old tightwad
Grévy and the swindler Rouvier.

The bourgeois of France were incapable of establishing
parliamentarianism, the bourgeois governmental form par excellence.
Since Napoleon's military dictatorship constitutional regimes have been
cooked up through the despotism of the saber.

Louis-Philippe, issued from a parliamentary revolution, opened his reign
with massacres in the middle of Paris. The provisional government,
before founding the republic, made sure to have a general in hand. It
had Cavaignac ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ come, who distinguished himself in June;
Napoleon \[III\] imitated the republicans and drew from Africa the
butchers he needed to make Paris bleed. The radicals of the day court
Boulanger, while the opportunists have assured themselves
Gallifet,^[\[15\]](#n15)^ who is worth a half-dozen Cavaignacs.

In times of peace it is impossible to establish and maintain a machine
of oppression against the standing army without the political parties
taking it over to turn it against their adversaries.

The dangers of coups d'état and military despotism will only cease to
exist when the standing army is abolished and the nation is armed.

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} May 30,1887 the Rouvier government was formed, which
Boulanger was no longer a member of and which included Hérédia and
Etienne.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Allusion to the publication in August 1886 of letters
in which Boulanger assured the Duke d'Aumale of his devotion, when he
had been the source of his expulsion a month earlier.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Boulanger fought a duel with Lareinty on July 17,1886

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Boulanger participated in the defense of Paris
against the Prussians. He fought against the Commune, but after
receiving a wound didn't participate in the massacres of the Bloody
Week.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} Gambetta, the great republican politician, was from
Cahors.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Paul Déroulède founded the Ligue des Patriotes, a
right-wing, *revanchard* organization in 1882. The leader and his group
were to be at the heart of the Boulangist movement.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} Gambetta is being referred to

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Editor and writer of "La Lanterne," the anti-Napoleon
III magazine. He was a participant in the Commune, was exiled for his
role, and when he returned founded "L'Intransigeant," which supported
Boulanger. He was condemned for his role in the Boulangist movement, and
moved progressively towards an anti-Semitic position, taking up the
anti-Dreyfus cause.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} Editor of "La Lanterne."

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Deputy from the Loire. La France was a newspaper
favorable to Boulanger.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} Former secretary to Louis Blanc, lawyer for
socialists and anarchists, including Louise Michel. One of the key
organizers of the Boulangist movement.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} Reference to Offenbach's comic opera, "La Grande
Duchesse de Gerolstein."

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} Schnaebele was a French police superintendent
involved in espionage against Germany. He was arrested by the Germans on
French territory.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} General who led the repression of the people of
Paris in 1848.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} General who ordered the summary execution of the
Communards. He became Governor of Paris in 1880.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../index.htm)
