---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1887

### The Morrow of the Revolution

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Commonweal*, [July 9,
1887](../../../history/international/social-democracy/commonweal/1887/commonweal_18870709_v3_n78.pdf)
and [July 16,
1887](../../../history/international/social-democracy/commonweal/1887/commonweal_18870716_v3_n79.pdf);\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Graham Seaman

------------------------------------------------------------------------

July 9, 1887

## THE MORROW OF THE REVOLUTION.

\[Our friend, Citizen Paul Lafargue, has communicated the following
interest ing article to us, which is surely well worth our attention; it
is probable that his view of the question will be nearer to that taken
by most of us in the League than that of our comrade Bax. - Ed.\]

Our friend Bax has treated this question, which we are very full of in
France, the country of revolutions above all others; where, since the
beginning of the century, with the regularity of a sidereal movement a
revolution breaks out every eighteen or twenty years. Permit me to put
before you our way of looking at this question.

In 1871, the power fell into the hands of the people when they were not
prepared to receive it. In a revolutionary period to take the power is a
thing relatively easy; to keep it, and above all to make use of it, is a
thing far more difficult. The Commune when master of Paris was not able
to take any really Socialist measures; there are numerous causes which
explain this helplessness towards Socialism, but which it is not worth
while going into at present. However, the bourgeois may be sure, that if
ever events should bring the Socialists into power again, the immediate
measures which they will take will strike so much at the root of things,
that even if the reaction should triumph, it would not be able to bring
back matters to the state in which they were before the revolution.

The morrow of the revolution the Socialists will have, 1st., To organise
the revolutionary power and provide for its defence; 2nd., To satisfy
the immediate needs of the people; and 3rd., To upset the capitalist
order of things, and to lay the foundation of the Socialist order.

In France the revolutionary party will find itself face to face with
three classes, having different, and even opposing interests; the
workman class belonging to the great industries; the peasant class, and
the capitalist class with its hangers-on, the little bourgeoisie,
industrial and commercial.

In the industrial towns the working-class will be master; they will
become so many revolutionary centres, which will have to federate in
order to gain the country for the revolution, and to overcome the
resistance which may spring up in the commercial and maritime towns.

In the industrial towns the Socialists will have to get hold of the
local governments, to arm and give military organisation to the workmen
(said Blanqui, \"He who has gunshot has bread!\"), to open the prisons
to let out the petty thieves, and put under lock and key the big ones,
such as bankers, financiers, big manufacturers, land-owners etc. Not
that one would do them any harm, but to treat them as hostages
responsible for the good behaviour of their class.

The revolutionary government would constitute itself by simply taking
possession, and it would not be till it was master of the situation that
it would think of ratifying its acts by so-called universal suffrage.
The bourgeois have so long kept the non-possessing classes out of the
suffrage, thmt they must not be over astonished if all ex-capitalists
are disenfranchised until the revolutionary party is absolutely
victorious.

Up till now in France it has been Paris which has given the word of
command, and has made the revolution for all France. This concentration
of the revolutionary movement has only been possible because the
revolutions of the epoch have not been real revolutions but ministerial
crises accompanied by barricades and musket-shot, and pompous
declamations on the great principles of liberty and justice, and other
twaddle.

The French are fond of melo-dramatic stage-plays, and the new
politicians give them their fill of these to their heart\'s content. But
while the drama is being played out in the streets, these politicians
slip into the yet warm places of their forerunners, and economic matters
go on their usual road. But since the next revolution must be an
economic one, and not a mere change of governors, it will not have just
merely to spring up in Paris, but must break out in all the industrial
centres, which as soon as the local revolutionary government is
constituted, must organise by means of delegations or otherwise the
central government charged with the function of taking general measures
in the interest of the revolution, and of preventing the formation of a
reactionary party.

But in order that the revolutionary government may be supported by the
mass of the working class, and in order that even if conquered it may
leave behind it a work which no reaction can destroy, it is necessary
that it should immediately satisfy the needs of the workers in town and
country, and that it should begin the transformation of capitalist
property.

It would have to return to the primitive idea of society, and consider
all its members as members of an immense family, which would have to
provide for the first needs of their lives, until a redistribution of
all products could be made on a basis of equality. The revolutionary
government would in each city have to house, clothe, and feed all its
inhabitants. To that end it would decree all house-property national and
would undertake the arrangement of lodging. It would drive the idle rich
from their mansions to install the workers in them, reserving those best
situated for families having many children. In Paris, while it would
lodge women with child on the first floor, it would relegate to the
fifth and sixth floors the big-bellied capitalists, so as to thin them
down by staircase exercise. The unwholesome hutches of the poor would be
demolished and their sites cleansed by fire.

The revolutionary government would nationalise the big shops of the
Peter Robinson and Moses kind, and would treat their proprietors as
thieves if they dared to embezzle so much as a single reel of cotton
Commissions would be organised by streets and quarters to distribute the
contents amongst the workers, who for the first time in their lives
would be clad in the good and handsome stuffs which they themselves,
have made.

But before lodging and clothing the working population it would be
necessary to think about their food. The revolutionary government would
set up great common restaurants in the various quarters, where a minimum
of substantial nourishment would be given to the inhabitants every day.
The cooking would be done in common, and those who wished to eat their
meals at home could take away their food: but it would be good to
encourage meals in common, so as to develope fraternity and equality.
During the revolution of the last century, the Commune of Paris
organised fraternal meals; tables were spread in the middle of the
streets, and each inhabitant brought his own food there, which was eaten
in common.

In order to feed the population, the revolutionary government would take
over the provision-stores, wine-vaults, breweries, etc., and would at
once organise a municipal catering service, which would put itself into
communication with the market-gardeners and small peasants of the
suburban country. This service, which would suppress the middlemen
between the buyer and the consumer, would allow the peasant to obtain a
better price for his products. To gain the peasant over to the
revolutionary cause is one of the first duties of the Socialist party,
and for that purpose, besides general measures (such as abolition of
interest, of debts of all kinds, of taxes and the conscription, etc.) we
must not hesitate to increase his gains, and make his labour easier by
advancing to him seed and manure of the best quality and the most
improved agricultural machines.

The workers of 1848, to allow Louis Blanc, Gamier Pag\^, Lamartine, and
the other bourgeois of the Provisional Government, to found their
Republic, \"put three months of poverty at their disposal.\" When at the
dissolution of June the people came to claim the fulfilment of their
promise, the bourgeois reaction answered them with grape-shot. The
Socialist revolution will begin the foundation of the social-republic by
putting three months of comfort at the disposal of the workers.

The party which will take these measures on the morrow of the revolution
will be invincible; it will be supported by the mass of the workers,
full both of enthusiasm and astonishment at finding a government which
is occupying itself with their needs.

\
*Paul Lafargue.*

{To be continued,)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

July 16, 1887.

## THE MORROW OF THE REVOLUTION.

(Concluded from p. 220.)

One great idea which dominates all others has taken firm hold of the
brains of all Socialists, *the suppression of individual property.* The
Anarchists themselves, who are, without knowing it, the representatives
of the *\"laisser faire, laisser passer\"* of property, are drawn into
its current. The idea of the suppression of individual property is not
one which has sprung up spontaneously in the human skull; it is the
intellectual reflexion of the economical phenomenon which is evolving in
the capitalist world.

What is the true characteristic of individual property. It is that the
owner should work on his own property: this is so true that the peasant,
the propertied animal above all others, when he grows too old to
cultivate his land, rather than see it worked by hirelings divides it
between his children, although this surrender of his land, his only
love, is as torturing to him as the tearing out of his entrails. The old
French proverb, \" Property is the fruit of labour,\" expresses this
fact. Consequently the only true property-owner in the old sense of the
word is the peasant who cultivates his own land, the landlord who
inhabits and repairs his own cottage, the shopkeeper who buys and sells
merchandise in his own shop, the carpenter who himself uses his own saw
and plane. All that these property-owners possess belongs to them in all
justice, it is the fruit of their labour and not of that of others, for
no wage-earner has worked,on \"their property.\"

But is it the case that capitalist property presents this character? Are
the owners of mines, of railways, of great warehouses, the landlords who
own hundreds and thousands of acres, and whole quarters of towns, really
property owners? Have they ever worked on their \"property\"? They only
know it by the rent it brings them in; it is the wage-earners and not
the owners who work on their property. In the capitalist world we must
correct the ancient proverb, and say. *\"Property is the fruit of
labour, and the reward of idleness.\"*

The capitalists by not working on their property, but by using it to lay
hold of the fruit of the labour of others, have destroyed the essential
character of individual property.

The capitalist property-owner is a being absolutely useless in the
scheme of property; all the shareholders and bondholders of the railways
might be drowned in the Channel, and yet the railways of Europe would go
on carrying passengers and merchandise. The capitalist property-owner is
a useless mouth which consumes a terrible quantity.

Everything that is eaten by a rich man, and the domestics and other folk
who serve and satisfy his tastes and needs, is consumed in pure loss. It
is as if instead of burning coal in a machine to transform its heat into
force, one were to burn it in the open. The capitalist being useless
therefore ought to be suppressed to lessen the expense of social
production. The Socialist revolution will be bound to accomplish this
economical operation; it will not destroy property, it will free it from
its parasites.

The very day of the revolution the first decree of the revolutionary
government will be the confiscation of capitalist property (mines,
spinning-mills, foundries, railways, etc.), and its transformation into
social property.

Bax and the English Socialists think that the State will take the place
of the capitalist property-owners, and continue the exploitation of the
great instruments of labour as in the past, but at the same time
bringing in certain ameliorations in the lot of the worker, such as
shorter hours and higher wages, etc. Their ideal is the capitalist
public service (post-office, telegraphs, police, etc.), brought to
perfection.^[\[1\]](#n1)^ But for us, we believe that as a consequence
of the very fact of the establishment of the revolutionary government,
the State with its public offices (post-office, national debt, police,
magistracy, army, etc.), will disappear. The State is a machine
cunningly organised to serve the interests of the capitalists, and to
keep the proletarian mass in slavery. The revolutionary government which
will temporarily replace it, will have to disorganise the bourgeois
machine and to draw all its power from the proletarian mass, and so to
lay the foundations of the new order.

Instead of its being the State which will be the manager of the
post-office, and telegraphs, the minter of money, and director of the
railways, as it is now in nearly all capitalist countries, instead of
its being the State which will be the manager of spinning, and weaving,
and director of the mines, etc., as Lassalle wished, and as the English
Socialists now wish, the revolutionary government will have to act in
such a way that it will be the workers themselves who will become their
own employers and their own directors.

The revolutionary government will not have to impose on the workmen,
their directors, the rules of their labour, or rate of wages on the
workmen, the telegraphists, the employes of the railways, or the miners,
foundrymen, etc. On the contrary, the workmen will come to an
understanding among themselves as to choosing their engineers and
foremen, and on the sharing of the gains of their business. The nation
will put at their service the instruments of labour; special commissions
will be charged with drawing up a table of charges; that is to say, a
rate of wages which can be claimed for services rendered, the sum which
it will be necessary to set aside for the repairing and improving of the
machinery, and the sum to be paid into the public treasury to assure to
each member of society victuals, lodging, and clothing.

On the morrow of the revolution, the work to be done will be so
colossal, that it must not be increased still more by turning the
revolutionary government into a director of spinning mills, or a shoe
manufacturer; on the contrary, it must hasten in the masses themselves,
the development of all the organisers and directors of social labour.
Capacities towards direction exist, since it is the wage-earners only
who direct all production, and it is only a matter of grouping them to
find those commissions which will be charged with regulating
scientifically the production and equitable distribution of products.

For the end of the social revolution is *to work as little as possible,
and to enjoy as much as possible,* and that can only be attained by a
continous improvement of machinery and a scientific division of labour
amongst all the members of Society, and by ensuring a just proportion of
production to the needs of Society.

But before arriving at this Communist Society, in which labour and
pleasure will be free and in common, we must pass through a transitional
period, in which it will be necessary to maintain wages and to keep the
due proportion between them and the service rendered and the effort
given. For our part we believe that the workers themselves have more
qualities to enable them to distribute the hours of labour and the
gains, than the functionaries of any State would have.

For the rest we only formulate here the desiderata; events will force us
on the road to be followed; and it is more than probable that the two
systems will be combined in various proportions.

The Morrow of the Revolution the revolutionists will have to arm the
wage-earners and organise them as soldiers; to lodge, feed, and clothe
them gratuitously; and to confiscate and nationalise capitalist
property. The nation which has once tasted this Socialist *regime,* even
if it were but for a month, will be gained for ever for the Social
Revolution.

\
*Paul Lafargue.*

### Footnote

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Comrade Bax must speak for himself, but I cannot
think he would endorse this statement of his views; and there are other
\"English Socialists,\" among them the editor of the Commomveal, who
would not walk across the street for the realisation of such an - ideal.
The fact that a French Socialist who knows so much of England as Citizen
Lafargue does, can have such an impression of the views of \"English
Socialists,\" shows the danger of coquetting with palliative measures.

### Note

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This article was written as a reply to the [article of the same
name](../../bax/1887/07/morrow.htm) by Belfort Bax published in
Commonweal on May 28th.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../index.htm)
