---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Larne Strike I

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 14 June, 1913.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At Larne, in the County Antrim, a place noted for its irreproachable
loyalty, there has been a slight break in the monotony of the relations
between the slaves and the slave-drivers. The principal industry in the
district is the manufacture of aluminium, the name of the company being
the British Aluminium Company. The men in the service of this company in
the production of the commodity in question have been compelled to work,
as their normal routine, a weekly total of 84 hours labour, or 12 hours
per day, 7 days per week.

After an uninterrupted run of 17 years there has at last come a strike
for a reduction in the hours of labour. The strike took place with
dramatic suddenness, following a refusal of the management to consent to
an interview with officials of the Irish Transport and General Workers'
Union, under whose banner the men in question have recently organised
themselves.

The day shift decided half-an-hour before commencing work to strike to
compel the management to consent to an interview and in another
half-an-hour they were joined by the full force of the day shift. The
strike had lasted ten days, when the first distribution of Strike Pay
took place on the 14th inst. and the men were as determined as ever. But
as they were only three weeks in the Union when the strike took place,
their Committee had decided to issue an appeal for funds to enable them
to supplement the sums granted out of the Union exchequer.

Any reader of **Forward** who can afford any help to assist in this
uprising against such intolerable conditions as I have mentioned -- a
normal working week of 84 hours -- should send along their mite to the
Secretary, 122, Corporation Street, Belfast. The Belfast press when
chronicling the strike stated that the management felt aggrieved at the
precipitate action of the men, as it "had always been ready to listen to
and remedy the grievances of the employees".

For cool, unblushing effrontery that statement would need some beating.
Always ready to remedy grievances and yet compelling its poor
unfortunate slaves of employees to work 12 hours a day, 7 days a week,
and, to make matters worse, no regular meal hours, but the worker
compelled to snatch his meals as best he could, whilst keeping up his
labour under the most wretched conditions of physical toil.

I am informed that this company has another branch in Scotland, at
Kinlochleven. If this is true, can some reader inform me what are the
conditions of labour, and will some industrial rebel in that vicinity
agitate among the Aluminium slaves there to make a move for greater
freedom now.

Talking about the Belfast press moves me to mention that that arch
exponent of the vilest Ulster Toryism, the **Belfast Evening
Telegraph**, publishes every Saturday, a so-called Labour column,
supposedly devoted to chronicling of happenings in the world of Labour.

Anything more utterly reactionary or opposite to everything the Labour
Movement stands for than the writings in this Labour column would be
hard to find, even in the organs of the Shipping Federation, or of the
Liberty and Property Defence League. The writer positively gloats in
every opportunity to pour cold water upon every forward move. In no
single case that I can recall has he ever approved of any strike. No
matter how horrible may have been the conditions, how revolting the
slavery, how atrociously small the wage, the strike has always been
unjustifiable, deplorable, and a menace to the prosperity of the nation.
No Labour candidature is ever anything but anathema, and the whole
industrial world is treated as one would expect it to be treated by a
slave currying favour with a slaveowner.

When I am inclined to be angry in my estimate of Belfast human nature, I
am often brought back to sweet toleration by remembering that a people
who have been brought up on such mental pablum as to fit them to believe
that such writings represent the Labour Movement, cannot be expected to
believe as a progressive people would.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.8.2003
