---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Larne Strike II

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 28 June, 1913.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first strike broken in Ireland by the direct intervention of the
clergy has recently ended in Larne, County Antrim. At that port the
workers in the Aluminium works, to the number of over 300, lately joined
the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, and came out on strike
for an improvement of their conditions. The overwhelming majority of
these workers are Protestants, and on Sunday 15th June, they took
advantage of their strike holiday to attend their respective places of
worship. As they have been working 12 hours a day 7 days a week, this
was the first occasion upon which a good many of them had had the
opportunity to attend divine services. The Belfast papers upon Monday
16th June, announced that at all the Protestant churches on Sunday the
strikers were asked to remain after services until the minister has an
opportunity of speaking to them in private.

It is understood that at these private conferences in the Protestant
churches after service, the clergymen urged upon the men to return to
work and trust to the goodwill of the manager. As a result, upon Monday,
the work gates were besieged by a mob of men clamorously begging for
leave to return at any terms the manager chose to impose. The Irish
Transport Workers' Union upon the Saturday had paid half strike pay to
all the men on strike, none of whom were more than three weeks in the
Union, and had promised more substantial aid for the ensuing week. But
the fires of sectarian and political bigotry had been let loose, the
chief argument used being that as the headquarters of the Union are in
Dublin it is a 'Fenian' and 'Papist' organisation, and by this specious
devilry the strikers were whipped back to their work, and the twin
forces of scabbism and Carsonism won a glorious victory.

Clerical interference in industrial disputes has been common in Ireland,
but it is a matter of bitter comment in Labour circles here that the
only occasion upon which this clerical dictation succeeded in acting the
part of strike breaker should be among and with Protestants, in an
Orange community, in the most Orange part of the North-East of Ulster.

During the six months lock-out of the foundry workers in Wexford almost
all of the clergy used their influence from the altar, in the
confraternities, and in the homes of the workers, to coerce them into
giving up the Union, but although that was the only point at issue, the
men resolutely but respectfully told the clergymen to mind their own
business, and despite all that these gentlemen could do, the boys of
Wexford fought on, and suffered on, until they won.

But in Larne! It is to laugh!

I have often said, to the scandal of my hearers here, that the
North-East corner of Ulster is the only priest-ridden part of Ireland.
And it is true if by 'priest-ridden' we mean a part of the country where
by appeals to theological hatreds the populace can be got to act
contrary to their material interests. In other parts of Ireland the
populace compel the priests to become their leaders or to remain
powerless to command political or social obedience; here at the command
of sectarianism the interests of trade unionism, of social progress, of
material well-being are all forgotten, and in the midst of a battle
against abominably slavish conditions, the workers are induced to
abandon their trade organisation, to bite the hand that fed them, and to
throw away the only weapon that could protect them.

For 17 years they slaved 12 hours per day, 7 days per week, and were
loyal and submissive and true blue. The agitators of the Irish Transport
Workers' Union succeeded in lighting in their breasts the divine spark
of rebellion and in keeping it alight for a whole week. But the
returning wave of sectarian bigotry guided by the hands of God's
ministers has again drowned the spark, and peace reigns once more in
Larne.

And the irony of it all lies in the fact that the strike was practically
won when the collapse took place. Internal arrangements had been made
for a start on the basis of an Eight Hour Day, or 56 hours per week, and
this has in fact been adhered to from the start. But whereas the output
for gang or for men for eight hours would have remained as before the
strike, now the gangs have been re-shuffled, with the end in view of
compelling the Eight Hour's shift to produce as nearly what a 12-hour
shift formerly did, as scientific slave-driving operating upon
disorganised men can do. This and a reduction in wages averaging from
2/6 to 3/- per week, sum up the glorious achievement of our clergy in
Larne.

Net result of the strike -- A reduction of hours to eight per day.

Net result of clerical dictation -- Victimisation of men made possible,
increased slave-driving of a merciless character, average reduction of
wages from 2/6 to 3/- per week, and smashing up of the local branch of
the Union.

A great victory for the apostles of 'civil and religious liberty' in the
very home of their apostolate!

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.8.2003
