---
layout: default
title: 
---
#### [Rosa Luxemburg]{.small} The Mass Strike

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI. Co-operation of Organised and Unorganised Workers Necessary for Victory

\

In connection with this, the question of organisation in relation to the
problem of the mass strike in Germany assumes an essentially different
aspect.

The attitude of many trade-union leaders to this question is generally
summed up in the assertion: "We are not yet strong enough to risk such a
hazardous trial of strength as a mass strike." Now this position is so
far untenable that it is an insoluble problem to determine the time, in
a peaceful fashion by counting heads, when the proletariat are "strong
enough" for any struggle. Thirty years ago the German trade-unions had
50,000 members. That was obviously a number with which a mass strike on
the above scale was not to be thought of. Fifteen years later the
trade-unions were four times as strong, and counted 237,000 members. If,
however, the present trade-union leaders had been asked at the time if
the organisation of the proletariat was then sufficiently ripe for a
mass strike, they would assuredly have replied that it was still far
from it and that the number of those organised in trade-unions would
first have to be counted by millions.

Today the number of trade-unionists already runs into the second
million, but the views of the leaders are still exactly the same, and
may very well be the same to the end. The tacit assumption is that the
entire working class of Germany, down to the last man and the last
woman, must be included in the organisation before it "is strong enough"
to risk a mass action, which then, according to the old formula, would
probably be represented as "superfluous." This theory is nevertheless
absolutely utopian, for the simple reason that it suffers from an
internal contradiction, that it goes in a vicious circle. Before the
workers can engage in any direct class struggle they must all be
organised. The circumstances, the conditions, of capitalist development
and of the bourgeois state make it impossible that, in the normal course
of things, without stormy class struggles, certain sections -- and these
the greatest, the most important, the lowest and the most oppressed by
capital, and by the state -- can be organised at all. We see even in
Britain, which has had a whole century of indefatigable trade-union
effort without any "disturbances" -- except at the beginning in the
period of the Chartist movement -- without any "romantic revolutionary"
errors or temptations, it has not been possible to do more than organise
a minority of the better-paid sections of the proletariat.

On the other hand the trade-unions, like all fighting organisations of
the proletariat, cannot permanently maintain themselves in any other way
than by struggle, and that not struggles of the same kind as the war
between the frogs and the mice in the stagnant waters of the bourgeois
parliamentary period, but struggle in the troubled revolutionary periods
of the mass strike. The rigid, mechanical-bureaucratic conception cannot
conceive of the struggle save as the product of organisation at a
certain stage of its strength. On the contrary, the living, dialectical
explanation makes the organisation arise as a product of the struggle.
We have already seen a grandiose example of this phenomenon in Russia,
where a proletariat almost wholly unorganised created a comprehensive
network of organisational appendages in a year-and-a-half of stormy
revolutionary struggle.

Another example of this kind is furnished by the history of the German
unions. In the year 1878 the number of trade-union members amounted to
50,000. According to the theory of the present-day trade-union leaders
this organisation, as stated above, was not nearly "strong enough" to
enter upon a violent political struggle. The German trade-unions
however, weak as they were at the time, did take up the struggle --
namely the struggle against the anti-socialist law -- and showed that
they were "strong enough," not only to emerge victorious from the
struggle, but to increase their strength five-fold: in 1891, after the
repeal of the anti-socialist laws, their membership was 277,659. It is
true that the methods by which the trade-unions conquered in the
struggle against the anti-socialist laws do not correspond to the ideal
of a peaceful, bee-like, uninterrupted process: they went first into the
fight absolutely in ruins, to rise again on the next wave and to be born
anew. But this is precisely the specific method of growth corresponding
to the proletarian class organisations: to be tested in the struggle and
to go forth from the struggle with increased strength.

On a closer examination of German conditions and of the condition of the
different sections of the working class, it is clear that the coming
period of stormy political mass struggles will not bring the dreaded,
threatening downfall of the German trade-unions, but on the contrary,
will open up hitherto unsuspected prospects of the extension of their
sphere of power -- an extension that will proceed rapidly by leaps and
bounds. But the question has still another aspect. The plan of
undertaking mass strikes as a serious political class action with
organised workers only is absolutely hopeless. If the mass strike, or
rather, mass strikes, and the mass struggle are to be successful they
must become a real *people's movement*, that is, the widest sections of
the proletariat must be drawn into the fight. Already in the
parliamentary form the might of the proletarian class struggle rests not
on the small, organised group but on the surrounding periphery of the
revolutionary-minded proletariat. If the social democrats were to enter
the electoral battle with their few hundred thousand organised members
alone, they would condemn themselves to futility. And although it is the
tendency of social democracy wherever possible to draw the whole great
army of its voters into the party organisation, its mass of voters after
thirty years experience of social democracy is not increased through the
growth of the party organisation, but on the contrary, the new sections
of the proletariat, won for the time being through the electoral
struggle, are the fertile soil for the subsequent seed of organisation.
Here the organisation does not supply the troops of the struggle, but
the struggle, in an ever growing degree, supplies recruits for the
organisation.

In a much greater degree does this obviously apply to direct political
mass action than to the parliamentary struggle. If the social democrats,
as the organised nucleus of the working class, are the most important
vanguard of the entire body of the workers and if the political clarity,
the strength, and the unity of the labour movement flow from this
organisation, then it is not permissible to visualise the class movement
of the proletariat as a movement of the organised minority. Every real,
great class struggle must rest upon the support and co-operation of the
widest masses, and a strategy of class struggle which does not reckon
with this co-operation, which is based upon the idea of the finely
stage-managed march out of the small, well-trained part of the
proletariat is foredoomed to be a miserable fiasco.

Mass strikes and political mass struggles cannot, therefore, possibly be
carried through in Germany by the organised workers alone, nor can they
be appraised by regular "direction" from the central committee of a
party. In this case, again -- exactly as in Russia -- they depend not so
much upon "discipline" and "training" and upon the most careful possible
regulation beforehand of the questions of support and cost, as upon a
real revolutionary, determined class action, which will be able to win
and draw into the struggle the widest circles of the unorganised
workers, according to their mood and their conditions.

The overestimate and the false estimate of the role of organisations in
the class struggle of the proletariat is generally reinforced by the
underestimate of the unorganised proletarian mass and of their political
maturity. In a revolutionary period, in the storm of great unsettling
class struggles, the whole educational effect of the rapid capitalist
development and of social democratic influences first shows itself upon
the widest sections of the people, of which, in peaceful times the
tables of the organised, and even election statistics, give only a faint
idea.

We have seen that in Russia, in about two years a great general action
of the proletariat can forthwith arise from the smallest partial
conflict of the workers with the employers, from the most insignificant
act of brutality of the government organs. Everyone, of course, sees and
believes that, because in Russia "the revolution" is there. But what
does that mean? It means that class feeling, the class instinct, is
alive and very active in the Russian proletariat, so that immediately
they regard every partial question of any small group of workers as a
general question, as a class affair, and quick as lightening they react
to its influence as a unity. While in Germany, France, Italy and Holland
the most violent trade-union conflicts call forth hardly any general
action of the working class -- and when they do, only the organised part
of the workers move -- in Russia the smallest dispute raises a storm.
That means nothing else however, than that at present -- paradoxical as
it may sound -- the class instinct of the youngest, least trained, badly
educated and still worse organised Russian proletariat is immeasurably
stronger than that of the organised, trained and enlightened working
class of Germany or of any other west European country. And that is not
to be reckoned a special virtue of the "young, unexhausted East" as
compared with the "sluggish West," but is simply a result of direct
revolutionary mass action.

In the case of the enlightened German worker the class consciousness
implanted by the social democrats is *theoretical and latent*: in the
period ruled by bourgeois parliamentarism it cannot, as a rule, actively
participate in a direct mass action; it is the ideal sum of the four
hundred parallel actions of the electoral sphere during the election
struggle, of the many partial economic strikes and the like. In the
revolution when the masses themselves appear upon the political
battlefield this class-consciousness becomes *practical and active*. A
year of revolution has therefore given the Russian proletariat that
"training" which thirty years of parliamentary and trade-union struggle
cannot artificially give to the German proletariat. Of course, this
living, active class feeling of the proletariat will considerably
diminish in intensity, or rather change into a concealed and latent
condition, after the close of the period of revolution and the erection
of a bourgeois-parliamentary constitutional state.

And just as surely, on the other hand, will the living revolutionary
class feeling, capable of action, affect the widest and deepest layers
of the proletariat in Germany in a period of strong political
engagement, and that the more rapidly and more deeply, more
energetically the educational work of social democracy is carried on
amongst them. This educational work and the provocative and
revolutionising effect of the whole present policy of Germany will
express itself in the circumstances that all those groups which at
present in their apparent political stupidity remain insensitive to all
the organising attempts of the social democrats and of the trade unions
will suddenly follow the flag of social democracy in a serious
revolutionary period. Six months of a revolutionary period will complete
the work of the training of these as yet unorganised masses which ten
years of public demonstrations and distribution of leaflets would be
unable to do. And when conditions in Germany have reached the critical
stage for such a period, the sections which are today unorganised and
backward will, in the struggle, prove themselves the most radical, the
most impetuous element, and not one that will have to be dragged along.
If it should come to mass strikes in Germany it will almost certainly
not be the best organised workers -- and most certainly not the printers
-- who will develop the greatest capacity for action, but the worst
organised or totally unorganised -- the miners, the textile workers, and
perhaps even the land workers.

In this way we arrive at the same conclusions in Germany in relation to
the peculiar tasks of *direction* in relation to the role of social
democracy in mass strikes, as in our analysis of events in Russia. If we
now leave the pedantic scheme of demonstrative mass strikes artificially
brought about by order of parties and trade unions, and turn to the
living picture of a peoples' movement arising with elementary energy,
from the culmination of class antagonisms and the political situation --
a movement which passes, politically as well as economically, into mass
struggles and mass strikes -- it becomes obvious that the task of social
democracy does not consist in the technical preparation and direction of
mass strikes, but, first and foremost, in the *political leadership* of
the whole movement.

The social democrats are the most enlightened, most class-conscious
vanguard of the proletariat. They cannot and dare not wait, in a
fatalist fashion, with folded arms for the advent of the "revolutionary
situation," to wait for that which in every spontaneous peoples'
movement, falls from the clouds. On the contrary, they must now, as
always, hasten the development of things and endeavour to accelerate
events. This they cannot do, however, by suddenly issuing the "slogan"
for a mass strike at random at any odd moment, but first and foremost,
by making clear to the widest layers of the proletariat the *inevitable
advent* of this revolutionary period, the inner *social factors* making
for it and the *political consequences* of it. If the widest proletarian
layer should be won for a political mass action of the social democrats,
and if, vice versa, the social democrats should seize and maintain the
real leadership of a mass movement -- should they become, in a
*political sense*, the rulers of the whole movement, then they must,
with the utmost clearness, consistency and resoluteness, inform the
German proletariat of their tactics and aims in the period of coming
struggle.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next: [VII. The Role of the Mass Strike in the Revolution](ch07.htm)

[Rosa Luxemburg Internet Archive](../../index.htm)

Last updated on: 10.10.15
