---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)  \> 
[Soc. & Pol. Struggle](index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Socialism and the Political Struggle                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### III

In the first chapter we endeavoured to explain historically the origin
of the conviction that socialism is incompatible with any "politics". We
saw that this conviction was based on Proudhon's and Bakunin's teaching
on the state, on the one hand, and on a certain inconsistency in our
Social-Democrats of the seventies, on the other. Moreover, it was
supported by the general tone of the background against which both the
tendencies mentioned above stood out. That background consisted, as we
said quoting Engels, in a mish-mash of manifold theories of the founders
of different socialist sects. The utopian socialists, we know, had an
entirely negative attitude to the political movements of the working
class, seeing in them nothing but "blind unbelief in the new Gospel".
This negative view of "politics" came to us with the teachings of the
utopians. Long before revolutionary movement of any strength began in
Russia, our socialists, like the "true" socialists in Germany at the end
of the forties (see the **Manifesto of the Communist Party**, p.32),
were ready "to hurl the traditional anathemas against liberalism,
against representative government, against bourgeois competition,
bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois liberty
and equality", forgetting entirely that all these attacks "presupposed
the existence of modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding
economic conditions of existence, and the political constitution adapted
thereto", i.e., the very conditions that it should still have been a
question of assuring in our country.[\[31\]](#f31){#a31}

As a result of all these influences there arose such a firm conviction
of the inexpediency of any political struggle except the revolutionary
struggle in the narrow and vulgar sense of the word, that we began to
regard with prejudice the socialist parties in Western Europe which saw
electoral campaigns, for instance, as a powerful means of educating and
organising the working masses. All the political and economic gains
those campaigns brought seemed to us unpardonable opportunism, a ruinous
deal with the demon of the bourgeois state, tantamount to renouncing
bliss in future socialist life. We ourselves did not even notice that
our theories were involving us in a vicious circle of insoluble
contradictions. We regarded the village commune as the point of
departure of Russia's social and economic development and, at the same
time, renouncing political struggle, we voluntarily deprived ourselves
of all possibility of safeguarding that commune against the present
destructive influences by state interference. We were thus forced to
remain indifferent spectators of a process which was destroying the very
foundation on which we wished to erect the edifice of the future.

We saw, however, that the logic of events had led the Russian movement
on to another road and forced the Russian revolutionaries, as
represented by the Narodnaya Volya party, to fight for political
influence and even dominance as one of the most powerfactors of economic
revolution. We also saw that having entered upon that road our movement
was growing to such an extent that the social and political theories of
different varieties of Proudhonism were too narrow and cramping for it.
The course of events peculiar to Russian social life clashed with the
course of the ideas dominating among our revolutionaries and thus
provoked a new trend of thought.

This trend, we said further, will not rid itself of its characteristic
contradictions until it merges with the incomparably deeper and wider
current of modern socialism. The Russian revolutionaries must adopt the
standpoint of Western Social-Democracy and break with "rebel" *theories*
just as a few years ago they renounced "rebel" *practice*, introducing a
new, *political* element into their programme. This will not be
difficult for them to do if they endeavour to adopt the correct view of
the political side of Marx s teaching and are willing to reconsider the
methods and immediate aims of their struggle by applying this new
criterion to them.

We saw as early as in the second chapter what false conclusions were
prompted by the philosophical and historical premises of modern
socialism. **Narodnaya Volya** itself apparently did not notice the
erroneousness of those conclusions and was inclined "even to defend
Dühring's sociological standpoint on the predominant influence of the
political and legal element in the social structure over the economic",
as P.L. Lavrov put it in describing the most recent tendencies in the
Russian revolutionary movement. [\[32\]](#f32){#a32} And it is only by
this inclination that we can explain the polemic contained in the home
review of Narodnaya Volya No. 6 against some kind of "immediate
interpreters of Marx's historical theory", who, according to the author,
based their views "mainly on Hegel's famous triad", not having "any
other inductive material" for their conclusions and explaining "Hegel's
law in the sense evil, merely in its extreme development, will lead to
good". [\[33\]](#f33){#a33} It is sufficient to acquaint oneself with
the programme of the German Social-Democrats or the French collectivists
to see how "Marx's historical theory" is understood by his West European
followers and, if you like, by his "immediate interpreters". We, for our
part, can assure our Russian comrades that these "interpreters"
understand "Hegel's law" by no means "in the sense that evil, merely in
its extreme development, will lead to good", and, besides, that they use
it as "*inductive* material" only when they study the history of German
philosophy, in which this law has a very prominent place and which, *in
any case*, it cannot be left out of, just as, according to the popular
saying, you cannot leave words out of a song. The passage we quoted is
an almost word-for-word repetition of the reproach addressed by Dühring
to Marx that in his historical scheme "the Hegelian negation of negation
plays, for want of better and clearer means, the role of a midwife with
whose help the future emerges from the womb of the present".
[\[34\]](#f34){#a34} But this trick has already received the punishment
it deserved from Engels, who showed the utter scientific worthlessness
of the former Berlin *Dozent's* works. Why, then, repeat other people's
errors and adopt, on such shifting grounds, a negative attitude towards
the greatest and most revolutionary social theory of the nineteenth
century? For without revolutionary theory there is no revolutionary
movement in the true sense of the word. Any class which strives for its
emancipation, any political party which aims at dominance, is
revolutionary only insofar as it represents the most progressive social
trends and consequently is a vehicle of the most progressive ideas of
its time. An idea which is inherently revolutionary is a kind of
dynamite which no other explosive in the world can replace. And as long
as our movement is under the banner of backward or erroneous theories it
will have revolutionary significance only by some, but by no means all
of its aspects. At the same time, without its members knowing it, it
will bear in itself the germs of reaction which will deprive it even of
that little significance in the more or less near future, because, as
Heine said,

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *New time needs a new garment\                                        |
| For the new job it's got to do*.                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

And indeed that really new time will come at last -- for our country
too.

Incorrect understanding of some principles of modern socialism is not,
however, the main obstacle preventing our revolutionary movement from
taking the road paved by the working class in the West. A closer
acquaintance with the literature of "Marxism" will show our socialists
what a powerful weapon they have deprived themselves of by refusing to
understand and master the theory of the great teacher of the "workers of
all countries". They will then see that our revolutionary movement, far
from losing anything, will gain a lot if the Russian Narodniks and the
Russian Narodnaya Volya at last become Russian Marxists and a new,
higher standpoint reconciles all the groups existing among us, which are
all right each in its own way, because despite their one-sidedness each
of them expresses a definite vital need of Russian social life.

Another obstacle prevents our movement from developing in the direction
just indicated. It consists in our lacking sense of proportion in
politics. Since the very beginning of our movement this has prevented
our revolutionaries from bringing their immediate tasks into line with
their strength and it is due to nothing else than lack of political
experience on the part of Russian public figures. Whether we went among
the people to disseminate socialist publications, settled in the
villages to organise the protesting elements of our peasantry or joined
directly in the fight against the representatives of absolutism, we
repeated one and the same mistake everywhere. We always overestimated
our strength and never fully took account of the resistance that would
be offered by the social environment, we hastened to raise a method of
action temporarily favoured by circumstances into a universal principle
precluding ail other ways and means. As a result, all our programmes
were in a state of absolutely unstable equilibrium which could be upset
by the most insignificant change in the surrounding atmosphere. We
changed those programmes almost every couple of years and could not keep
to anything *lasting* because we always kept to something *narrow* and
*one-sided*. Just as, according to Belinsky's words, Russian society had
experience of all literary trends even before it had any literature, so
the Russian socialist movement managed to try out all possible shades of
West European socialism despite the fact that it had not yet become a
movement of our working class.

The struggle against absolutism that Narodnaya Volya has undertaken will
undoubtedly help greatly to eliminate the onesidedness of the study
*groups* by bringing our revolutionaries out on to a broader path and
compelling them to strive to set up a real *party*. But in order to put
a stop to the continual changing of programmes, to rid themselves of
these habits of political nomads and to acquire intellectual stability
at last, the Russian revolutionaries must complete the criticism which
began with the rise of conscious political trends among them. They must
adopt a critical attitude to the very programme which has made necessary
the criticism of *all* previous programmes and theories. The "Narodnaya
Volya party" is the child of a time of transition. Its programme is the
last produced in the conditions which made our one-sidedness inevitable
and therefore legitimate. Although it broadens the political horizon of
the Russian socialists, this programme in itself is not yet free from
one-sidedness. The lack of sense of proportion in politics, of the
ability to line up the immediate aims of the party with its actual or
potential strength is also still conspicuous in it. The Narodnaya Volya
party reminds one of a man who is going along a real road but has no
idea of distances and therefore feels sure that he can leave "miles and
leagues behind -- twenty thousand leagues, ere night, covered in a
single flight". Practice will, of course, shatter his illusion, but that
shattering may cost him a great deal. It would be better for him to ask
himself whether seven-league strides do not belong to the realm of
fantasy.

By seven-league strides we mean the element of fantasy whose existence
in the programme referred to we have already pointed out and which was
manifested in the second issue of **Narodnaya Volya** by assurances
concerning the social-revolutionary (we do not say *socialist*) majority
in the future Russian Constituent Assembly, 55 and in No.8-9 by
considerations on "the seizure of power by the provisional revolutionary
government". We are profoundly convinced that this element of fantasy is
highly dangerous for the "Narodnaya Volya party" itself. Dangerous to it
as a socialist party because it diverts attention of the working class
from the immediate tasks in Russia; dangerous to it as a party which has
assumed the initiative of our emancipation movement because it will
alienate from the party great resources and forces which, in other
circumstances, would accrue to it out of the socalled society. Let us
explain this in greater detail.

To whom does Narodnaya Volya appeal, to whom can it and should it appeal
in fighting absolutism? "The enlistment in the organisation" --
Narodnaya Volya -- "of *individuals from the peasantry* capable of
joining it," we read in **Kalendar Narodnoi Voli**, [\[35\]](#f35){#a35}
"has naturally always been acknowledged as very desirable\.... But as
for a mass peasant organisation at present, that was considered
completely fantastic when our programme was drawn up, and, if we are not
mistaken, subsequent practice was unable to change the opinion of our
socialists on this subject." Perhaps the "Narodnaya Volya party" intends
to rely on the more progressive section of our labouring population,
i.e., on the town workers? It does actually attach great importance to
propaganda and organisation among them, it considers that "the urban
working population must be the object of the party's serious attention".
But the very reason on which it bases this necessity shows that in the
party's conception the town workers must be only one of the elements in
our revolutionary movement. They "are of particular significance for the
revolution, both by their position and by their relatively greater
maturity", the same document explains; "the success of the first attack
depends entirely on the conduct of the workers and the troops". So the
impending revolution will not be a working-class revolution in the full
sense of the term, but the workers must take part in it because they
"are of particular significance *for it*". Which other elements, then,
will be included in this movement? We have already seen that one of
these elements will be the "troops". but in the army "in present
conditions propaganda among the men is so difficult that great hope can
hardly be placed upon it. Action on *the officer corps* is far more
convenient: being more educated and having greater liberty they are more
susceptible to influence"! That is quite correct, of course, but we will
not stop at that for the moment, we will go further. Besides the workers
and "the officer corps", the Narodnaya Volya party has in mind the
liberals and "Europe", in relation to which "the policy of the party
must strive to ensure the sympathy of the peoples for the Russian
revolution, to rouse sympathy for the revolution among the European
public". To attain this aim "the party must make known to Europe all the
disastrous significance of Russian absolutism for European civilisation
itself, and also the party's true aims and the significance of our
revolutionary movement as the expression of the protest of the whole
nation". As far as the "liberals" are concerned, "we must point out,
without concealing our radicalism, that given the present setting of our
party tasks, our interests and theirs compel us to act jointly against
the government".

Thus we see that the Narodnaya Volya party relies not only, nor even
mainly, on the working and peasant classes. It also has in mind society
and the officer corps, which, in substance, is the very flesh and bone"
of that society. It wants to convince the liberal part of that society
that "given the present setting of our party tasks" the interests of
Russian liberalism coincide with those of the Russian
social-revolutionary party. What, then, does it do to that conviction
upon the Russian liberals? First of all it publishes the programme of
the Executive Committee which Says that "the *people's will* would be
sufficiently well expressed and Implemented by a Constituent Assembly
freely elected by universal suffrage and receiving instructions from the
electors". In its famous **Letter to Alexander III** the Executive
Committee also demanded "the convocation of representatives of the whole
Russian people to reconsider the existing forms of statehood and public
life and to refashion them according to the desires of the people".
[\[36\]](#f36){#a36} That programme does indeed coincide with the
interests of the Russian liberals, and in order to carry it out they
would probably be reconciled even to universal suffrage, which the
Executive Committee cannot fail to demand. In all this, the programme of
the said Committee displays far greater maturity than all those which
preceded it. But, not to mention such a huge blunder as to demand
freedom of assembly, of speech, of the press and of electoral programmes
only "as a temporary measure", let us recall other statements of the
Narodnaya Volya party. The party organ hastened to warn its readers that
the majority of the deputies to the Constituent Assembly would be
supporters of radical economic revolution. We have already said above
that this assurance was no more than a fiction invented to conciliate
incompatible elements in the Narodnaya Volya programme. Let us now
consider the printed expression of that assurance from the stand-point
of tactics. The question is: does an economic revolution suit the
interests of Russian liberalism? Does our liberal society sympathise
with the agrarian revolution which Narodnaya Volya says the peasant
deputies will aim at? West European history tells us most convincingly
that whenever the "red spectre" took at all threatening forms the
"liberals" were ready to seek protection in the embraces of the most
unceremonious military dictatorship. Did the terrorist organ think that
our Russian liberals would be an exception to this general rule? If so,
on what did it base its conviction? Did it also think that contemporary
"public opinion in Europe" was so imbued with socialist ideas that it
would sympathise with the convocation of a social-revolutionary
Constituent Assembly? Or did it think that although the European
bourgeoisie trembled at the red sprectre in their own countries they
would cheer its appearance in Russia? It goes without saying that it
thought nothing of the sort and forgot nothing of the sort. But why, in
that case, make such a risky statement? Or was the Narodnaya Volya party
organ so convinced of the inevitable realisation of its prophecy that it
considered it necessary to rouse the members of the organisation to take
steps corresponding to the importance of the anticipated event? Bearing
in mind the fact that the same organ declared work among the people
useless, we think the statement was intended rather to calm than to
rouse: a social-revolutionary majority in the Constituent Assembly was
expected *despite* the fact that the work referred to now recalls the
"Danaides filling bottomless barrels".

In itself the statement could have been regarded as unimportant,
especially as **Narodnaya Volya** itself had apparently given up its
exaggeratedly optimistic hopes about the future composition of the
Russian Constituent. We think so, because the leading article in No. 8-9
speaks of the economic revolution which, in the absence of
social-revolutionary initiative among the people themselves, must be
accomplished by the "provisional revolutionary government" before the
convocation of the Constituent Assembly. The author of the article quite
rightly sees such a revolution as the only guarantee that "the Zemsky
Sobor which is convoked will be attended by true representatives of the
people". Thus, **Narodnaya Volya**'s former illusion has been shattered
completely. But, unfortunately, it has only disappeared to give place to
a new one, still more harmful for the cause of the Narodnaya Volya
party. The element of fantasy in the programme has not been removed but
has only assumed a new form, being now called that very *"seizure of
power by the provisional revolutionary government"* which is supposed to
give the party the possibility to carry out the economic revolution
referred to. It is obvious that the new "setting of the party tasks" can
on no account impress upon either Russian liberalism or bourgeois Europe
the idea that they have common interests with the Russian revolutionary
movement. However downtrodden and crushed Russian society may be it is
by no means deprived of the instinct of self-preservation and in no case
will it voluntarily meet the "red spectre" half-way; to point out to it
such a formulation of the party tasks means to deprive oneself of its
support and to rely only on one's own strength. But is that strength
great enough to warrant the risk of alienating such an ally? Can our
revolutionaries really seize power and retain it, if only for a short
time, or is all talk of this nothing else than cutting the skin of a
bear that has not been killed and which, by force of circumstances, is
not even going to be killed? That is a question which has recently
become an urgent one for revolutionary Russia\....

Let us hasten to make a reservation. The previous pages must already
have convinced the reader that we do not belong to the opponents in
principle of such an act as the seizure of power by a revolutionary
party. In our opinion that is the last, and what is more, the absolutely
inevitable conclusion to be drawn from the political struggle which
every class striving for emancipation must undertake at a definite stage
in social development. Having gained political domination, a
revolutionary class will retain that domination and be relatively secure
against the blows of reaction only when it uses against reaction the
mighty weapon of state power. "Den Teufel halte, wer ihn halt! " says
Faust.

But there is no more difference between heaven and earth than between
the dictatorship of a class and that of a group of revolutionary
*raznochintsi*. This applies in particular to the dictatorShip of the
working class, whose present task is not only to overthrow the political
domination of the unproductive classes in society, but also to do away
with the anarchy now existing in production and consciously to organise
all functions of social and economic life. The mere *understanding* of
this task calls for an advanced working class with political experience
and education, a working class free from bourgeois prejudices and able
to discuss its situation by itself. In addition to this, its *solution*
presupposes that socialist ideas are spread among the proletariat and
that the proletariat is conscious of its own strength and confident in
victory. But *such* a proletariat *will not allow* even the sincerest of
its well-wishers to seize power. It will not allow it for the simple
reason that it has been to the school of political education with the
firm intention of finishing it at some time and coming forward as an
independent figure in the arena of historical life, instead of passing
eternally from one guardianship to another; it will not allow it because
such a guardianship would be unnecessary, as the proletariat could then
solve the problem of the socialist revolution itself; and finally it
will not allow it because such a guardianship would be harmful, for the
conscious participation of the producers in organising production cannot
be replaced by any conspiratorial skill, any daring or self-sacrifice on
the part of the conspirators. The mere thought that the social problem
can be solved in practice by anybody but the workers themselves shows
complete misunderstanding of this problem, irrespective of whether the
idea is held by an "Iron Chancellor" or a revolutionary organisation.
Once the proletariat has understood the conditions of its emancipation
and is mature to emancipate itself, it will take state power in its own
hands in order to finish off its enemies and build up social life, not,
of course, on the basis of *an*-archy, which would bring new disasters,
but of *pan*-archy, which will give all adult members of society the
possibility to take part in the discussion and settlement of social
matters. And until the working class is sufficiently developed to be
able to fulfil its great historical task, the duty of its supporters is
to accelerate the process of its development, to remove the obstacles
preventing its strength and its consciousness from growing, and not to
invent social experiments and vivisection, the outcome of which is
always more than doubtful.

That is how we understand the seizure of power in the socialist
revolution. Applying this point of view to Russian reality we must admit
that we by no means believe in the early possibility of a socialist
government in Russia.

Narodnaya Volya considers the contemporary "relation of political and
economic factors on Russian soil" particularly "advantageous" to the
socialists. We agree that it is more advantageous for them in Russia
than in India, Persia or Egypt, but it cannot be compared, of course,
with the social relations in Western Europe. And if Narodnaya Volya
arrives at its convictions by comparing our system not with the Egyptian
or the Persian, but with the French or the English system, then it has
made a very big mistake. The contemporary "relation" of social factors
"on Russian soil" is the cause of the ignorance and indifference of the
popular masses; when were such qualities advantageous for their
emancipation? Narodnaya Volya apparently presumes that this indifference
has already begun to disappear because among the people "there is
growing hatred of the privileged ruling estates and persistent striving
for a radical change in economic relations". But what comes of that
striving? "Hatred of the privileged estates" proves nothing at all; it
is often not accompanied by a single ray of political consciousness.
Furthermore, at the present time we must clearly distinguish between
*estate* consciousness and *class* consciousness, for the old division
into estates no longer corresponds to the economic relations in Russia
and is preparing to give place to formal equality of citizens in a
"legal state" If Narodnaya Volya considers the contemporary outlook of
our peasantry from the standpoint of the development of their *class*
and *political* consciousness, it will hardly persist in saying that the
relation between our social factors is advantageous to the cause of the
social revolution. For it certainly cannot consider "advantageous" to
that cause the rumours, for instance, circulating among the peasantry
about their own struggle against the government. No matter how strongly
"hatred of the ruling classes" is shown in these rumours, the fact that
the revolutionary movement itself is attributed by the peasants to
scheming by the serfdom-minded nobility and the officials is evidence
that the "provisional revolutionary government" will be in great danger
when the people begins "winning economic equality from those who have
been exploiting and oppressing it for centuries". Then the relation
between the factors now interesting us will perhaps display rather
disadvantageous qualities for the temporarily victorious conspirators.
And then, what is meant by "winning economic equality"?

Is it enough for that to expropriate the big landowners, capitalists and
businessmen? Does it not require production itself to be organised in a
definite manner? If so, are Russia's present economic relations
favourable to such organisation? In other words, does the "economic
factor" offer us much chance of success? We do not think so, and for the
following reason. Any organisation presupposes in what is to be
organised certain qualities determined by the purpose and character of
the organisation. The socialist organisation of production implies such
a character of the economic relations as will make that organisation the
logical conclusion of the entire previous development of the country and
is therefore distinguished by an extremely significant definiteness. In
other words socialist organisation, like any other, requires the
appropriate basis. But that basis does not exist in Russia. The old
foundations of national life are too narrow, heterogeneous and
one-sided, and moreover too shaky, and new ones are as yet only being
formed. The objective social conditions of production necessary for
socialist organisation have not yet matured, and that is why the
producers themselves have not yet either the striving or the ability for
such organisation: our peasantry can yet neither understand nor fulfil
this task. Therefore, the "provisional government" will have not to
"sanction", but to *carry out* "the economic revolution", granted that
it is not swept away by a wave of the popular movement, granted that the
producers are obedient enough.

You cannot create by decrees conditions which are alien to the very
character of the existing economic relations. The "provisional
government" will have to reconcile itself to what exists, to take as the
basis of its reforming activity what it is given by present Russian
reality. And on that narrow and shaky foundation the edifice of
socialist organisation will be built by a government which will include:
first, town workers, as yet little prepared for such a difficult task;
second, representatives of our revolutionary youth, who have always kept
aloof from practical life; third, the "officer corps", whose knowledge
of economics is certainly subject to doubt. We do not want to make the
quite probable supposition that, besides all these elements, liberals
will also find their way into the provisional government, and they will
not sympathise with, but hinder the social-revolutionary "setting of the
party tasks". We suggest that the reader merely weigh up the
circumstances we have just enumerated and then ask himself: has an
"economic revolution" which begins in such circumstances much chance of
success? Is it true that the present "relation of political and economic
factors on Russian soil" is favourable to the cause of the socialist
revolution? Is not the confidence that this relation is advantageous one
of the fictions borrowed from the old anarchist and rebel outlook and
carried to impossible extremes in the programme of the new *political*
party? Yet it is this fiction that determines the most "immediate tasks"
of the party and underlies the desire for the immediate "seizure of
power" a striving that terrifies our society and makes the entire
activity of our revolutionaries one-sided!

Perhaps it will be objected that Narodnaya Volya does not even think of
undertaking the socialist organisation of society immediately after
seizing power, that the "economic revolution" it plans is intended only
to educate the people for a future socialist revolution. Let us see
whether this supposition is possible, and if so, what conclusions follow
from it.

The leading article of No.8-9 of **Narodnaya Volya** speaks of the
economic equality which will be "won" by the people itself, or, if the
people lacks initiative, created by the provisional government. We have
already said that so-called economic equality is possible only with a
socialist organisation of production. But let us assume that **Narodnaya
Volya** considers it possible under other circumstances too, that
economic equality, in its opinion, will be sufficiently guaranteed by
the transfer of the land and the instruments of production to the
ownership of the working people. Such an opinion would be nothing but a
return to the old Narodnik ideals of Zemlya i Volya, and from the
economic standpoint it would show the same weaknesses that characterised
those ideals. The mutual relations of individual village communes, the
conversion of the product of the commune members' labour into
commodities and the capitalist accumulation connected with it would
threaten to make that "equality" extremely precarious! With the
independence of the *mir* "as an economic and administrative unit", with
"broad territorial self-government guaranteed by the electivity of all
offices", and "the ownership of the land by the people" which the
Executive Committee's programme demands, the central government *would
not be able* to take steps to consolidate that equality, even if we
assume that it would devise measures to abrogate not only the written
laws of the Russian Empire, but the laws of commodity production itself.
And anyhow, it would be reluctant to take such measures, for it would
consist of representatives of the "economically and politically
emancipated people" whose ideals would be expressed, at the best, by the
words "Land and Freedom" and would leave no room for any organisation of
national (let alone *international*) production.

Let us suppose that in view of this danger Narodnaya Volya's
"provisional government" will not hand over the power it has seized to
the representatives of the people but will become a permanent
government. Then it will be faced with the following alternative: either
it will have to remain an indifferent spectator of the slow decay of the
"economic equality" it has established, or it will be obliged to
*organise* national production. It will have to fulfil this difficult
task either in the spirit of modern socialism, in which it will be
hindered by its own unpracticality as well as by the present stage of
development of national labour and the workers' own habits; or it will
have to seek salvation in the ideals of patriarchal and authoritarian
communism", only modifying those ideals so that national production is
managed not by the Peruvian "sons of the sun" and their officials but by
a socialist caste. But even now the Russian people is too far developed
for anybody to flatter himself with the hope that such experiments on it
could be successful. Moreover, there is no doubt that under such a
guardianship the people, far from being educated for socialism, would
even lose all capacity for further progress or would retain that
capacity only thanks to the appearance of the very economic *in*equality
which it would be the revolutionary government's immediate aim to
abolish. Not to mention the influence of international relations or the
impossibility of Peruvian communism even in Eastern Europe in the
nineteenth or the twentieth century.

Anyhow, why speak so much of the *results* of the seizure of power by
our revolutionaries? Is that seizure itself probable or even possible?
In our opinion the probability is very small, so small that the seizure
of power may be considered as absolutely impossible. Our "thinking
proletariat" has already done much for the emancipation of its
motherland. It has shaken absolutism, aroused political interest among
society, sown the seed of socialist propaganda among our working class.
It is intermediary between the higher classes of society and the lower,
having the education of the former and the democratic instincts of the
latter. This position has eased for it the diversified work of
propaganda and agitation. But this same position gives it very little
hope of success in a conspiracy to seize power. For such a conspiracy
talent, energy and education are not enough: the conspirators need
connections, wealth and an influential position in society. And that is
what our revolutionary intelligentsia lacks. It can make good these
deficiencies only by allying itself with other dissatisfied elements of
Russian society. Let us suppose that its plans actually meet with the
sympathy of those elements, that rich landowners, capitalists,
officials, staff and senior officers join in the conspiracy. There will
then be more probability of the conspiracy being a success, although
that probability will still be very small -- just remember the outcome
of most of the famous conspiracies in history. But the main danger to
the *socialist* conspiracy will come not from the existing government,
but from the members of the conspiracy itself. The influential and
high-placed personages who have joined it may be sincere socialists only
by a "fortunate coincidence". But as regards the majority of them, there
can be no guarantee that they will not wish to use the power they have
seized for purposes having nothing in common with the interests of the
working class. And once the conspirators deviate from the socialist aim
of the conspiracy it can be considered not only useless but even harmful
for the social development of the country; for hatred of absolutism does
not warrant sympathy for the successes of the "most modern Seyans", as
Stepnyak puts it in his well-known book, who would wish to use the
conspiracy in their own interests. Thus, the more sympathy a conspiracy
of the socialist intelligentsia to seize power in the immediate future
meets among influential spheres, i.e., the greater the probability of
its outward success, the more open to doubt its results will be;
contrariwise, the more such a conspiracy is confined to our socialist
"intelligentsia", i.e., the less the probability of its success, the
less doubt there will be about its results, as far as the conspirators'
intentions are concerned. Everything leads us to think that at present a
Russian socialist conspiracy would be threatened with a failure of the
second kind rather than of the first.

Considering all that has been said we think that only one aim of the
Russian socialists would not be fantastic now: to achieve free political
institutions, on the one hand, and to create elements for the setting up
of the future *workers' socialist party* of Russia, on the other. They
must put forward the demand for a democratic constitution which shall
guarantee the workers the "rights of citizen" as well as the "rights of
man" and give them, by universal suffrage, the possibility to take an
active part in the political life of the country. Without trying to
scare anybody with the yet remote "red spectre", such a political
programme would arouse sympathy for our revolutionary party among all
those who are not systematic enemies of democracy; it could be
subscribed to by very many representatives of our liberalism as well as
by the socialists. [\[37\]](#f37){#a37} And whereas the seizure of power
by some secret revolutionary organisation will always be the work only
of that organisation and of those who are initiated in its plans,
agitation for the programme mentioned would be a matter for the whole of
Russian society, in which it would intensify the conscious striving for
political emancipation. Then the interests of the liberals would indeed
"force" them to "act jointly with the socialists against the
government", because they would cease to meet in revolutionary
publications the assurance that the overthrow of absolutism would be the
signal for a social revolution in Russia. At the same time another less
timid and more sober section of liberal society would no longer see
revolutionaries as unpractical youths who set themselves unrealisable
and fantastic plans. This view, which is disadvantageous for
revolutionaries, would give place to the respect of society not only for
their heroism but also for their political maturity. This sympathy would
gradually grow into active support, or more probably into an independent
social movement, and then the hour of absolutism's fall would strike at
last. The socialist party would play an extremely honourable and
beneficial role in this emancipation movement. Its glorious past, its
selflessness and energy would give weight to its demands and it would at
least stand chances of thus winning *for the people* the possibility of
political development and education, and *for itself* the right to
address its propaganda openly to the people and to organise them openly
into a separate party.

But that is not enough: Or more exactly, it is unachievable without
simultaneous action of another kind and in another sphere. Without might
there is no right. Every constitution -- according to Lassalle's
splendid expression -- corresponds or strives to correspond to the
"*real, factual relation of forces in the country*". That is why our
socialist intelligentsia must concern itself with changing the factual
relations of Russian social forces in favour of the working class even
in the pre-constitutional period. Otherwise the fall of absolutism will
by no means justify the hopes placed in it by the Russian socialists or
even democrats. Even in a constitutional Russia, the demands of the
people may be left completely unattended to or satisfied only as far as
is necessary to allow them to pay more taxes which they are now almost
unable to do as a result of the rapacity of the state economic
management. The socialist party itself, having won for the liberal
bourgeoisie freedom of speech and action, may find itself in an
"exceptional" position similar to that of German Social-Democracy today.
In politics, only he may count on the gratitude of his allies of
yesterday, now his enemies, who has nothing more serious to count on.

Fortunately, the Russian socialists can base their hopes on a firmer
foundation. They can and must place their hopes first and foremost in
the working class. The strength of the working class -- as of any other
class -- depends, among other things, on the clarity of its political
consciousness, its cohesion and its degree of organisation. It is these
elements of its strength that must be influenced by our socialist
intelligentsia. The latter must become the leader of the working class
in the impending emancipation movement, explain to it its political and
economic interests and also the interdependence of those interests and
must prepare it to play an independent role in the social life of
Russia. They must exert all their energy so that in the very opening
period of the constitutional life of Russia our working class will be
able to come forward as a separate party with a definite social and
political programme. The detailed elaboration of that programme must, of
course, be left to the workers themselves, but the intelligentsia must
elucidate for them its principal points, for instance, a radical review
of the present agrarian relations, the taxation system and factory
legislation, state help for producers' associations, and so forth. All
this can be done only by intensive work among at least the most advanced
sections of the working class, by oral and printed propaganda and the
organisation of workers' socialist study groups. It is true that these
tasks have always held a more or less prominent place in the programmes
of our socialists, and **Kalendar Narodnoi Voli** can convince us that
they were not forgotten even in the heat of the bitterest fight against
the government (see *Preparatory Work of the Party* in section *C, Urban
Workers*). But we suggest that everybody who is acquainted with our
revolutionary movement should recall and compare how much energy and
money was wasted on destructive work and how much was devoted to
training elements for the future *workers' socialist party*. We are not
accusing anybody, but we think that the distribution of our
revolutionary forces was too one-sided. Yet it would be vain for us to
try to explain this by the quality of the revolutionary forces
themselves or of the elements of the working class which, according to
their own programme, they should have influenced. The appearance and
success of such publications as **Zerno** and **Rabochaya Gazeta** show
that our revolutionaries have not lost their inclination for propaganda,
and our working people are not indifferent to it. Of course these
publications made mistakes, at times serious ones, but only he who does
nothing makes no mistakes. The main trouble is that in their
publications one does not see any of the energy with which printed
propaganda is conducted among "intellectual" sections of society, that
when a print-shop is closed by the police a new one is not opened in its
stead, that when it is impossible to publish them in Russia they are not
transferred abroad, and so forth. Of all the journals from abroad -- and
we had a fair number of them -- **Rabotnik** alone wrote for the people
and that was the great merit of its publishers. But **Rabotnik** has
already been closed for a long time and we have heard nothing of new
attempts of this kind, with, say, a new programme, better suited to the
changed views of the Russian socialists. What has been published here,
in Russia, for the workers besides **Zerno** and **Rabochaya Gazeta?**
Absolutely nothing. Not a single booklet, not a single pamphlet.
[\[38\]](#f38){#a38} And that at a time when the revolutionary movement
has centred universal attention upon itself, and the people, grasping
avidly at the rumours and opinions, have been wondering anxiously: What
do these people want? Can one be astonished, after this, at the absurd
answers to this question with which for lack of better ones, they are
sometimes satisfied? We repeat: we are not accusing *anybody*, we advise
*everybody* to pay attention to this aspect of the matter so as to make
up for the omission in time. [\[39\]](#f39){#a39}

Thus, the struggle for political freedom, on the one hand, and the
preparation of the working class for its future independent and
offensive role, on the other, such, in our opinion, is the only possible
"setting of party tasks" at present. To bind together in one two so
fundamentally different matters as the overthrow of absolutism and the
socialist revolution, to wage revolutionary struggle in the belief that
these elements of social development will *coincide* in the history of
our country *means to put off the advent of both*. But it depends on us
to *bring* these two elements *closer together*. We must follow the
splendid example of the German Communists who, as the **Manifesto**
says, fight "with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary
way, against the absolute monarchy", and yet "never cease, for a single
instant, to instil into the working class the dearest possible
recognition of the hostile antagonism between bourgeoisie and
proletariat". Acting thus, the Communists wanted "the bourgeois
revolution in Germany" to "be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution".

The present position of bourgeois societies and the influence of
international relations on the social development of each civilised
country entitle us to hope that the social emancipation of the Russian
working class will follow very quickly upon the fall of absolutism. If
the German bourgeoisie "*came too late*", the Russian has come still
later, and its domination cannot be a long one. Only the Russian
revolutionaries should not, in their turn, begin "too late" the
preparation of the working class, a matter which has now become of
absolute urgency.

Let us make a reservation to avoid misunderstandings. We do not hold the
view, which as we have seen was ascribed to Marx's school rather than it
existed in reality, and which alleges that the socialist movement cannot
obtain support from our peasantry until the peasant has been turned into
a landless proletarian and the village commune has disintegrated under
the influence of capitalism. We think that on the whole the Russian
peasantry would show great sympathy for any measure aiming at the
so-called "nationalisation of the land". Given the possibility of any at
all free agitation among the peasants, [\[40\]](#f40){#a40} they would
also sympathise with the socialists, who naturally would not be slow in
introducing into their programme the demand for a measure of that kind.
But we do not exaggerate the strength of our socialists or ignore the
obstacles, the opposition which they will inevitably encounter from that
quarter in their work. For that reason, and *for that reason only*, we
think that for the beginning they should concentrate their main
attention on the industrial centres. The rural population of today,
living in backward social conditions is not only less capable of
conscious political *initiative* than the industrial workers, it is also
less *responsive* to the movement which our revolutionary intelligentsia
has begun. It has greater difficulty in mastering the socialist
teachings, because its living conditions are too much unlike the
conditions which gave birth to those teachings. And besides, the
peasantry is now going through a difficult, critical period. The
previous "ancestral foundations" of its economy are crumbling, "the
ill-lated village commune itself is being discredited in its eyes", as
is admitted even by such "ancestral" organs of Narodism as **Nedelya**
(see No. 39, the article by Mr. N.Z. *In Our Native Parts*); and the new
forms of labour and life are only in the process of formation, and this
creative process is more intensive in the industrial centres. Like water
which washes away the soil in one place and forms new sediments and
deposits in others, the process of Russian social development is
creating new social formations by destroying the age-old forms of the
peasants' relation to the land and to one another. These new social
formations contain the embryo of a new social movement which alone can
end the exploitation of Russia's working population. The industrial
workers, who are more developed and have higher requirements and a
broader outlook than the peasantry, will join our revolutionary
intelligentsia in its struggle against absolutism, and when they have
won political freedom they will organise into a workers' socialist party
whose task will be to begin systematic propaganda of socialism among the
peasantry. We say *systematic propaganda* because isolated opportunities
of propaganda must not be missed even at present. It is hardly necessary
to add that our socialists would have to change the distribution of
their forces among the people if a strong independent movement made
itself felt among the peasantry.

That is the "programme" which life itself suggests to the Russian
revolutionary socialist party. Will the party be able to carry out of
this programme? Will it be prepared to give up its fantastic plans and
notions, which, it must be admitted, have a great appeal to sentiment
and imagination? It is as yet difficult to answer that question with
certitude. The *Announcement of the Publication of **Vestnik Narodnoi
Voli*** speaks of the political tasks of the revolutionary party only in
the most general terms. **Vestnik**'s editorial board describes those
aims as "absolutely definite" and apparently does not consider it
necessary to define them again in its announcement. That is why there is
ground for fear that it will not consider it necessary either to ask
itself whether the "absolutely definite conditions" of present Russian
actuality correspond to the "absolutely definite aims" of the Narodnaya
Volya party. In that case the new publication will leave unsatisfied the
most urgent need of our revolutionary literature, the need for a
critical reconsideration of obsolete programmes and traditional methods
of action. But we hope that the future will dissipate our fears. We wish
to hope that the new publication will take a sober view of our
revolutionary party's tasks, on whose fulfilment the party's future
depends. Social life will be just as pitiless to the party's present
illusions as it was to those of our "rebels" and propagandists. *It is
better to follow its directions now than to pay for its stern lessons
later by splits and new disappointments*.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### Footnotes

[\[31\]](#a31){#f31} What is said here does not apply, however, to the
group which published **Narodnoye Dyelo** in Geneva, a group which
repeatedly affirmed its negative attitude to the "theory of political
non-interference".

[\[32\]](#a32){#f32} See the article *View of the Past and the Present
of Russian Socialism*, **Kalendar Narodnoi Voli, 1883**, p.109.

[\[33\]](#a33){#f33} \[Note to the 1905 edition.\] Subsequently, our
"legal" N. Mikhailovsky and Bros., repeated this nonsense in all keys.
It must be noted in general that in their disputes with us these
gentlemen could think of nothing new in comparison with what was written
against us in *illegal* literature. Let anybody who wants to convince
himself of this read Tikhomirov's article *What Can We Expect from the
Revolution?* in the second issue of **Vestnik Narodnoi Voli** and
compare it with the arguments Beltov had to refute much later in his
book. "Illegal" thought long ago outstripped "legal" thought in our
country.

[\[34\]](#a34){#f34} See **Kritische Geschichte der Nationaloekonomie
und des Sozialismus**, dritte Auflage, S.498.

[\[35\]](#a35){#f35} *Preparatory Work of the Party*, p.129, note.
\[Plekhanov's italics\]

[\[36\]](#a36){#f36} See *Letter to Alexander III*, **Kalendar Narodnoi
Voli**, p.14.

[\[37\]](#a37){#f37} \[Note to the 1905 edition.\] The sympathy of
"society" is very important for us and we can -- or more exactly we had
many chances to -- win it without changing one iota of our programme.
But, of course, it requires tact to make the possibility a reality, and
that is what we have not always got. For instance, we sometimes allow
ourselves to abuse "capital" about, though, or course, not because of,
its "rebellion". Marx would never have made such a gross tactical
blunder. He would have considered it worthy of Karl Grün and other "true
socialists".

[\[38\]](#a38){#f38} \[Note to the 1905 edition\] From this we see that
the idea of a popular Publication is by no means a novelty in our
literature. But this did not prevent it from seeming a dangerous novelty
to many comrades *no further back than on the eve of our Second
Congress*, when I was almost its only supporter on the staff of
**Iskra**. This idea has now been practically realised -- with greater
or lesser success. Better late than never. But if you could hear,
reader, what amazing arguments were brought out against this idea in the
not-far-off time just mentioned, you would exclaim, like Faust: Wie weh,
wie weh, wie weh!

[\[39\]](#a39){#f39} "This year," we read in the **Supplement to *Listok
of N. V.*** No.1 (1883, p.61), "there was a whole series of strikes
which, thanks to the workers' lack of organisation, were mostly
failures! "

[\[40\]](#a40){#f40} \[Note to the 1905 edition.\] i.e., under a
constitution.

 \
[Top of the page](#top)\
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.10.2003
