---
layout: default
title: 
---
####  

# History of the World Crisis

## Lecture 1:  The World Crisis and the Peruvian Proletariat

by

**J. C. MARIATEGUI**

** **

**Delivered to the "Gonzales Prada" People's University,**

**at the Peruvian Student Federation hall, Lima, on June 15, 1923.**

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Translated by:]{.info} Juan R. Fajardo, 2016.\
[Source of the text:]{.info} Translated from *Historia de la crisis
mundial*, in *Obras Completas*, volume 8,
https://www.marxists.org/espanol/mariateg/oc/historia_de_la_crisis_mundial/index.htm\
[Editorial Note:]{.info} This text is available in print as part of: 
José Carlos Mariátegui, ***[History of the World Crisis and Other
Writings](../../../../admin/books/mariategui/index.htm)***, Marxists
Internet Archive Publications (2017); ISBN 978-0-692-88676-2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

**I**n this lecture -- let us call it a conversation rather than a
lecture -- I will limit myself to laying out the course's program, as
well as some thoughts on the need to spread knowledge of the world
crisis among the proletariat.

Unfortunately, in Peru there is a lack of an educating press which will
follow the development of this great crisis with attentiveness,
intelligence, and an ideological conviction; likewise, there is a lack
of university professors, of José Ingenieros' sort, capable of being
passionate about the ideas of renewal which are currently changing the
world, and of freeing themselves from the influence and prejudices of
conservative and bourgeois culture and education; there is a lack of
socialist and syndicalist groups, in possession of their own instruments
of popular culture, and thus capable of making the people interested in
studying the crisis. The only popular educational institution, with a
revolutionary spirit, is this institution-in-formation, the People's
University. It thus falls to it, beyond the modest plane of its initial
work, to present contemporary reality to the people, to explain to the
people that it is living through one of the greatest and most
transcendental times in history, and infect the people with the fruitful
restlessness which currently moves the other civilized peoples of the
world.

In this great contemporary crisis, the proletariat is not a spectator;
it is an actor. In it the fate of the world proletariat is to be
resolved. From it -- according to all odds and predictions -- the
proletarian civilization, the socialist civilization, will emerge,
destined to succeed the declining, decadent, moribund capitalist,
individualist, and bourgeois civilization. Now, more than ever, the
proletariat needs to know what happens in the world. It cannot know it
by way of the fragmented, occasional, homeopathic reports of the daily
cable -- in most instances, badly translated, and worse written --
coming always from reactionary agencies charged with discrediting the
Revolution's parties, organizations, and men, and of discouraging and
disorienting the world proletariat.

In the European crisis the destinies of the workers of the world are in
play. The crisis' development should thus interest Peruvian workers and
the workers of the Far East alike. The crisis has Europe as its primary
theater, but the crisis of European institutions is the crisis of the
institutions of Western civilization. And, Peru, like the other
countries of the Americas, moves within the orbit of that civilization,
not only because we are dealing with countries which are politically
independent but economically colonial, tied to cart of British, or
American, or French, capitalism, but also because our culture is
European, and our institutions European are of the European type. And,
it is precisely these democratic institutions -- which we copied from
Europe -- and this culture -- which we also copied from Europe -- which,
in Europe, are now in a period of definitive, total, crisis. Above all,
capitalist society has internationalized humanity's life. It has forged
material bonds between all peoples which establish an inevitable
solidarity between them. Internationalism is not an ideal, it is a
historical reality. Progress causes the peoples' interests, ideas,
customs, and regimes to unify and comingle. Peru, like other American
countries, is therefore not outside the crisis; it is within it. The
world crisis has already echoed amongst these peoples, and, of course,
it shall continue to echo. A period of reaction in Europe will also be a
period of reaction in America. A period of revolution in Europe will
also be a period of revolution in America. Over a century ago, when
humanity's life was not as unified as it is today, when there did not
exist the means of communication which exist today, when nations did not
have the immediate and constant contact they have today, and when we
were but distant spectators to European events, the French Revolution
gave birth to the War of Independence and the emergence of these
republics. This memory is enough for us to realize the speed with which
the transformation of society shall be reflected in American societies.
Those who say that Peru, and America in general, live far removed from
the European revolution, have no notion of contemporary life, have no --
not even an approximate -- understanding of history. These people are
surprised that Europe's most advanced ideals should make it to Peru;
but, by contrast, they are not surprised that the airplane, the ocean
liner, the wireless telegraph, the radio -- in short, all the most
advanced expressions of Europe's material advance -- make it. There
would be the same reason for ignoring the socialist movement as there
would be for ignoring Einstein's theory of relativity. I am sure that it
would not occur to the most reactionary of our intellectuals -- almost
all are impenetrable reactionaries -- that the new physics, of which
Einstein is the most eminent and greatest representative, ought to be
banned from study and dissemination.

If the proletariat in general needs to learn about the great aspects of
the world crisis, this need is even greater in that socialist,
Labourite, syndicalist, or libertarian part of the proletariat which
makes up its vanguard; in that more combative and more conscious, more
fighting, and more prepared, part of the proletariat; in that part of
the proletariat which is in charge of the leadership of the great
proletarian actions; in that part of the proletariat to which falls the
historical role of representing the Peruvian proletariat in the present
social moment; in short, in that part of the proletariat which, whatever
it particular credo, has class consciousness, has revolutionary
consciousness. I dedicate my dissertations, above all, to this vanguard
of the Peruvian proletariat. No one needs to study the world crisis more
than the vanguard proletarians. I have no pretensions of coming to this
free rostrum, of a free university, to teach them the history of that
world crisis, but to myself study it with them. I do not teach you from
this stage, comrades, the history of the world crisis; I study it with
you. I have, in this study, but the very modest merit of bringing to it
personal observations from three and one-half years of European living,
in other words, of the three and one-half climactic years of the crisis,
and the echoes of contemporary European thinking.

I specially invite the vanguard of the proletariat to study the process
of the world crisis with me, for several very important reasons. These I
will briefly enumerate. The first reason is that the revolutionary
preparation, the revolutionary culture, and the revolutionary
orientation of that proletarian vanguard have been formed on the basis
of the socialist, syndicalist, and anarchist literature from before the
European war, or prior, at least, to the climactic period of the crisis.
Generally, it is outdated socialist, syndicalist, and libertarian books
that circulate among us. Here, a little is known of the classic
literature of socialism and of syndicalism. The new revolutionary
literature is unknown. Revolutionary culture here is a classical
culture, aside from being -- as you well know, comrades -- a new, very
unformed, very disorganized, very incomplete culture. All that pre-war
socialist and syndicalist literature is now being revised. And that
revision is not one imposed at the whim of theoreticians, but by the
force of events. That literature, therefore, cannot be used without the
benefit of an inventory. Naturally, it is not that it is no longer exact
in its principles, it its foundations, in all that there is in it that
is ideal and eternal, but that it has often ceased to be exact in its
tactical inspirations, in its historical considerations, in all that
means action, procedure, or means of struggle. The workers' goal remains
the same, what have necessarily changed, due to the latest historical
events, are the roads chosen to arrive at, even just approach, that
ideal goal. It is from this that the study of these historical events
and of their significance becomes indispensable to workers who are
militants in class-conscious organizations.

Comrades, you know that the European proletarian forces are divided into
two great camps: reformists and revolutionaries. There is a reformist,
collaborationist, evolutionist Workers' International, and another
maximalist, anti-collaborationist, revolutionary Workers' International.
Between the one and the other, there has attempted to emerge an
intermediate International, but it has ended up by making common cause
with the former against the latter. On one side or the other there are
various hues, but there are clearly and unmistakably but two sides. The
side of those who wish to bring about socialism by collaborating
politically with the bourgeoisie, and the side of those who seek to
bring about socialism by seizing political power entirely for the
proletariat. Of course, the existence of these two sides comes from the
existence of two different views, two opposed views, two antithetical
views, of the current historical moment. One part of the proletariat
believes that the moment is not a revolutionary one, that the
bourgeoisie has not yet played out its historical role, that, on the
contrary, the bourgeoisie is still strong enough to hold on to political
power; that, in short, the hour of social revolution has not yet
arrived. Another part of the proletariat believes that the current
historical moment is revolutionary, that the bourgeoisie is incapable of
rebuilding the social wealth destroyed by the war, and incapable,
therefore, of solving the problems of peace; that the war has brought
about a crisis whose solution cannot be but a proletarian solution, a
socialist solution, and that, with the Russian Revolution, the social
revolution has already begun.

There are, then, two proletarian armies because there are within the
proletariat two opposing views of the historical moment, two different
interpretations of the world crisis. The numerical strength of one or
the other of the proletarian armies is dependent on whether or not
events appear to confirm its respective historical view. It is because
of this that thinkers, theoreticians, studious men of one and the other
proletarian armies struggle above all to delve deeply into the meaning
of the crisis, to understand its character, to discover its
significance.

Before the war, two tendencies shared predominance among the
proletariat: the socialist tendency, and the syndicalist tendency. The
socialist tendency was, mostly, reformist, social-democratic,
collaborationist. The socialists thought that social revolution's hour
was far off, and fought for gradual conquest through legalistic action
and governmental, or at least legislative, collaboration. In some
countries this activity excessively weakened the revolutionary will and
spirit of socialism. Socialism was considerably bourgeoisified. As a
reaction against this bourgeoisification of socialism, we had
syndicalism. Syndicalism countered the political activity of the
socialist parties with the direct action of the unions. The
proletariat's most revolutionary and intransigent spirits found a home
in syndicalism. But, deep down, syndicalism also turned out to be
collaborationist and reformist. Syndicalism also was dominated by a
union bureaucracy lacking a true revolutionary psychology. And,
syndicalism and socialism showed themselves to be more or less in
solidarity and conjoined in some countries, such as Italy, where the
Socialist Party did not take part in the government and remained loyal
to other formal principles of independence. Such as it is, the more or
less contending, or more or less close tendencies -- depending on the
country -- were two: syndicalist and socialist. It is to this period of
social struggle that the revolutionary literature which has fed the
minds of our leading proletarians belongs.

But, the situation has changed after the war. The proletarian camp, as
we have just recalled, is no longer divided into socialists and
syndicalists, but into reformists and revolutionaries. First, we have
witnessed a schism, a split, in the socialist camp. One part of
socialism has held fast in its social-democratic, collaborationist
course; the other part has followed an anti-collaborationist,
revolutionary course. And, it is this part of socialism which, in order
to set itself apart from the other, has adopted the name of communism.
The split has also taken place in the same way in the syndicalist camp.
One part of the unions supports the social-democrats, and the other
supports the communists. The shape of European social struggle has,
therefore, shifted radically. We have seen many intransigent pre-war
syndicalists head toward reformism. We have, by contrast, seen others
follow communism. And -- as comrade Fonkén[^\[1\]^](#n1){#1} recalled in
a conversation not long ago -- among these can be counted the greatest
and most illustrious theorist of syndicalism: the Frenchman, Georges
Sorel. Sorel -- whose death has meant bitter mourning for the French
proletariat and intelligentsia-- gave his allegiance to the Russian
Revolution and to the men of the Russian Revolution.

Thus, here, as in Europe, the proletarians have to divide, not into
syndicalists and socialists -- an anachronistic classification -- but
into collaborationists and anti-collaborationists, into reformists and
maximalists. But, in order for this classification to take place clearly
and coherently, it is indispensable that the proletariat knows and
understands the broader features of the great contemporary crisis.
Otherwise, confusion is inevitable.

I hold to the opinion of those who believe that humanity is living
through a revolutionary period. I am convinced of the approaching
decline of all social-democratic theses, of all reformist theses, and of
all evolutionist theses.

Before the war, these theses were understandable because they
corresponded to different historical conditions. Capitalism was in
apogee. Production was superabundant. Capitalism could still allow
itself the luxury of making successive economic concessions to the
proletariat, and its margins of utility were such that the formation of
a middle class, of a petty bourgeoisie which enjoyed a comfortable
life-style was possible. The European laborer earns enough to eat
modestly, and in some countries, such as England and Germany, he could
satisfy some needs of the spirit. There was not, then, an atmosphere for
revolution. After the war, everything has changed. Europe's social
wealth has, in great measure, been destroyed. Capitalism, which was
responsible for the war, needs to rebuild that wealth at the expense of
the proletariat. It, therefore, wants socialists to collaborate in the
government, in order to strengthen democratic institutions; but not in
order to make progress down the road of socialist fulfillment.
Previously, socialists collaborated in order to gradually improve the
workers' living conditions. Today they would collaborate in order to
renounce all proletarian conquests. In order to rebuild Europe the
bourgeoisie requires that the proletariat agree to produce more and
consume less. And, the proletariat objects to one thing and the other
and says to itself that it is not worthwhile to consolidate in power a
class that is guilty of the war and destined, fatally, to lead humanity
to an even crueler war. The conditions for collaboration by the
bourgeoisie with the proletariat are, by nature, such that
collaborationism must necessarily, bit by bit, lose its current
widespread proselytism.

Capitalism cannot make concessions to socialism. In order to rebuild
themselves European states require a regimen of rigorous fiscal economy,
increase in work hours, lowering of salaries; in short, the
re-establishment of economic concepts and methods abolished in homage to
proletarian will. Logically, the proletariat cannot consent to this
reversal. It cannot consent to it, nor does it wish to. All possibility
of rebuilding the capitalist economy is thus eliminated. This is the
tragedy of today's Europe. In the European countries, the reaction is
canceling the economic concessions made to socialism; but, while on the
one hand, this reactionary policy cannot be sufficiently energetic and
effective as to re-establish the bled-dry public treasure, on the other
hand, the proletarian united front is slowly preparing itself against
that reactionary policy. Fearful of revolution, the reaction thus
cancels, not only the masses' economic conquests, but moves also against
political conquests. Thus, in Italy, we bear witness to the fascist
dictatorship. But the bourgeoisie thusly undercuts and saps and mortally
wounds democratic institutions, and it loses all its moral strength and
all its ideological prestige.

Moreover, in international relations, the reaction places foreign policy
in the hands of nationalist and anti-democratic minorities. These
nationalist minorities saturate that foreign policy with chauvinism.
With their imperialist leanings, and their fight for European hegemony,
they block the re-establishment of an atmosphere of European unity which
would allow States to agree on a program of cooperation and work. The
work of that nationalism, of that reactionism, is evident in the
occupation of the Ruhr.

The world crisis is, then, an economic and a political crisis. And, it
is also, above all, an ideological crisis. The affirmative and
positivist philosophies of bourgeois society are, from long ago,
undermined by a current of skepticism, of relativism. Rationalism,
historicism positivism, irremediably decline. This is undoubtedly the
deepest aspect, the gravest symptom, of the crisis. This is the most
definite and deepest indication that what is in crisis is not only
bourgeois society's economy, but capitalist civilization, Western
civilization, European civilization in its entirety.

Well, now. The ideologues of Social Revolution, Marx and Bakunin, Engels
and Kropotkin, lived at the time of the height of capitalist
civilization and of historicist and positivist philosophy. Consequently,
they could not foresee that the ascendance of the proletariat had to
occur by virtue of the decadence of Western civilization. The
proletariat was destined to create a new type of civilization and
culture. The economic ruin of the bourgeoisie was also to be the ruin of
bourgeois civilization. And, socialism would find itself with the need
to govern, not in a time of plenty, but in a time of poverty, misery,
and scarcity. Reformist socialists, accustomed to the notion that the
socialist order, more than a mode of production, is a mode of
distribution, believe they see in this the sign that the historic
mission of the bourgeoisie is not yet played out and that the moment is
not yet ripe for the realization of socialism. In a report for *La
Crónica* I recalled those phrases to the effect that the tragedy of
Europe is this: Capitalism can no longer, while socialism cannot yet.
This phrase, which does in fact give one a sense of the tragedy of
Europe, is a reformist's phrase, it is a phrase saturated with
evolutionist mentality, and impregnated with the notion of a slow,
gradual, and beatific movement, without convulsions or tremors, from
individualist society to collectivist society. History teaches us that
every new social state has taken shape on the ruins on the preceding
social state, and that between the emergence of one and the downfall of
the other, there has, logically, been an intervening period of crisis.

We are witnessing the disintegration, the agony of a worn-out, senile,
decrepit society, and, at the same time, we are witnessing the slow and
restless gestation, the formation, the creation, of the new society. All
of us who are bound to the new society and separated from the old by
sincere ideological affinity, must profoundly fix our gaze on this
agitated and intense transcendental period in human history.\
\
 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

[\[1\]](#1){#n1} Adalberto Fonkén, an anarchosyndicalist textile worker
and strike leader in the 1919 movement for the 8-hour workday in Lima.
Mariátegui may be referring to Fonkén's participation in the People's
University movement in the Lima suburb of Vitarte. *- Trans.*

 

 

**[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Next Lecture \>\>](hwc02.htm)**

 
