---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 10 November 1900.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Spiritual Inheritance of the Celt!

I suppose you have all heard that phrase. You may not understand what it
means, but that, as the vulgar phraseology hath it, "makes no matter".

Nowadays the spiritual inheritance of the Celt is in evidence at almost
every public meeting in the country: every public speaker who finds
himself too densely destitute of the faintest traces of originality to
evoke the applause of his audience, or is too ignorant of the question
under discussion to speak even tolerably upon it, falls back as a last
and never failing resort upon an appeal to the spiritual inheritance of
the Celt.

That is always apropos. No matter what the subject of the meeting may be
-- Catholic University, Financial Relations, Home Rule, or the location
of the Pig Market, it can always be embellished and improved by a
reference to the spiritual inheritance of the Celt.

What that spiritual inheritance is remains to me somewhat of a problem.
I am a hard matter of fact individual and inclined I daresay to place
too much stress occasionally upon material things as the first
necessity, but I am open to conviction (no allusion Mr Mahony) and hope
some of my well informed readers will please enlighten me by answering
this question.

The legends, romances, fairy tales, 'pishrogs', and general folk-lore of
this country deal largely in popular interpretations of the
manifestation of the unknown forces of Nature; always giving, as is the
wont of a half-educated people living in close contact with Nature, a
personal form and intelligence to every natural phenomenon whose origin
is unknown to them.

In other words, where the investigations of modern science have laid
bare the working out of natural processes, our forefathers saw only the
labours, or heard only the voices, of spirits -- the roar of the tempest
on the hilltops, the sighing of the wind through the valleys, the myriad
undefinable noises of night, the phantasms across the minds of the
insane, the weird phenomena of birth and death -- all these were to the
Celts of old the result of a perpetual war between superhuman
intelligences, beneficent and diabolic.

Thus the Celt clothed the mechanism of the universe with form and
colour; thus sprang into existence in his brain all the spirits of good
and bad, with which his fancy has invested every hill and dale, river,
loch, and island in Ireland: thus originated the spiritual inheritance
of the Celt -- in an unprogressive desire to escape the responsibility
of investigating phenomena by placing their source beyond the reach of
human activity.

But, I may be told, is not the fact that the Celt did show himself prone
to place a spiritual interpretation upon the material manifestations of
natural phenomena, proof in itself of the spirituality of his mental
bias, or inheritance?

It may be, but if it is, then the same proof holds good of the Teuton,
of the Russian, of the Indian; all of whom have under the same
conditions cherished similar beliefs, and all of whom have in proportion
as their material conditions were modified and altered by the
development of industry, and the growth of towns and cities, abandoned
such ideas in favour of the scientific explanations.

The characteristic marks of Celtic spirituality are all to be found
parallelled in the Hindu and the Brahmin; the legends of the Brocken and
the Black Forest show the German mind as fertile in weird conceptions as
ever was Irish Seanchaí; the Russian moujik and baba still tell each
other of the spirits of forests and mountain steppes; and the peasantry
of Somersetshire and other English rural counties credit such details of
occult happenings as sufficiently demonstrate the affinity of their
intellectual state to that of the spiritual Celt.

I do not war upon this quaint conceit of ours; I am only tired of
hearing it belauded and praised so much by superficial thinkers and
spouters.

You will hear a man or woman denouncing 'the gross materialism' of
England as contrasted with Celtic spirituality one day, and the next you
will find the same person showing a most laudable (?) but 'grossly
material' desire to establish Irish manufactories where Irish wage
slaves can be robbed by Irish capitalists; or joining with rackrenting
landlords and scheming company promoters to demand an abatement of
taxation on their own precious incomes.

Now, I believe that the mental traits upon which our Celtic enthusiasts
base their claims, or should I say *our* claims, to spirituality, are
but the result of the impression left upon the Celtic mind by the
operations of the natural phenomena of his material surroundings; that
most, if not all, races have had similar experience at similar periods
of their history; and that there was therefore nothing unique in the
intellectual equipment of the Celt, and nothing that he needs must
cherish lest he lose his individuality.

The influences which go to the destruction and debasement of the Irish
Celtic character are not racial in their character, they are social and
industrial; it is not Anglo-Saxonism but Capitalism which pours its
cheap filth into our news-agencies, and deluges our homes with its
gutter literature.

This fact is obvious to all who choose to open their eyes and note that
Paris, Berlin, and Vienna have each their gutter literature,
corresponding in all its vulgarity and inanity to the Cheap Jack rubbish
and filth which some people would have us believe is Anglo-Saxon.

The debasing literature is common to all these cities because its source
is common to all; that source being, of course, not the language but the
capitalist system.

It is only a trifling degree worse in England because the capitalist
system is more developed in England than in the countries named. As the
people become brutalised by overwork under capitalism they are incapable
of appreciating healthy literature, and require the strong meat of
sensationalism and suggestiveness -- the stronger and more pungent the
flavour the easier it can be assimilated by the degraded wage slaves.

If you desire to pursue this line of thought further you can do it by
tracing the appetite for unhealthy literature in capitalist countries,
such as England, America, and France; and the corresponding absence of
such literature in countries such as Spain, Portugal, or Norway, where
capitalism is in its undeveloped, infant, state.

As long as it was a question of Celt versus Saxon in Ireland the Celt
(considering the enormous odds against him) held his own fairly well for
six hundred years, without much deterioration in his national character
-- held his own so well that one hundred years ago many districts were
as un-English as at the Norman Invasion.

But with the advent of capitalism all that was changed; the cheapness of
its wares opened a way for English capitalism into districts where the
political power of England had only excited aversion; the use of the
English product paved the way for the use of the English speech, which
in its turn made possible the debasing floods of cheap literary garbage.

Thus capitalism has done more in one hundred years to corrupt the Celt,
and destroy his spirituality, than the previous six hundred were able to
accomplish.

Yet the 'Spiritual Inheritance' orators and writers are all in favour of
capitalism, and opposed to Socialism.

Why? Because their belief in a spiritual inheritance does not weaken
their determination to hold firmly on to the incomes derivable from
their material inheritance of land and capital, -- and the legal title
it confers to a share in the plunder of the Irish worker.

I could mention one poet in this city who writes some most weirdly
spiritual poems in the intervals of drawing rack rents from one of the
most filthy slums of Dublin.

He is a patriot, a town councillor, a slum landlord, a publican, a poet,
an heir to our spiritual inheritance -- and other things.

A beautiful blending of the material and the spiritual -- of both kinds.

Well, well! I have rambled a bit from my text, or rather the incident
that suggested the text. That incident was a complimentary dinner given
D.J. Cogan, MP for East Wicklow. Mr Cogan in thanking the friends who
had feasted him gave this gem to the world. I quote from the **Evening
Telegraph**:--

> The sentimental was the spiritual side of man -- it proceeded from the
> soul, and the man who was without sentiment would be without a soul
> (hear, hear). He therefore had no hesitation in admitting that the
> Irish character was highly sentimental, and he was proud of it. But
> why was it so? Because it is highly spiritual, and he thought it would
> be a sad day, indeed, for our country when the sentimental or
> spiritual side of it would become paralysed or lose any of its
> attributes (applause). In conclusion he would do what one individual
> could to further the interest of that branch of trade to which he had
> the honour to belong (hear, hear).

Now that is what I call 'lovely'. Mr Cogan is a provision dealer, and
the beautiful and entirely ingenuous manner in which he promises to
combine in his own person a solicitude for the spiritual side of the
Irish character, and the interests of the provision trade is worthy of
all praise.

But if an Irish workingman were to rhapsodise about our spiritual
inheritance at the beginning of his speech, and at the end of it to
denounce the tyranny of capital his audience would be shocked.

Perhaps that is the reason why the Socialist Republicans are not counted
in, in the functions organised by the new cult. Perhaps! Yet I think we
are favourable as need be, but we cannot work up any enthusiasm for
things spiritual while lacking things material, and we cannot forget
that there are thousands of our brother and sister Celts so poor to-day
that if they could barter their spiritual inheritance for a loaf of
bread and a 'rasher' it would be a profitable exchange.

But, gentlemen, before we part allow me to give you a toast. You will
drink it, please, in water -- the purest Vartry blend, with microbes of
Irish manufacture only -- and pledge me accordingly: "Here's to the
union of two mighty, epoch-making forces, 'The Spiritual Inheritance of
the Celt', and 'The Interests of the Provision Trade'; these two, linked
in indissoluble union, to go marching down the ages to immortality
together."

Sláinte!

SPAILPÍN

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.7.2005
