Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter Thirty-Three: The Modern Theory of Colonisation ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#1a}

 

Political economy confuses on principle two very different kinds of
private property, of which one rests on the producers' own labour, the
other on the employment of the labour of others. It forgets that the
latter not only is the direct antithesis of the former, but absolutely
grows on its tomb only. In Western Europe, the home of Political
Economy, the process of primitive accumulation is more of less
accomplished. Here the capitalist regime has either directly conquered
the whole domain of national production, or, where economic conditions
are less developed, it, at least, indirectly controls those strata of
society which, though belonging to the antiquated mode of production,
continue to exist side by side with it in gradual decay. To this
ready-made world of capital, the political economist applies the notions
of law and of property inherited from a pre-capitalistic world with all
the more anxious zeal and all the greater unction, the more loudly the
facts cry out in the face of his ideology. It is otherwise in the
colonies. There the capitalist regime everywhere comes into collision
with the resistance of the producer, who, as owner of his own conditions
of labour, employs that labour to enrich himself, instead of the
capitalist. The contradiction of these two diametrically opposed
economic systems, manifests itself here practically in a struggle
between them. Where the capitalist has at his back the power of the
mother-country, he tries to clear out of his way by force the modes of
production and appropriation based on the independent labour of the
producer. The same interest, which compels the sycophant of capital, the
political economist, in the mother-country, to proclaim the theoretical
identity of the capitalist mode of production with its contrary, that
same interest compels him in the colonies to make a clean breast of it,
and to proclaim aloud the antagonism of the two modes of production. To
this end, he proves how the development of the social productive power
of labour, co-operation, division of labour, use of machinery on a large
scale, &c., []{#2a} []{#3a} are impossible without the expropriation of
the labourers, and the corresponding transformation of their means of
production into capital. In the interest of the so-called national
wealth, he seeks for artificial means to ensure the poverty of the
people. Here his apologetic armor crumbles off, bit by bit, like rotten
touchwood. It is the great merit of E.G. Wakefield to have discovered,
not anything new about the Colonies ^[\[2\]](#n2)^, but to have
discovered in the Colonies the truth as to the conditions of capitalist
production in the mother country. As the system of protection at its
origin ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ attempted to manufacture capitalists artificially
in the mother-country, so Wakefield's colonisation theory, which England
tried for a time to enforce by Acts of Parliament, attempted to effect
the manufacture of wage-workers in the Colonies. This he calls
"systematic colonisation." []{#4a} []{#5a}

First of all, Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, property in
money, means of subsistence, machines, and other means of production,
does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the
correlative --- the wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell
himself of his own free will. He discovered that capital is not a thing,
but a social relation between persons, established by the
instrumentality of things. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ Mr. Peel, he moans, took with
him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and
of production to the amount of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight to
bring with him, besides, 300 persons of the working class, men, women,
and children. Once arrived at his destination, "Mr. Peel was left
without a servant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river."
^[\[5\]](#n5)^ Unhappy Mr. Peel who provided for everything except the
export of English modes of production to Swan River!

For the understanding of the following discoveries of Wakefield, two
preliminary remarks: We know that the means of production and
subsistence, while they remain the property of the immediate producer,
are not capital. They become capital only under circumstances in which
they serve at the same time as means of exploitation and subjection of
the labourer. But this capitalist soul of theirs is so intimately
wedded, in the head of the political economist, to their material
substance, that he christens them capital under all circumstances, even
when they are its exact opposite. Thus is it with Wakefield. Further:
the splitting up of the means of production into the individual property
of many independent labourers, working on their own account, he calls
equal division of capital. It is with the political economist as with
the feudal jurist. The latter stuck on to pure monetary relations the
labels supplied by feudal law. []{#6a} []{#7a}

"If," says Wakefield, "all members of the society are supposed to
possess equal portions of capital\... no man would have a motive for
accumulating more capital than he could use with his own hands. This is
to some extent the case in new American settlements, where a passion for
owning land prevents the existence of a class of labourers for hire."
^[\[6\]](#n6)^ So long, therefore, as the labourer can accumulate for
himself --- and this he can do so long as he remains possessor of his
means of production --- capitalist accumulation and the capitalistic
mode of production are impossible. The class of wage labourers,
essential to these, is wanting. How, then, in old Europe, was the
expropriation of the labourer from his conditions of labour, i.e., the
co-existence of capital and wage labour, brought about? By a social
contract of a quite original kind. "Mankind have adopted a\... simple
contrivance for promoting the accumulation of capital," which, of
course, since the time of Adam, floated in their imagination, floated in
their imagination as the sole and final end of their existence: "they
have divided themselves into owners of capital and owners of labour\....
The division was the result of concert and combination." ^[\[7\]](#n7)^
In one []{#8a} word: the mass of mankind expropriated itself in honor of
the "accumulation of capital." Now, one would think that this instinct
of self-denying fanaticism would give itself full fling especially in
the Colonies, where alone exist the men and conditions that could turn a
social contract from a dream to a reality. But why, then, should
"systematic colonisation" be called in to replace its opposite,
spontaneous, unregulated colonisation? But - but - "In the Northern
States of the American Union; it may be doubted whether so many as a
tenth of the people would fall under the description of hired
labourers\.... In England\... the labouring class compose the bulk of
the people." ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ Nay, the impulse to self-expropriation on
the part []{#9a} of labouring humanity for the glory of capital, exists
so little that slavery, according to Wakefield himself, is the sole
natural basis of Colonial wealth. His systematic colonisation is a mere
*pis aller*, since he unfortunately has to do with free men, not with
slaves. "The first Spanish settlers in Saint Domingo did not obtain
labourers from Spain. But, without labourers, their capital must have
perished, or at least, must soon have been diminished to that small
amount which each individual could employ with his own hands. This has
actually occurred in the last Colony founded by England --- the Swan
River Settlement --- where a great mass of capital, of seeds,
implements, and cattle, has perished for want of labourers to use it,
and where no settler has preserved much more capital than he can employ
with his own hands." ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ []{#10a} []{#11a}

We have seen that the expropriation of the mass of the people from the
soil forms the basis of the capitalist mode of production. The essence
of a free colony, on the contrary, consists in this --- that the bulk of
the soil is still public property, and every settler on it therefore can
turn part of it into his private property and individual means of
production, without hindering the later settlers in the same
operation.^[\[10\]](#n10)^ This is the secret both of the prosperity of
the colonies and of their inveterate vice --- opposition to the
establishment of capital. "Where land is very cheap and all men are
free, where every one who so pleases can easily obtain a piece of land
for himself, not only is labour very dear, as respects the labourer's
share of the produce, but the difficulty is to obtain combined labour at
any price." ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ []{#12a}

As in the colonies the separation of the labourer from the conditions of
labour and their root, the soil, does not exist, or only sporadically,
or on too limited a scale, so neither does the separation of agriculture
from industry exist, nor the destruction of the household industry of
the peasantry. Whence then is to come the internal market for capital?
"No part of the population of America is exclusively agricultural,
excepting slaves and their employers who combine capital and labour in
particular works. Free Americans, who cultivate the soil, follow many
other occupations. Some portion of the furniture and tools which they
use is commonly made by themselves. They frequently build their own
houses, and carry to market, at whatever distance, the produce of their
own industry. They are spinners and weavers; they make soap and candles,
as well as, in many cases, shoes and clothes for their own use. In
America the cultivation of land is often the secondary pursuit of a
blacksmith, a miller or a shopkeeper." ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ With such queer
people as these, where is the "field of abstinence" for the capitalists?

The great beauty of capitalist production consists in this --- that it
not only constantly reproduces the wage-worker as wage-worker, but
produces always, in proportion to the accumulation of capital, a
relative surplus-population of wage-workers. Thus the law of supply and
demand of labour is kept in the right rut, the oscillation of wages is
penned within limits satisfactory to capitalist exploitation, and
lastly, the social dependence of the labourer on the capitalist, that
indispensable requisite, is secured; an unmistakable relation of
dependence, which the smug political economist, at home, in the
mother-country, can transmogrify into one of free contract between buyer
and seller, between equally independent owners of commodities, the owner
of the commodity capital and the owner of the commodity labour. But in
the colonies, this pretty fancy is torn asunder. The absolute population
here increases much more quickly than in the mother-country, because
many labourers enter this world as ready-made adults, and yet the
labour-market is always understocked. The law of supply and demand of
labour falls to pieces. On the one hand, the old world constantly throws
in capital, thirsting after exploitation and "abstinence"; on the other,
the regular reproduction of the wage labourer as wage labourer comes
into collision with impediments the most impertinent and in part
invincible. What becomes of the production of wage-labourers,
supernumerary in proportion to the accumulation of capital? The
wage-worker of to-day is to-morrow an independent peasant, or artisan,
working for himself. He vanishes from the labour-market, but not into
the workhouse. This constant transformation of the wage-labourers into
independent producers, who work for themselves instead of for capital,
and enrich themselves instead of the capitalist gentry, reacts in its
turn very perversely on the conditions of the labour-market. Not only
does the degree of exploitation of the wage labourer remain indecently
low. The wage labourer loses into the bargain, along with the relation
of dependence, also the sentiment []{#13a} []{#14a} of dependence on the
abstemious capitalist. Hence all the inconveniences that our E. G.
Wakefield pictures so doughtily, so eloquently, so pathetically. The
supply of wage labour, he complains, is neither constant, nor regular,
nor sufficient. "The supply of labour is always not only small but
uncertain." ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ "Though the produce divided between the
capitalist and the labourer be large, the labourer takes so great a
share that he soon becomes a capitalist\.... Few, even those whose lives
are unusually long, can accumulate great masses of wealth."
^[\[14\]](#n14)^ The labourers most distinctly decline []{#15a} []{#16a}
to allow the capitalist to abstain from the payment of the greater part
of their labour. It avails him nothing, if he is so cunning as to import
from Europe, with his own capital, his own wage-workers. They soon
"cease\... to be labourers for hire; they\... become independent
landowners, if not competitors with their former masters in the
labour-market." ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ Think of the horror! The excellent
capitalist has imported bodily from Europe, with his own good money, his
own competitors! The end of the world has come! No wonder Wakefield
laments the absence of all dependence and of all sentiment of dependence
on the part of the wage-workers in the colonies. On account of the high
wages, says his disciple, Merivale, there is in the colonies "the urgent
desire for cheaper and more subservient labourers --- for a class to
whom the capitalist might dictate terms, instead of being dictated to by
them\.... In ancient civilised countries the labourer, though free, is
by a law of Nature dependent on capitalists; in colonies this dependence
must be created by artificial means." ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ []{#17a}

What is now, according to Wakefield, the consequence of this unfortunate
state of things in the colonies? A "barbarising tendency of dispersion"
of producers and national wealth.^[\[17\]](#n17)^ The parcelling-out of
the means of production among innumerable owners, working on their own
account, annihilates, along with the centralisation of capital, all the
foundation of combined labour. Every long-winded undertaking, extending
over several years and demanding outlay of fixed capital, is prevented
from being carried out. In Europe, capital invests without hesitating a
moment, for the working class constitutes its living appurtenance,
always in excess, always at disposal. But in the colonies! Wakefield
tells an extremely doleful anecdote. He was talking with some
capitalists of Canada and the state of New York, where the immigrant
wave often becomes stagnant and deposits a sediment of "supernumerary"
labourers. "Our capital," says one of the characters in the melodrama,
[]{#18a} \"was ready for many operations which require a considerable
period of time for their completion; but we could not begin such
operations with labour which, we knew, would soon leave us. If we had
been sure of retaining the labour of such emigrants, we should have been
glad to have engaged it at once, and for a high price: and we should
have engaged it, even though we had been sure it would leave us,
provided we had been sure of a fresh supply whenever we might need it."
^[\[18\]](#n18)^ []{#19a}

After Wakefield has constructed the English capitalist agriculture and
its "combined" labour with the scattered cultivation of American
peasants, he unwittingly gives us a glimpse at the reverse of the medal.
He depicts the mass of the American people as well-to-do, independent,
enterprising, and comparatively cultured, whilst "the English
agricultural labourer is miserable wretch, a pauper\.... In what
country, except North America and some new colonies, do the wages of
free labour employed in agriculture much exceed a bare subsistence for
the labourer? \... Undoubtedly , farm-horses in England, being a
valuable property, are better fed than English peasants."
^[\[19\]](#n19)^ But, never mind, national wealth is, once again, by its
very nature, identical with misery of the people. []{#20a}

How, then, to heal the anti-capitalistic cancer of the colonies? If men
were willing, at a blow, to turn all the soil from public into private
property, they would destroy certainly the root of the evil, but also
--- the colonies. The trick is how to kill two birds with one stone. Let
the Government put upon the virgin soil an artificial price, independent
of the law of supply and demand, a price that compels the immigrant to
work a long time for wages before he can earn enough money to buy land,
and turn himself into an independent peasant.^[\[20\]](#n20)^ The fund
resulting from the sale of land at a price relatively prohibitory for
the wage-workers, this fund of money extorted from the wages of labour
by violation of the sacred law of supply and demand, the Government is
to employ, on the other hand, in proportion as it grows; to import
have-nothings from Europe into the colonies, and thus keep the wage
labour market full for the capitalists. Under these circumstances, tout
sera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles. This is the
great secret of "systematic colonisation." By this plan, Wakefield cries
in triumph, "the supply of labour *must* []{#21a} []{#22a} be constant
and regular, because, first, as no labourer would be able to procure
land until he had worked for money, all immigrant labourers, working for
a time for wages and in combination, would produce capital for the
employment of more labourers; secondly, because every labourer who left
off working for wages and became a landowner would, by purchasing land,
provide a fund for bringing fresh labour to the colony."
^[\[21\]](#n21)^ The price of the soil imposed by the State must, of
course, be a "sufficient price" --- *i.e*., so high "as to prevent the
labourers from becoming independent landowners until others had followed
to take their place." ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ This "sufficient price for the
land" is nothing but a euphemistic circumlocution for the ransom which
the labourer pays to the capitalist for leave to retire from the wage
labour market to the land. First, he must create for the capitalist
"capital," with which the latter may be able to exploit more labourers;
then he must place, at his own expense, a *locum tenens*
[\[placeholder\]]{.context} on the labour market, whom the Government
forwards across the sea for the benefit of his old master, the
capitalist.

It is very characteristic that the English Government for years
practised this method of "primitive accumulation" prescribed by Mr.
Wakefield expressly for the use of the colonies. The fiasco was, of
course, as complete as that of Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act. The stream of
emigration was only diverted from the English colonies to the United
States. Meanwhile, the advance of capitalistic production in Europe,
accompanied by increasing Government pressure, has rendered Wakefield's
recipe superfluous. On the one hand, the enormous and ceaseless stream
of men, year after year driven upon America, leaves behind a stationary
sediment in the east of the United States, the wave of immigration from
Europe throwing men on the labour-market there more rapidly than the
wave of emigration westwards can wash them away. On the other hand, the
American Civil War brought in its train a colossal national debt, and,
with it, pressure of taxes, the rise of the vilest financial
aristocracy, the squandering of a huge part of the public land on
speculative companies for the exploitation of railways, mines, &c., in
brief, the most rapid centralisation of capital. The great republic has,
therefore, ceased to be the promised land for emigrant labourers.
[]{#23a} Capitalistic production advances there with giant strides, even
though the lowering of wages and the dependence of the wage-worker are
yet far from being brought down to the normal European level. The
shameless lavishing of uncultivated colonial land on aristocrats and
capitalists by the Government, so loudly denounced even by Wakefield,
has produced, especially in Australia ^[\[23\]](#n23)^, in conjunction
with the stream of men that the gold diggings attract, and with the
competition that the importation of English-commodities causes even to
the smallest artisan, an ample "relative surplus labouring population,"
so that almost every mail brings the Job's news of a "glut of the
Australia labour-market," and the prostitution in some places flourishes
as wantonly as in the London Haymarket.

However, we are not concerned here with the conditions of the colonies.
The only thing that interests us is the secret discovered in the new
world by the Political Economy of the old world, and proclaimed on the
housetops: that the capitalist mode of production and accumulation, and
therefore capitalist private property, have for their fundamental
condition the annihilation of self-earned private property; in other
words, the expropriation of the labourer.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[[1.](#1a){#n1}]{.info} We treat here of real Colonies, virgins soils,
colonised by free immigrants. The United States are, speaking
economically, still only a Colony of Europe. Besides, to this category
belong such old plantations as those in which the abolition of slavery
has completely altered the earlier conditions.

[[2.](#2a){#n2}]{.info} Wakefield's few glimpses on the subject of
Modern Colonisation are fully anticipated by Mirabeau Pere, the
physiocrat, and even much earlier by English economists.

[[3.](#3a){#n3}]{.info} Later, it became a temporary necessity in the
international competitive struggle. But, whatever its motive, the
consequences remain the same.

[[4.](#4a){#n4}]{.info} "A negro is a negro. In certain circumstances he
becomes a slave. A mule is a machine for spinning cotton. Only under
certain circumstances does it become capital. Outside these
circumstances, it is no more capital than gold is intrinsically money,
or sugar is the price of sugar\.... Capital is a social relation of
production. It is a historical relation of production." (Karl Marx,
"Lohnarbeit und Kapital," *N. Rh. Z*., No.266, April 7, 1849.)

[[5.](#5a){#n5}]{.info} E. G. Wakefield: "England and America," vol.ii.
p.33.

[[6.](#6a){#n6}]{.info} l.c., p.17.

[[7.](#7a){#n7}]{.info} l.c., vol.i, p.18.

[[8.](#8a){#n8}]{.info} l.c., pp.42, 43, 44.

[[9.](#9a){#n9}]{.info} l.c., vol.ii, p.5.

[[10.](#10a){#n10}]{.info} "Land, to be an element of colonisation, must
not only be waste, but it must be public property, liable to be
converted into private property." (l.c., Vol.II, p.125.)

[[11.](#11a){#n11}]{.info} l.c., Vol.I, p.247.

[[12.](#12a){#n12}]{.info} l.c., pp.21, 22.

[[13.](#13a){#n13}]{.info} l.c., Vol.II, p.116.

[[14.](#14a){#n14}]{.info} l.c., Vol.I, p.131.

[[15.](#15a){#n15}]{.info} l.c., Vol.II, p.5.

[[16.](#16a){#n16}]{.info} Merivale, l.c., Vol.II, pp.235-314 passim.
Even the mild, Free Trade, vulgar economist, Molinari, says: "Dans les
colonies où l'esclavage a été aboli sans que le travail forcé se
trouvait remplacé par une quantité équivalente de travail libre, on a vu
s'opérer la contre-partie du fait qui se réalise tous les jours sous nos
yeux. On a vu les simples travailleurs exploiter à leur tour les
entrepreneurs d'industrie, exiger d'eux des salaires hors de toute
proportion avec la part légitime qui leur revenait dans le produit. Les
planteurs, ne pouvant obtenir de leurs sucres un prix suffisant pour
couvrir la hausse de salaire, ont été obligés de fournir l'excédant,
d'abord sur leurs profits, ensuite sur leurs capitaux mêmes. Une foule
de planteurs ont été ruinés de la sorte, d'autres ont fermé leurs
ateliers pour échapper à une ruine imminente\.... Sans doute, il vaut
mieux voir périr des accumulations de capitaux que des générations
d'hommes \[how generous Mr. Molinari!\]: mais ne vaudrait-il pas mieux
que ni les uns ni les autres périssent? [\[In the colonies where slavery
has been abolished without the compulsory labour being replaced with an
equivalent quantity of free labour, there has occurred the opposite of
what happens every day before our eyes. Simple workers have been seen to
exploit in their turn the industrial entrepreneurs, demanding from them
wages which bear absolutely no relation to the legitimate share in the
product which they ought to receive. The planters were unable to obtain
for their sugar for a sufficent price to cover the increase in wages,
and were obliged to furnish the extra amount, at first out of their
profits, and then out of their very capital. A considerable amount of
planters have been ruined as a result, while others have closed down
their businesses in order to avoid the ruin which threatened them \...
It is doubtless better that these accumulations of capital should be
destroyed than that generations of men should perish \... but would it
not be better if both survived?\]]{.context} (Molinari, l.c., pp.51,52.)
Mr. Molinari, Mr. Molinari! What then becomes of the ten commandments,
of Moses and the prophets, of the law of supply and demand, if in Europe
the "entrepreneur" can cut down the labourer's legitimate part, and in
the West Indies, the labourer can cut down the entrepreneur's? And what,
if you please, is this "legitimate part," which on your own showing the
capitalist in Europe daily neglects to pay? Over yonder, in the colonies
where the labourers are so "simple" as to "exploit" the capitalist, Mr.
Molinari feels a strong itching to set the law of supply and demand,
that works elsewhere automatically, on the right road by means of the
police.

[[17.](#17a){#n17}]{.info} Wakefield, l.c., Vol.II, p.52.

[[18.](#18a){#n18}]{.info} l.c., pp.191, 192.

[[19.](#19a){#n19}]{.info} l.c., Vol.I, p.47, 246.

[[20.](#20a){#n20}]{.info} "C'est, ajoutez-vous, grâce à l'appropriation
du sol et des capitaux que l'homme, qui n'a que ses bras, trouve de
l'occupation et se fait un revenu\... c'est au contraire, grâce à
l'appropriation individuelle du sol qu'il se trouve des hommes n'ayant
que leurs bras\.... Quand vous mettez un homme dans le vide, vous vous
emparez de l'atmosphère. Ainsi faites-vous, quand vous vous emparez du
sol\.... C'est le mettre dans le vide le richesses, pour ne la laisser
vivre qu'à votre volonté." [\[It is, you add, a result of the
appropriation of the soil and of capital that the man who has nothing
but the strength of his arms finds employment and creates an income for
himself \... but the opposite is true, it is thanks to the individual
appropriation of the soil that there exist men who only possess the
strength of their arms. \... When you put a man in a vacuum, you rob him
of the air. You do the same, when you take away the soil from him \...
for you are putting him in a space void of wealth, so as to leave him no
way of living except according to your wishes\]]{.context} (Collins,
l.c. t.III, pp.268-71, passim.)

[[21.](#21a){#n21}]{.info} Wakefield, l.c., Vol.II, p.192.

[[22.](#22a){#n22}]{.info} l.c., p.45.

[[23.](#23a){#n23}]{.info} As soon as Australia became her own
law-giver, she passed, of course, laws favorable to the settlers, but
the squandering of the land, already accomplished by the English
Government, stands in the way. "The first and main object at which new
Land Act of 1862 aims is to give increased facilities for the settlement
of the people." ("The Land Law of Victoria," by the Hon. C. G. Duffy,
Minister of Public Lands, Lond., 1862.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcribed by Zodiac\
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The End

[Capital Volume One- Index](index.htm)
