---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

# Letter to Jules Guesde

### (1912)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Source: le Socialisme**, 2 November 1912.\
**Translated:** for marxists.org by Mitch Abidor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Paris, October 27, 1912

My dear Guesde:

Passing through Paris, I learn that you would like to have an article
from me for *Le Socialisme* on the war that currently threatens us. I
don't have much time, so I ask you, my dear friend, to accept the
following lines as a down payment.

For us, the supreme law is the interest of the international
proletariat. War is completely contrary to this interest. The entire
international proletariat must rise up against the chauvinists of all
countries.

Besides, there is no doubt that this time, like last year in Morocco,
the proletariat will know how to fulfill its obligations, all of its
obligations. I leave now for Brussels for a meeting of the Socialist
International, where the representatives of the organized workers of the
entire world are going to come out with the greatest energy for the
keeping of the peace.

Yes, we are for peace. Nevertheless, we are not pacifists like those
who, last September, held an international congress for peace. We don't
believe in the magic virtue of words. We know that in the world there is
only one force capable of keeping the peace: the force of the organized
international proletariat. They can call it paradoxical as much as they
want, it's no less unarguable that only *class war* can successfully
oppose *war between peoples*.

Naturally, in every particular case the success will be more or less
complete. If socialism was able to ward off war between France and
Germany last year, this year it's couldn't prevent the plague from
striking the Balkans. But it's also true that our organization has not
everywhere attained the same level of development and the same
influence.

What's incontestable, what's absolutely obvious, is that the stronger
this organization becomes, the more the chances of an international war
decrease.

On its own, this would make us doubly persevere in our daily labor of
propaganda and recruitment.

##### Long live the international proletariat!

##### Long live the class war, sole effective guarantee against war between peoples!

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Cordially yours,\                 |
|                                   | G. Plekhanoff                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.7.2004
