---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Let Us Free Ireland!

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From [Workers' Republic]{.underline}, 1899.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let us free Ireland! Never mind such base, carnal thoughts as concern
work and wages, healthy homes, or lives unclouded by poverty.

Let us free Ireland! The rackrenting landlord; is he not also an
Irishman, and wherefore should we hate him? Nay, let us not speak
harshly of our brother -- yea, even when he raises our rent.

Let us free Ireland! The profit-grinding capitalist, who robs us of
three-fourths of the fruits of our labour, who sucks the very marrow of
our bones when we are young, and then throws us out in the street, like
a worn-out tool when we are grown prematurely old in his service, is he
not an Irishman, and mayhap a patriot, and wherefore should we think
harshly of him?

Let us free Ireland! "The land that bred and bore us." And the landlord
who makes us pay for permission to live upon it. Whoop it up for
liberty!

"Let us free Ireland," says the patriot who won't touch Socialism. Let
us all join together and cr-r-rush the br-r-rutal Saxon. Let us all join
together, says he, all classes and creeds. And, says the town worker,
after we have crushed the Saxon and freed Ireland, what will we do? Oh,
then you can go back to your slums, same as before. Whoop it up for
liberty!

And, says the agricultural workers, after we have freed Ireland, what
then? Oh, then you can go scraping around for the landlord's rent or the
money-lenders' interest same as before. Whoop it up for liberty!

After Ireland is free, says the patriot who won't touch socialism, we
will protect all classes, and if you won't pay your rent you will be
evicted same as now. But the evicting party, under command of the
sheriff, will wear green uniforms and the Harp without the Crown, and
the warrant turning you out on the roadside will be stamped with the
arms of the Irish Republic. Now, isn't that worth fighting for?

And when you cannot find employment, and, giving up the struggle of life
in despair, enter the poorhouse, the band of the nearest regiment of the
Irish army will escort you to the poorhouse door to the tune of *St.
Patrick\'s Day*. Oh! It will be nice to live in those days!

"With the Green Flag floating o'er us" and an ever-increasing army of
unemployed workers walking about under the Green Flag, wishing they had
something to eat. Same as now! Whoop it up for liberty!

Now, my friend, I also am Irish, but I'm a bit more logical. The
capitalist, I say, is a parasite on industry; as useless in the present
stage of our industrial development as any other parasite in the animal
or vegetable world is to the life of the animal or vegetable upon which
it feeds.

The working class is the victim of this parasite -- this human leech,
and it is the duty and interest of the working class to use every means
in its power to oust this parasite class from the position which enables
it to thus prey upon the vitals of labour.

Therefore, I say, let us organise as a class to meet our masters and
destroy their mastership; organise to drive them from their hold upon
public life through their political power; organise to wrench from their
robber clutch the land and workshops on and in which they enslave us;
organise to cleanse our social life from the stain of social
cannibalism, from the preying of man upon his fellow man.

Organise for a full, free and happy life **FOR ALL OR FOR NONE**.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
