Karl Marx: Critique of Political Economy. 1859

### Part I THE COMMODITY

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The wealth of bourgeois society, at first sight, presents itself as an
immense accumulation of commodities, its unit being a single commodity.
Every commodity, however, has a twofold aspect -- *use-value and
exchange-value.* [^\[1\]^](#1){#1a}

To begin with, a commodity, in the language of the English economists,
is "any thing necessary, useful or pleasant in life," an object of human
wants, a means of existence in the widest sense of the term. Use-value
as an aspect of the commodity coincides with the physical palpable
existence of the commodity. Wheat, for example, is a distinct use-value
differing from the use-values of cotton, glass, paper, etc. A use-value
has value only in use, and is realized only in the process of
consumption. One and the same use-value can be used in various ways. But
the extent of its possible application is limited by its existence as an
object with distinct properties. It is, moreover, determined not only
qualitatively but also quantitatively. Different use-values have
different measures appropriate to their physical characteristics; for
example, a bushel of wheat, a quire of paper, a yard of linen.

Whatever its social form may be, wealth always consists of use-values,
which in the first instance are not affected by this form. From the
taste of wheat it is not possible to tell who produced it, a Russian
serf, a French peasant or an English capitalist. Although use-values
serve social needs and therefore exist within the social framework, they
do not express the social relations of production. For instance, let us
take as a use-value a commodity such as a diamond. We cannot tell by
looking at it that the diamond is a commodity. Where it serves as an
aesthetic or mechanical use-value, on the neck of a courtesan or in the
hand of a glass-cutter, it is a diamond and not a commodity. To be a
use-value is evidently a necessary prerequisite of the commodity, but it
is immaterial to the use-value whether it is a commodity. Use-value as
such, since it is independent of the determinate economic form, lies
outside the sphere of investigation of political economy.
[^\[2\]^](#2){#2a} It belongs in this sphere only when it is itself a
determinate form. Use-value is the immediate physical entity in which a
definite economic relationship -- exchange-value -- is expressed.

Exchange-value seems at first to be a *quantitative relation,* the
proportion in which use-values are exchanged for one another. In this
relation they constitute equal exchangeable magnitudes. Thus one volume
of Propertius and eight ounces of snuff may have the same
exchange-value, despite the dissimilar use-values of snuff and elegies.
Considered as exchange-value, one use-value is worth just as much as
another, provided the two are available in the appropriate proportion.
The exchange-value of a palace can be expressed in a definite number of
tins of boot polish. London manufacturers of boot polish, on the other
hand, have expressed the exchange-value of their numerous tins of polish
in terms of palaces. Quite irrespective, therefore, of their natural
form of existence, and without regard to the specific character of the
needs they satisfy as use-values, commodities in definite quantities are
congruent, they take one another's place in the exchange process, are
regarded as equivalents, and despite their motley appearance have a
common denominator.

Use-values serve directly as means of existence. But, on the other hand,
these means of existence are themselves the products of social activity,
the result of expended human energy, *materialized labour.* As
objectification of social labour, all commodities are crystallisations
of the same substance. The specific character of this substance, i.e.,
of labour which is embodied in exchange-value, has now to be examined.

Let us suppose that one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of
wheat and twenty yards of silk are exchange-values of equal magnitude.
As exchange-values in which the qualitative difference between their
use-values is eliminated, they represent equal amounts of the same kind
of labour. The labour which is uniformly materialised in them must be
uniform, homogeneous, simple labour; it matters as little whether this
is embodied in gold, iron, wheat or silk, as it matters to oxygen
whether it is found in rusty iron, in the atmosphere, in the juice of
grapes or in human blood. But digging gold, mining iron, cultivating
wheat and weaving silk are qualitatively different kinds of labour. In
fact, what appears objectively as diversity of the use-values, appears,
when looked at dynamically, as diversity of the activities which produce
those use-values. Since the particular material of which the use-values
consist is irrelevant to the labour that creates exchange-value, the
particular form of this labour is equally irrelevant. Different
use-values are, moreover, products of the activity of different
individuals and therefore the result of individually different kinds of
labour. But as exchange-values they represent the same homogeneous
labour, i.e., labour in which the individual characteristics of the
workers are obliterated. Labour which creates exchange-value is thus
*abstract general labour.*

If one ounce of gold, one ton of iron, one quarter of wheat and twenty
yards of silk are exchange-values of equal magnitude or equivalents,
then one ounce of gold, half a ton of iron, three bushels of wheat and
five yards of silk are exchange-values which have very different
magnitudes, and this quantitative difference is the only difference of
which as exchange-values they are at all capable. As exchange-values of
different magnitudes they represent larger or smaller portions, larger
or smaller amounts of simple, homogeneous, abstract general labour,
which is the substance of exchange-value. The question now arises, how
can these amounts be measured? Or rather the question arises, what is
the quantitative form of existence of this labour, since the
quantitative differences of the commodities as exchange-values are
merely the quantitative differences of the labour embodied in them. Just
as motion is measured by time, so is labour by *labour-time.* Variations
in the duration of labour are the only possible difference that can
occur if the quality of labour is assumed to be given. Labour-time is
measured in terms of the natural units of time, *i.e.,* hours, days,
weeks, etc. Labour-time is the living state of existence of labour,
irrespective of its form, its content and its individual features; it is
the quantitative aspect of labour as well as its inherent measure. The
labour-time materialised in the use-values of commodities is both the
substance that turns them into exchange-values and therefore into
commodities, and the standard by which the precise magnitude of their
value is measured. The corresponding quantities of different use-values
containing the same amount of labour-time are equivalents; that is, all
use-values are equivalents when taken in proportions which contain the
same amount of expended, materialised labour-time. Regarded as
exchange-values all commodities are merely definite quantities of
*congealed labour-time.*

The following basic propositions are essential for an understanding of
the determination of exchange-value by labour-time. Labour is reduced to
simple labour, labour, so to speak, without any qualitative attributes;
labour which creates exchange-value, and therefore commodities, is
specifically *social labour;* finally, labour in so far as its results
are use-values is distinct from labour in so far as its results are
exchange-values.

To measure the exchange-value of commodities by the labour-time they
contain, the different kinds of labour have to be reduced to uniform,
homogeneous, simple labour, in short to labour of uniform quality, whose
only difference, therefore, is quantity.

This reduction appears to be an abstraction, but it is an abstraction
which is made every day in the social process of production. The
conversion of all commodities into labour-time is no greater an
abstraction, and is no less real, than the resolution of all organic
bodies into air. Labour, thus measured by time, does not seem, indeed,
to be the labour of different persons, but on the contrary the different
working individuals seem to be mere organs of this labour. In other
words the labour embodied in exchange-values could be called *human*
labour in *general*. This abstraction, human labour in general, *exists*
in the form of average labour which, in a given society, the average
person can perform, productive expenditure of a certain amount of human
muscles, nerves, brain, etc. It is *simple* labour \[English economists
call it "unskilled labour"\] which any average individual can be trained
to do and which in one way or another he has to perform. The
characteristics of this average labour are different in different
countries and different historical epochs, but in any particular society
it appears as something given. The greater part of the labour performed
in bourgeois society is simple labour as statistical data show. Whether
A works 6 hours producing iron and 6 hours producing linen, and B
likewise works 6 hours producing iron and 6 hours producing linen, or A
works 12 hours producing iron and B 12 hours producing linen is quite
evidently merely a different application of the *same* labour-time. But
what is the position with regard to more complicated labour which, being
labour of greater intensity and greater specific gravity, rises above
the general level? This kind of labour resolves itself into simple
labour; it is simple labour raised to a higher power, so that for
example one day of skilled labour may equal three days of simple labour.
The laws governing this reduction do not concern us here. It is,
however, clear that the reduction is made, for, as exchange-value, the
product of highly skilled labour is equivalent, in definite proportions,
to the product of simple average labour; thus being equated to a certain
amount of this simple labour.

The determination of exchange-value by labour-time, moreover,
presupposes that the *same amount* of labour is materialised in a
particular commodity, say a ton of iron, irrespective of whether it is
the work of A or of B, that is to say, different individuals expend
equal amounts of labour-time to produce use-values which are
qualitatively and quantitatively equal. In other words, it is assumed
that the labour-time contained in a commodity is the labour-time
necessary for its production, namely the labour-time required, under the
generally prevailing conditions of production, to produce another unit
of the same commodity.

From the analysis of exchange-value it follows that the conditions of
labour which creates exchange-value are *social categories* of labour or
categories of *social labour*, social however not in the general sense
but in the particular sense, denoting a specific type of society.
Uniform simple labour implies first of all that the labour of different
individuals is equal and that their labour is treated as *equal* by
being in fact reduced to homogeneous labour. The labour of every
individual in so far as it manifests itself in exchange-values possesses
this social character of equality, and it manifests itself in
exchange-value only in so far as it is equated with the labour of all
other individuals.

Furthermore, in exchange-value the labour-time of a particular
individual is directly represented as *labour-time in general*, and this
*general character* of individual labour appears as the social character
of this labour. The labour-time expressed in exchange-value is the
labour-time of an individual, but of an individual in no way differing
from the next individual and from all other individuals in so far as
they perform equal labour; the labour-time, therefore, which one person
requires for the production of a given commodity is the *necessary*
labour-time which any other person would require to produce the same
commodity. It is the labour-time of an individual, *his* labour-time,
but only as labour-time common to all; consequently it is quite
immaterial *whose* individual labour-time this is. This universal
labour-time finds its expression in a universal product, a *universal
equivalent*, a definite amount of materialised labour-time, for which
the distinct form of the use-value in which it is manifested as the
direct product of one person is a matter of complete indifference, and
it can be converted at will into any other form of use-value, in which
it appears as the product of any other person. Only as such a
*universal* magnitude does it represent a *social magnitude.* The labour
of an individual can produce exchange-value only if it produces
universal equivalents, that is to say, if the individual's labour-time
represents universal labour-time or if universal labour-time represents
individual labour-time. The effect is the same as if the different
individuals had amalgamated their labour-time and allocated different
portions of the labour-time at their joint disposal to the various
use-values. The labour-time of the individual is thus, in fact, the
labour-time required by society to produce a particular use-value, that
is to satisfy a particular want. But what matters here is only the
specific manner in which the social character of labour is established.
A certain amount of a spinner's labour-time is materialised, say, in 100
lb. of linen yarn. The same amount of labour-time is assumed to be
represented in 100 yards of linen, the product of a weaver. Since these
two products represent equal amounts of universal labour-time, and are
therefore equivalents of any use-value which contains the same amount of
labour-time, they are equal to each other. Only because the labour -time
of the spinner and the labour-time of the weaver represent universal
labour-time, and their products are thus universal equivalents, is the
social aspect of the labour of the two individuals represented for each
of them by the labour of the other, that is to say, the labour of the
weaver represents it for the spinner, and the labour of the spinner
represents it for the weaver. On the other hand, under the rural
patriarchal system of production, when spinner and weaver lived under
the same roof -- the women of the family spinning and the men weaving,
say for the requirements of the family -- yarn and linen were *social*
products, and spinning and weaving *social* labour within the framework
of the family. But their social character did not appear in the form of
yarn becoming a universal equivalent exchanged for linen as a universal
equivalent, i.e., of the two products exchanging for each other as equal
and equally valid expressions of the same universal labour-time. On the
contrary, the product of labour bore the specific social imprint of the
family relationship with its naturally evolved division of labour. Or
let us take the services and dues in kind of the Middle Ages. It was the
distinct labour of the individual in its original form, the particular
features of his labour and not its universal aspect that formed the
social ties at that time. Or finally let us take communal labour in its
spontaneously evolved form as we find it among all civilised nations at
the dawn of their history. [^\[3\]^](#3){#3a} In this case the social
character of labour is evidently not effected by the labour of the
individual assuming the abstract form of universal labour or his product
assuming the form of a universal equivalent. The communal system on
which this mode of production is based prevents the labour of an
individual from becoming private labour and his product the private
product of a separate individual; it causes individual labour to appear
rather as the direct function of a member of the social organisation.
Labour which manifests itself in exchange-value appears to be the labour
of an isolated individual. It becomes social labour by assuming the form
of its direct opposite, of abstract universal labour.

Lastly, it is a characteristic feature of labour which posits
exchange-value that it causes the social relations of individuals to
appear in the perverted form of a social relation between things. The
labour of different persons is equated and treated as universal labour
only by bringing one use-value into relation with another one in the
guise of exchange-value. Although it is thus correct to say that
exchange-value is a relation between persons, [^\[4\]^](#4){#4a} it is
however necessary to add that it is a relation hidden by a material
veil. Just as a pound of iron and a pound of gold have the *same* weight
despite their different physical and chemical properties, so two
commodities which have different use-values but contain the same amount
of labour-time have the *same exchange-value*. Exchange-value thus
appears to be a social determination of use-values, a determination
which is proper to them as things and in consequence of which they are
able in definite proportions to take one another's place in the exchange
process, i.e., they are equivalents, just as simple chemical elements
combined in certain proportions form chemical equivalents. Only the
conventions of our everyday life make it appear commonplace and ordinary
that social relations of production should assume the shape of things,
so that the relations into which people enter in the course of their
work appear as the relation of things to one another and of things to
people. This mystification is still a very simple one in the case of a
commodity. Everybody understands more or less clearly that the relations
of commodities as exchange-values are really the relations of people to
the productive activities of one another. The semblance of simplicity
disappears in more advanced relations of production. All the illusions
of the Monetary System arise from the failure to perceive that money,
though a physical object with distinct properties, represents a social
relation of production. As soon as the modern economists, who sneer at
illusions of the Monetary System, deal with the more complex economic
categories, such as capital, they display the same illusions. This
emerges clearly in their confession of naive astonishment when the
phenomenon that they have just ponderously described as a thing
reappears as a social relation and, a moment later, having been defined
as a social relation, teases them once more as a thing.

Since the exchange-value of commodities is indeed nothing but a mutual
relation between various kinds of labour of individuals regarded as
equal and universal labour, i.e., nothing but a material expression of a
specific social form of labour, it is a tautology to say that labour is
the only source of exchange-value and accordingly of wealth in so far as
this consists of exchange-value. It is equally a tautology to say that
material in its natural state does not have exchange-value
[^\[5\]^](#5){#5a} since it contains no labour, and that exchange-value
as such includes no material in a natural state. It is true that William
Petty calls "labour the father and earth the mother of wealth\", Bishop
Berkeley asks

"whether the four elements, and man's labour therein, be not the true
source of wealth," [^\[6\]^](#6){#6a}

and the American Thomas Cooper explains in popular form:

"Take away from a piece of bread the labour bestowed by the baker on the
flour, by the miller on the grain brought to him, by the farmer in
ploughing, sowing, tending, gathering, threshing, cleaning and
transporting the seed, and what will remain? A few grains of grass,
growing wild in the woods, and unfit for any human purpose."
[^\[7\]^](#7){#7a}

But all these observations are concerned not with abstract labour, which
is the source of exchange-value, but with concrete labour as the source
of material wealth, in short with labour in so far as it produces
use-values. Since the use-value of the commodity is postulated, the
specific utility and the definite usefulness of the labour expended on
it is also postulated; but this is the only aspect of labour as useful
labour which is relevant to the study of commodities. In considering
bread as a use-value, we are concerned with its properties as an article
of food and by no means with the labour of the farmer, miller, baker,
etc. Even if the labour required were reduced by 95 per cent as a result
of some invention, the usefulness of a loaf of bread would remain quite
unaffected. It would lose not a single particle of its use-value even if
it dropped ready-made from the sky. Whereas labour positing
exchange-value manifests itself in the equality of commodities as
universal equivalents, labour as useful productive activity manifests
itself in the infinite variety of use-values. Whereas labour positing
exchange-value is abstrect universal and uniform labour, labour positing
use-value is concrete and distinctive labour, comprising infinitely
varying kinds of labour as regards its form and the material to which it
is applied.

It would be wrong to say that labour which produces use-values is the
only source of the wealth produced by it, that is of material wealth.
Since labour is an activity which adapts material for some purpose or
other, it needs material as a prerequisite. Different use-values contain
very different proportions of labour and natural products, but use-value
always comprises a natural element. As useful activity directed to the
appropriation of natural factors in one form or another, labour is a
natural condition of human existence, a condition of material
interchange between man and nature, quite independent of the form of
society. On the other hand, the labour which posits exchange-value is a
specific social form of labour. For example, tailoring if one considers
its physical aspect as a distinct productive activity produces a coat,
but not the exchange-value of the coat. The exchange-value is produced
by it not as tailoring as such but as abstract universal labour, and
this belongs to a social framework not devised by the tailor. Women in
ancient domestic industry, for instance, produced coats without
producing the exchange-value of coats. Labour as a source of material
wealth was well known both to Moses, the law-giver, and to Adam Smith,
the customs official. [^\[8\]^](#8){#8a}

Let us now examine a few propositions which follow from the reduction of
exchange-value to labour-time.

A commodity as a use-value has an eminently material function. Wheat for
example is used as food. A machine replaces a certain amount of labour.
This function, by virtue of which a commodity is a use-value, an article
of consumption, may be called its service, the service it renders as a
use-value. But the commodity as an exchange-value is always considered
solely from the standpoint of the result. What matters is not the
service it renders, but the service [^\[9\]^](#9){#9a} rendered to it in
the course of its production. Thus the exchange-value of a machine, for
instance, is determined not by the amount of labour-time which it can
replace, but by the amount of labour-time expended in its production and
therefore required for the production of a new machine of the same type.

Thus, if the amount of labour required for the production of commodities
remained constant, their exchange-value would also remain unchanged. But
the facility or difficulty of production varies continually. If the
productivity of labour grows, the same use-value will be produced in
less time. If\~the productivity of labour declines, more time will be
needed to produce the same use-value. The amount of labour-time
contained in a commodity, and therefore its exchange-value, is
consequently a variable quantity, rising or falling in inverse
proportion to the rise or fall of the productivity of labour. The level
of the productivity of labour, which is predetermined in manufacturing
industry, depends in agriculture and extractive industry also upon
unpredictable natural conditions. The same quantity of labour will
result in a larger or smaller output of various metals -- depending on
the relative abundance of the deposits of these metals in the earth's
crust. The same amount of labour may yield two bushels of wheat in a
favourable season, and perhaps only one bushel in an unfavourable
season. Scarcity or abundance brought about by natural circumstances
seems in this case to determine the exchange-value of commodities,
because it determines the productivity of the specific concrete labour
which is bound up with the natural conditions.

Equal amounts of labour-time, or equal amounts of exchange-value, are
contained in unequal volumes of different use-values. The smaller the
volume of a use-value which contains a given amount of labour-time as
compared with other use-values of commodities, the greater is the
specific exchange-value of that commodity. If we find that in different
epochs of civilisation separated by long periods of time, various
use-values -- for example gold, silver, copper and iron, or wheat, rye,
barley and oats -- form a series of specific exchange-values which on
the whole retain their relative order in relation to one another, though
not their exact numerical proportions, it follows that the progressive
development of the social productive forces has exerted a uniform or
nearly uniform effect on the labour-time required for the production of
these commodities.

The exchange-value of a commodity is not expressed in its own use-value.
But as materialisation of universal social labour-time, the use-value of
one commodity is brought into relation with the use-values of other
commodities. The exchange-value of one commodity thus manifests itself
in the use-values of other commodities. In fact the exchange-value of
one commodity expressed in the use-value of another commodity represents
equivalence. If one says, for instance, one yard of linen is worth two
pounds of coffee, then the exchange-value of linen is expressed in the
use-value of coffee, and it is moreover expressed in a definite quantity
of this use-value. Once the proportion is given, the value of any
quantity of linen can be expressed in terms of coffee. It is evident
that the exchange-value of a commodity, e.g., linen, is not exhaustively
expressed by the proportion in which a particular commodity, e.g.,
coffee, forms its equivalent. The quantity of universal labour-time
represented by a yard of linen exists simultaneously in infinitely
varied amounts of the use-values of all other commodities. The use-value
of any other commodity taken in the proportion which represents the same
quantity of labour-time constitutes an equivalent for the yard of linen.
The exchange-value of this particular commodity can therefore be
exhaustively exprcssed only by the infinite number of equations in which
the use-values of all other commodities form its equivalent. The only
exhaustive expression for a universal equivalent is the sum of these
equations or the totality of the different proportions in which a
commodity can be exchanged for any other commodity. For example the
series of equations --

1 yard of linen = ½ lb. of tea\
1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee\
1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread\
1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico\

may be put in the following form --

1 yard of linen = 1/8 lb. of tea + ½ lb. of coffee 2 lbs. Of bread + 1½
yards of calico.

Thus if we had all the equations in which the value of a yard of linen
is exhaustively expressed, we could denote its exchange-value in the
form of a series. This is in fact an infinite series, for the range of
commodities can never be finally circumscribed but expands continuously.
Since the exchange-value of one commodity is measured by the use-values
of all other commodities, the exchange-values of all other commodities
are on the contrary measured in terms of the use-value of the one
commodity measured by them. [^\[10\]^](#10){#10a} If the exchange-value
of one yard of linen is expressed in 1/2 lb. of tea, or 2 lbs. of
coffee, or 6 yards of calico, or 8 lbs. of bread, etc., it follows that
coffee, tea, calico, bread, etc., must be equal to one another in the
proportion in which they are equal to linen, a third magnitude, linen
thus serves as a common measure of their exchange-value. The
exchange-value of any commodity considered as materialised universal
labour-time, .e., as a definite quantity of universal labour-time, is
measured successively in terms of definite quantities of the use-values
of all other commodities; and on the other hand the exchange-values of
all other commodities are measured in the use-value of this one
exclusive commodity. But any commodity considered as exchange-value is
both the exclusive commodity which serves as the common measure of the
exchange-values of all other commodities and on the other hand it is
merely one commodity of the many commodities in the series in which the
exchange-value of any other commodity is directly expressed.

The existing number of different types of commodities does not affect
the *value* of a commodity. But whether the series of equations in which
its exchange-value can be realised is longer or shorter depends on the
greater or smaller variety of different commodities. The series of
equations which express, say, the value of coffee shows the range of its
exchangeability, the limits within which it functions as an
exchange-value. The exchange-value of a commodity as the objective
expression of universal social labour-time finds its appropriate
expression of equivalence in the infinite variety of use-values.

We have seen that the exchange-value of a commodity varies with the
quantity of labour-time directly contained in it. Its realised
exchange-value, that is its exchange-value expressed in the use-values
of other commodities, must also depend on the degree to which the
labour-time expended on the production of all other commodities varies.
For example, if the labour-time necessary for the production of a bushel
of wheat remained unchanged, while the labour-time needed for the
production of all other commodities doubled, the exchange-value of a
bushel of wheat in terms of its equivalents would have been halved. The
result would actually be the same as if the labour-time required to
produce a bushel of wheat had been halved and the labour-time required
to produce all other commodities had remained unchanged. The value of
commodities is determined by the amount of them which can be produced in
a given labour-time. In order to examine what changes are liable to
affect this proportion, let us take two commodities, A and B. *First*
The labour-time required for the production of B is assumed to remain
unchanged. In this case the exchange-value of A expressed in terms of B
falls or rises in direct proportion to the decrease or increase in the
labour-time necessary for the production of A. *Secondly*. The
labour-time necessary for the production of commodity A is assumed to
remain unchanged. The exchange-value of commodity A in terms of B falls
or rises in inverse proportion to the decrease or increase in the
labour-time required to produce B. *Thirdly*. The labour-time required
for the production of A and of B is assumed to decrease or increase at
the same rate. The equation expressing the value of commodity A in terms
of B remains unchanged in this case. If some factor were to cause the
productivity of all types of labour to fall in equal degree, thus
requiring the same proportion of additional labour for the production of
all commodities, then the value of *all* commodities would rise, the
actual expression of their exchange-value remaining unchanged, and the
real wealth of society would decrease, since the production of the same
quantity of use-values would require a larger amount of labour-time.
*Fourthly*. The labour-time required for the production of both A and B
is assumed to increase or decrease but in unequal degree, or else the
labour-time required for the production of A is assumed to increase
while that required for B decreases, or vice versa. All these cases can
be simply reduced to the position where the labour-time required for the
production of one commodity remains unchanged, while that required for
the production of the other either increases or decreases.

The exchange-value of any commodity is expressed in terms of the
use-value of any other commodity, either in whole units or in fractions
of that use-value. Every commodity as exchange-value can be just as
easily divided as the labour-time contained in it. The equivalence of
commodities is just as independent of the physical divisibility of their
use-values as the summation of the exchange-values of commodities is
unaffected by the changes which the use-values of the commodities may
undergo in the course of their transformation into a *single* new
commodity.

So far two aspects of the commodity -- use-value and exchange-value --
have been examined, but each one separately. The commodity, however, is
the direct *unity* of use-value and exchange-value, and at the same time
it is a commodity only in relation to other commodities. The *exchange
process* of commodities is the *real* relation that exists between them.
This is a social process which is carried on by individuals
independently of one another, but they take part in it only as
commodity-owners; they exist for one another only insofar as their
commodities exist; they thus appear to be in fact the conscious
representatives of the exchange process.

The commodity *is* a use-value, wheat, linen, a diamond, machinery,
etc., but as a commodity it is simultaneously *not* a use-value. It
would not be a commodity, if it were a use-value for its owner, that is
a direct means for the satisfaction of his own needs. For its owner it
is on the contrary a *non-use-value*, that is merely the physical
depository of exchange-value, or simply *a means of exchange*. Use-value
as an active carrier of exchange-value becomes a means of exchange. The
commodity is a use-value for its owner only so far as it is an
exchange-value. \[It is in this sense that Aristotle speaks of
exchange-value (see the passage quoted at the beginning of this
chapter).\] The commodity therefore *has* still to *become* a use-value,
in the first place a use-value for others. Since it is not a use-value
to its owner, it must be a use-value to owners of other commodities. If
this is not the case, then the labour expended on it was useless; labour
and the result accordingly is not a commodity. The commodity must, on
the other hand, become a use-value *for its owner*, since his means of
existence exist outside it, in the use-values of other people's
commodities. To *become* a use- value, the commodity must encounter the
particular need which it can satisfy. Thus the use-values of commodities
become use-values by a mutual exchange of places: they pass from the
hands of those for whom they were means of exchange into the hands of
those for whom they serve as consumer goods. Only as a result of this
universal *alienation* of commodities does the labour contained in them
become useful labour. Commodities do not acquire a new economic form *in
the course* of mutual relations as use-values. On the contrary, the
specific form which distinguished them as commodities disappears. Bread,
for instance, in passing from the baker to the consumer does not change
its character as bread. It is rather that the consumer treats it as a
use- value, as a particular foodstuff, whereas so long as it was in the
hands of the baker it was simply representative of an economic relation,
a concrete and at the same time an abstract thing. The only
transformation therefore that commodities experience in the course of
becoming use-values is the cessation of their formal existence in which
they were non-use-values for their owner, and use-values for their
non-owner. To become use-values commodities must be altogether
alienated; they must enter into the exchange process; exchange however
is concerned merely with their aspect as exchange-values. Hence, only by
being realized as exchange-values can they be realized as use-values.

The individual commodity as a use-value was originally regarded as
something independent, while as an exchange- value it was from the
outset regarded in its relation to all other commodities But this was
merely a theoretical, hypothetical, relation. It realises itself only in
the process of exchange. On the other hand, a commodity is an exchange-
value in so far as a definite amount of labour-time has been expended on
its production and it accordingly represents *materialised labour-time*.
Yet the commodity as it comes into being is only materialised individual
labour-time of a specific kind, and not *universal* labour-time. The
commodity is thus not immediately exchange-value, but has still to
*become* exchange-value. To begin with, it can be materialisation of
universal labour-time only when it represents a particular useful
application of labour-time, that is a use- value. This is the material
condition under which alone the labour-time contained in commodities is
regarded as universal, social labour-time. A commodity can only
therefore become a use-value if it is realised as an exchange-value,
while it can only be realised as an exchange-value if it is alienated
and functions as a use-value. The alienation of a commodity as a
use-value is only possible to the person for whom it is a use-value,
*i.e.*, an object satisfying particular needs. On the other hand, it can
only be alienated in exchange for another commodity, or if we regard the
matter from the standpoint of the owner of the other commodity, he too
can only alienate, *i.e.,* realise, his commodity by bringing it into
contact with the particular need of which it is the object. During the
universal alienation of commodities as *use-values* they are brought
into relation with one another as discrete things which are physically
different and because of their specific properties satisfy particular
needs. But as mere use-values they exist independently of one another or
rather without any connection. They can be exchanged as use-values only
in connection with particular needs. They are, however, exchangeable
only as equivalents, and they are equivalents only as equal quantities
of materialised labour-time, when their physical properties as use-
values, and hence the relations of these commodities to specific needs,
are entirely disregarded. A commodity functions as an exchange-value if
it can freely take the place of a definite quantity of any other
commodity, irrespective of whether or not it constitutes a use-value for
the owner of the other commodity. But for the owner of the other
commodity it becomes a commodity only in so far as it constitutes a
use-value for him, and for the owner in whose hands it is it becomes an
exchange-value only in so far as it is a commodity for the other owner.
One and the same relation must therefore be simultaneously a relation of
essentially equal commodities which differ only in magnitude, i.e., a
relation which expresses their equality as materialisations of universal
labour-time, and at the same time it must be their relation as
qualitatively different things, as distinct use-values for distinct
needs, in short a relation which differentiates them as actual
use-values But equality and inequality thus posited are mutually
exclusive. The result is not simply a vicious circle of problems, where
the solution of one problem presupposes the solution of the other, but a
whole complex of contradictory premises, since the fulfillment of one
condition depends directly upon the fulfillment of its opposite.

The exchange process must comprise both the evolution and the solution
of these contradictions, which cannot however be demonstrated in the
process in this simple form We have merely observed how the commodities
themselves are related to one another as use-values, i.e., how
commodities as use-values function *within* the exchange process. On the
other hand, exchange-value as we have considered it till now has merely
existed as our abstraction, or, if one prefers, as the abstraction of
the individual commodity- owner, who keeps the commodity as use-value in
the ware- house, and has it on his conscience as exchange-value. In the
exchange process, however, the commodities must exist for one another
not only as use-values but also as exchange- values, and this aspect of
their existence must appear as their own mutual relation. The difficulty
which confronted us in the first place was that the commodity as a
use-value has to be alienated, disposed of, before it can function as an
exchange-value, as materialised labour, while on the contrary its
alienation as a use-value presupposes its existence as exchange-value.
But let us suppose that this difficulty has been overcome, that the
commodity has shed its particular use-value and has thereby fulfilled
the material condition of being socially useful labour, instead of the
particular labour of an individual by himself. In the exchange process,
the commodity as exchange-value must then become a universal equivalent,
materialised general labour-time for all other commodities; it has thus
no longer the limited function of a particular use-value, but is capable
of being directly represented in all use-values as its equivalents.
Every commodity however is *the* commodity which, as a result of the
alienation of its particular use-value, must appear as the direct
materialisation of universal labour- time. But on the other hand, only
particular commodities, particular use-values embodying the labour of
private individuals, confront one another in the exchange process.
Universal labour-time itself is an abstraction which, as such, does not
exist for commodities.

Let us consider the series of equations in which the exchange-value of a
commodity is expressed in concrete terms, for example --

1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee\
1 yard of linen = ½ lb. of tea\
1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread, etc.\

To be sure, these equations merely denote that equal amounts of
universal social labour-time are materialised in 1 yard of linen, 2 lbs.
of coffee, 1/2 lb. of tea, etc. But the different kinds of individual
labour represented in these particular use-values, in fact, become
labour in general, and in this way social labour, only by actually being
exchanged for one another in quantities which are proportional to the
labour-time contained in them. Social labour-time exists in these
commodities in a latent state, so to speak, and becomes evident only in
the course of their exchange. The point of departure is not the labour
of individuals considered as social labour, but on the contrary the
particular kinds of labour of private individuals, i.e., labour which
proves that it is universal social labour only by the supersession of
its original character in the exchange process. Universal social labour
is consequently not a ready-made prerequisite but an emerging result.
Thus a new difficulty arises: on the one hand, commodities must enter
the exchange process as materialized universal labour-time, on the other
hand, the labour-time of individuals becomes materialized universal
labour-time only as the result of the exchange process.

It is through the alienation of its use-value, that is of its original
form of existence, that every commodity has to acquire its corresponding
existence as exchange-value. The commodity must therefore assume a dual
form existence in the exchange process. On the other hand, its second
form of existence, exchange-value, can only be represented by another
commodity, for only commodities confront one another in the exchange
process. How is it possible to present a particular commodity directly
as *materialised universal labour-time*, or -- which amounts to the same
thing -- how can the individual labour-time materialised in a particular
commodity directly assume a universal character? The concrete expression
of the exchange-value of a commodity, i.e., of any commodity considered
as universal equivalent, consists of an infinite series of equations
such as --

1 yard of linen = 2 lbs. of coffee\
1 yard of linen = 1/2 lb. of tea\
1 yard of linen = 8 lbs. of bread\
1 yard of linen = 6 yards of calico\
1 yard of linen = and so on.\

This is a theoretical statement since the commodity is merely *regarded*
as a definite quantity of materialised universal labour-time. A
particular commodity as a universal equivalent is transformed from a
pure abstraction into a *social* result of the exchange process, if one
simply reverses the above series of equations. For example --

2 lbs. of coffee = 1 yard of linen\
1/2 lb. of tea =1 yard of linen\
8 lbs. of bread =1 yard of linen\
6 yards of calico=1 yard of linen.\

Just as the labour-time contained in coffee, tea, bread, calico, in
short in all commodities, is expressed in terms of linen, so conversely
the exchange-value of linen is reflected in all other commodities which
act as its equivalents, and the labour-time materialised in linen
becomes direct universal labour-time, which is equally embodied in
different volumes of all other commodities. Linen thus becomes the
*universal equivalent* in consequence of the *universal action* of all
other commodities in relation to it. Every commodity considered as
exchange-value became a measure of the value of all other commodities.
In this case, on the contrary, because the exchange-value of all
commodities is measured in terms of one particular commodity, the
excluded commodity becomes the adequate representation of exchange-
value as the universal equivalent. On the other hand, the infinite
series or the infinite number of equations in which the exchange-value
of each commodity was expressed is now reduced to a single equation
consisting of two terms. The equation 2 lbs. of coffee = 1 yard of linen
is now a comprehensive expression for the exchange-value of coffee, for
in this expression it appears as the direct equivalent to a definite
quantity of any other commodity. Commodities within the exchange process
accordingly exist for one another, or appear to one another, as
exchange-values in the form of linen. The fact that all commodities are
related to one another as exchange-values! i.e., simply as different
quantities of materialised universal labour-time, now appears in the
form that all exchange-values represent merely different quantities of
one and the *same* article, linen. Universal labour-time thus appears as
a specific thing, as a commodity in addition to and apart from all other
commodities. At the same time, the equation in which one commodity
represents the exchange-value of another commodity, e.g., 2 lbs. of
coffee = 1 yard of linen, has still to be realised. Only by being
alienated as a use-value -- an alienation which depends on whether it is
able to prove in the exchange process that it is a needed object -- is
it really converted from the form of coffee into that of linen, thus
becoming a universal equivalent and really representing exchange-value
for all other commodities. On the other hand, because as a result of
their alienation as use-values all commodities are converted into linen,
linen becomes the converted form of all other commodities, and only as a
result of this transformation of all other commodities into linen does
it become the direct *reification of universal labour-time*, i.e., the
product of universal alienation and of the supersession of all
individual labour. While commodities thus assume a dual form in order to
represent exchange- value for one another, the commodity which has been
set apart as universal equivalent acquires a dual use-value. In addition
to its particular use-value as an individual commodity it acquires a
universal use-value. This latter use- value is itself a determinate
form, i.e., it arises from the specific role which this commodity plays
as a result of the universal action exerted on it by the other
commodities in the exchange process. The use-value of each commodity as
an object which satisfies particular needs has a different value in
different hands, e.g., it has one value for the person who disposes of
it and a different value for the person who acquires it. The commodity
which has been set apart as the universal equivalent is now an object
which satisfies a universal need arising from the exchange process
itself, and has the same use-value for everybody -- that of being
carrier of exchange-value or a universal medium of exchange. Thus the
contradiction inherent in the commodity as such, namely that of being a
particular use-value and simultaneously universal equivalent, and hence
a use-value for everybody or a universal use-value, has been solved in
the case of this one commodity. Whereas now the exchange-value of all
other commodities is in the first place presented in the form of an
ideal equation with the commodity that has been set apart, an equation
which has still to be realised; the use-value of this commodity, though
real, seems in the exchange process to have merely a formal existence
which has still to be realised by conversion into actual use-values. The
commodity originally appeared as commodity in general, as universal
labour-time materialised in a particular use-value. All commodities are
compared in the exchange process with the one excluded commodity which
is regarded as commodity in general, *the commodity*, the embodiment of
universal labour-time in a particular use-value. They are therefore as
*particular* commodities opposed to one particular commodity considered
as being the *universal* commodity. \[The same term is used by Genovesi.
(Note in author's copy.)\] The fact that commodity-owners treat one
another's labour as universal social labour appears in the form of their
treating their own commodities as exchange-values; and the interrelation
of commodities as exchange-values in the exchange process appears as
their universal relation to a particular commodity as the adequate
expression of their exchange-value; this in turn appears as the specific
relation of this particular commodity to all other commodities and hence
as the distinctive, as it were naturally evolved, social character of a
thing. The particular commodity which thus represents the exchange-value
of all commodities, that is to say, the exchange-value of commodities
regarded as a particular, exclusive commodity, constitutes *money*. It
is a crystallization of the exchange-value of commodities and is formed
in the exchange process. Thus, while in the exchange process commodities
become *use-values* for one another by discarding all determinate forms
and confronting one another in their immediate physical aspect, they
must assume a new determinate form they must evolve money, so as to be
able to confront one another as *exchange-values*. Money is not a
symbol, just as the existence of a use-value in the form of a commodity
is no symbol. A social relation of production appears as something
existing apart from individual human beings, and the distinctive
relations into which they enter in the course of production in society
appear as the specific properties of a thing -- it is this perverted
appearance, this prosaically real, and by no means imaginary,
mystification that is characteristic of all social forms of labour
positing exchange-value. This perverted appearance manifests itself
merely in a more striking manner in money than it does in commodities.

The necessary physical properties of the particular commodity, in which
the money form of all other commodities is to be crystallised -- in so
far as they direct\]y follow from the nature of exchange-value -- are:
unlimited divisibility, homogeneity of its parts and uniform quality of
all units of the commodity. As the materialisation of universal labour-
time it must be homogeneous and capable of expressing only quantitative
differences. Another necessary property is durability of its use-value
since it must endure through the exchange process. Precious metals
possess these qualities in an exceptionally high degree. Since money is
not the result of deliberation or of agreement, but has come into being
spontaneously in the course of exchange, many different, more or less
unsuitable, commodities were at various times used as money. When
exchange reaches a certain stage of development, the need arises to
polarise the functions of exchange-value and use-value among various
commodities -- so that one commodity, for example, shall act as means of
exchange while another is disposed of as a use-value. The outcome is
that one commodity or sometimes several commodities representing the
most common use-value come occasionally to serve as money. Even when no
immediate need for these use-values exists, the demand for them is bound
to be more general than that for other use-values, since they constitute
the most substantial physical element in wealth.

Direct barter, the spontaneous form of exchange, signifies the beginning
of the transformation of use-values into commodities rather than the
transformation of commodities into money. Exchange-value does not
acquire an independent form, but is still directly tied to use-value.
This is manifested in two ways. Use-value, not exchange-value, is the
purpose of the whole system of production, and use- values accordingly
cease to be use-values and become means of exchange, or commodities,
only when a larger amount of them has been produced than is required for
consumption. On the other hand, they become commodities only within the
limits set by their immediate use-value, even when this function is
polarised so that the commodities to be exchanged by their owners must
be use-values for both of them, but each commodity must be a use-value
for its non-owner. In fact, the exchange of commodities evolves
originally not within primitive communities, [^\[11\]^](#11){#11a} but
on their margins, on their borders, the few points where they come into
contact with other communities. This is where barter begins and moves
thence into the interior of the community, exerting a disintegrating
influence upon it. The particular use-values which, as a result of
barter between different communities, become commodities, e.g., slaves,
cattle, metals, usually serve also as the first money within these
communities. We have seen that the degree to which the exchange- value
of a commodity functions as exchange-value is the higher, the longer the
series of its equivalents or the *larger* the sphere in which the
commodity is exchanged. The gradual extension of barter, the growing
number of exchange transactions, and the increasing variety of
commodities bartered lead, therefore, to the further development of the
commodity as exchange-value, stimulates the formation of money and
consequently has a disintegrating effect on direct barter. Economists
usually reason that the emergence of money is due to external
difficulties which the expansion of barter encounters, but they forget
that these difficulties arise from the evolution of exchange-value and
hence from that of social labour as universal labour. For example
commodities as use-values are not divisible at will, a property which as
exchange-values they should possess. Or it may happen that the commodity
belonging to A may be use-value required by B; whereas B's commodity may
not have any use-value for A. Or the commodity-owners may need each
other's commodities but these cannot be divided and their relative
exchange-values are different. In other words, on the plea of examining
simple barter, these economists display certain aspects of the
contradiction inherent in the commodity as being the direct unity of
use-value and exchange-value. On the other hand, they then persistently
regard barter as a form well adapted to commodity exchange, suffering
merely from certain technical inconveniences, to overcome which money
has been cunningly devised. Proceeding from this quite superficial point
of view, an ingenious British economist has rightly maintained that
money is merely a material instrument, like a ship or a steam engine,
and not an expression of a social relation of production, and hence is
not an economic category. It is therefore simply a malpractice to deal
with this subject in political economy, which in fact has nothing in
common with technology. [^\[12\]^](#12){#12a}

The world of commodities presupposes a developed division of labour, or
rather the division of labour manifests itself directly in the diversity
of use-values which confront one another as particular commodities and
which embody just as many diverse kinds of labour. The *division of
labour* as the aggregate of all the different types of productive
activity constitutes the totality of the physical aspects of social
labour as labour producing use-values. But it exists as such -- as
regards commodities and the exchange process -- only in its results, in
the variety of the commodities them- selves.

The exchange of commodities is the process in which the social
metabolism, in other words the exchange of particular products of
private individuals, simultaneously gives rise to definite social
relations of production, into which individuals enter in the course of
this metabolism. As they develop, the interrelations of commodities
crystallise into distinct aspects of the universal equivalent, and thus
the exchange process becomes at the same time the process of formation
of money. This process as a whole, which comprises several processes,
constitutes *circulation*.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOOTNOTES

[[1.]{.info}](#1a){#1} Aristotle, De Republica, L.I, C. "Of everything
which we possess there are two uses:\... one is the proper, and the
other the improper or secondary use of it. For example, a shoe is used
for wear, and is used for exchange; both are uses of the shoe. He who
gives a shoe in exchange for money or food to him who wants one, does
indeed use the shoe as a shoe, but this is not its proper or primary
purpose, for a shoe is not made to be an object of barter. The same may
be said of all possessions\.... "

[[2.]{.info}](#2a){#2} That is why German compilers write *con amore*
about use-values, calling them "goods\". See for example the section on
"goods" in I. Stein, System der Staatswissenschaft, Bd. 1. Useful
information on "goods" may be found in "manuals dealing with
merchandise."

[[3.]{.info}](#3a){#3} At present an absurdly biased view is widely
held, namely that *primitive* communal property is a specifically
Slavonic, or even an exclusively Russian, phenomenon. It is an early
form which ean be found among Romans, Teutons and Celts, and of which a
whole collection of diverse patterns (though sometimes only remnants
survive) is still in existence in India. A careful study of Asiatic,
particularly Indian, forms of communal property would indicate that the
disintegration of different forms of primitive communal ownership gives
rise to diverse forms of property. For instance, various prototypes of
Roman and Germanic private property can be traced back to certain forms
of Indian communal property.

[[4.]{.info}](#4a){#4} "La ricchezza e una ragione tra due persone."
Galiani, Della Moneta, p. 221. In Volume III of Custodi's collection of
Scrittori classici Italiani di Economia Politica. Parte Moderna, Milano,
1803.

[[5.]{.info}](#5a){#5} "In its natural state, matter \... is always
destitute of value." McCulloch, *A Discourse on the Rise, Progress,
Peculiar Objects, and Importance of Political Economy,* Second Edition,
Edinburgh, 1825, p. 48. This shows how high even a McCulloch stands
above the fetishism of German "thinkers" who assert that "material" and
half a dozen similar irrelevancies are elements of value. See, *inter
alia*, L. Stein, *op. cit*., Bd. 1, p. 170.

[[ 6.]{.info}](#6a){#6} Berkeley, *The Querist,* London, 1750.

[[7.]{.info}](#7a){#7} Thomas Cooper, *Lectures on the Elements of
Political Economy,* London, 1831 (Columbia, 1826), p. 99.

[[8.]{.info}](#8a){#8} Friedrich List has never been able to grasp the
difference between labour as a producer of something useful, a
use-value, and labour as a producer of exchange-value, a specific social
form of wealth (since his mind being occupied with practical matters was
not concerned with understanding); he therefore regarded the modern
English economists as mere plagiarists of Moses of Egypt.

[[9.]{.info}](#9a){#9} It can easily be seen what "service" the category
"service" must render to economists such as J. B. Say and F. Bastiat,
whose sagacity, as Malthus has aptly remarked, always abstracts from the
specific form of economic conditions.

[[10.]{.info}](#10a){#10} "It is another peculiarity of measures to
enter into such a relation with the thing measured, that in a certain
way the thing measured becomes the measure of the measuring unit."
Montanari, Della Moneta, p. 41 in Custodi's collection, Vol. III, Parte
Antica.

[[11.]{.info}](#11a){#11} Aristotle makes a similar observation with
regard to the individual family considered as the primitive community.
But the primitive form of the family is the tribal family, from the
historical dissolution of which the individual family develops. "In the
first community, indeed which is the family, this art" (that is, trade)
"is obviously of no use" (Aristotle, loc. cit.).

[[12.]{.info}](#12a){#12} "Money is, in fact, only the instrument for
carrying on buying and selling" (but could you please explain what you
mean by buying and selling?) "and the consideration of it no more forms
a part of the science of political economy than the consideration of
ships or steam engines, or of any other instruments employed to
facilitate the production and distribution of wealth" (Thomas Hodgskin,
Popular Political Economy, London, 1827, pp. 178,179).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Notes on the Analysis of Commodities](ch01a.htm)\
[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Capital](../../1867-c1/ch01.htm#S1)
\| [Marx Engels Archive](../../../index.htm)
