Karl Marx 1859\
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy

### Preface

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} K. Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy*, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1977, with some notes by R.
Rojas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#001}

I examine the system of bourgeois economy in the following order:
*capital, landed property, wage-labour; the State, foreign trade, world
market.*

The economic conditions of existence of the three great classes into
which modern bourgeois society is divided are analysed under the first
three headings; the interconnection of the other three headings is
self-evident. The first part of the first book, dealing with Capital,
comprises the following chapters: 1. The commodity, 2. Money or simple
circulation; 3. Capital in general. The present part consists of the
first two chapters. The entire material lies before me in the form of
monographs, which were written not for publication but for
self-clarification at widely separated periods; their remoulding into an
integrated whole according to the plan I have indicated will depend upon
circumstances.

[]{#002}

A general introduction, which I had drafted, is omitted, since on
further consideration it seems to me confusing to anticipate results
which still have to be substantiated, and the reader who really wishes
to follow me will have to decide to advance from the particular to the
general. A few brief remarks regarding the course of my study of
political economy are appropriate here.

[]{#003}

Although I studied jurisprudence, I pursued it as a subject subordinated
to philosophy and history. In the year 1842-43, as editor of the
*Rheinische Zeitung,* I first found myself in the embarrassing position
of having to discuss what is known as material interests. The
deliberations of the Rhenish Landtag on forest thefts and the division
of landed property; the official polemic started by Herr von Schaper,
then Oberprasident of the Rhine Province, against the *Rheinische
Zeitung* about the condition of the Moselle peasantry, and finally the
debates on free trade and protective tariffs caused me in the first
instance to turn my attention to economic questions. On the other hand,
at that time when good intentions "to push forward" often took the place
of factual knowledge, an echo of French socialism and communism,
slightly tinged by philosophy, was noticeable in the *Rheinische
Zeitung.* I objected to this dilettantism, but at the same time frankly
admitted in a controversy with the *Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung* that
my previous studies did not allow me to express any opinion on the
content of the French theories. When the publishers of the *Rheinische
Zeitung* conceived the illusion that by a more compliant policy on the
part of the paper it might be possible to secure the abrogation of the
death sentence passed upon it, I eagerly grasped the opportunity to
withdraw from the public stage to my study.

[]{#004}

The first work which I undertook to dispel the doubts assailing me was a
critical re-examination of the Hegelian philosophy of law; the
introduction to this work being published in the *Deutsch-Franzosische
Jahrbucher* issued in Paris in 1844. My inquiry led me to the conclusion
that neither legal relations nor political forms could be comprehended
whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general development
of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in the
material conditions of life, the totality of which Hegel, following the
example of English and French thinkers of the eighteenth century,
embraces within the term "civil society"; that the anatomy of this civil
society, however, has to be sought in political economy. The study of
this, which I began in Paris, I continued in Brussels, where I moved
owing to an expulsion order issued by M. Guizot. The general conclusion
at which I arrived and which, once reached, became the guiding principle
of my studies can be summarised as follows. []{#005}

In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into
definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely
relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development
of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations
of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to
which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of
production of material life conditions the general process of social,
political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that
determines their existence, but their social existence that determines
their consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material
productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing
relations of production or -- this merely expresses the same thing in
legal terms -- with the property relations within the framework of which
they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive
forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of
social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or
later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.
[]{#006}

In studying such transformations it is always necessary to distinguish
between the material transformation of the economic conditions of
production, which can be determined with the precision of natural
science, and the legal, political, religious, artistic or philosophic --
in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this
conflict and fight it out. Just as one does not judge an individual by
what he thinks about himself, so one cannot judge such a period of
transformation by its consciousness, but, on the contrary, this
consciousness must be explained from the contradictions of material
life, from the conflict existing between the social forces of production
and the relations of production. No social order is ever destroyed
before all the productive forces for which it is sufficient have been
developed, and new superior relations of production never replace older
ones before the material conditions for their existence have matured
within the framework of the old society. []{#007}

Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only such tasks as it is able to
solve, since closer examination will always show that the problem itself
arises only when the material conditions for its solution are already
present or at least in the course of formation. In broad outline, the
Asiatic, ancient,^[\[A\]](#e1){#eb1}^ feudal and modern bourgeois modes
of production may be designated as epochs marking progress in the
economic development of society. The bourgeois mode of production is the
last antagonistic form of the social process of production --
antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagonism but of an
antagonism that emanates from the individuals\' social conditions of
existence -- but the productive forces developing within bourgeois
society create also the material conditions for a solution of this
antagonism. The prehistory of human society accordingly closes with this
social formation.

[]{#008}

Frederick Engels, with whom I maintained a constant exchange of ideas by
correspondence since the publication of his brilliant essay on the
critique of economic categories (printed in the *Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher,* arrived by another road (compare his *Lage der arbeitenden
Klasse in England*) at the same result as I, and when in the spring of
1845 he too came to live in Brussels, we decided to set forth together
our conception as opposed to the ideological one of German philosophy,
in fact to settle accounts with our former philosophical conscience.
[]{#009} The intention was carried out in the form of a critique of
post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript \[The German Ideology\], two
large octavo volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in Westphalia
when we were informed that owing to changed circumstances it could not
be printed. We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the
mice all the more willingly since we had achieved our main purpose --
self-clarification. Of the scattered works in which at that time we
presented one or another aspect of our views to the public, I shall
mention only the *Manifesto of the Communist Party,* jointly written by
Engels and myself, and a *Discours sur le libre echange,* which I myself
published. []{#010} The salient points of our conception were first
outlined in an academic, although polemical, form in my *Misere de la
philosophie*\..., this book which was aimed at Proudhon appeared in
1847. The publication of an essay on *Wage-Labour* \[Wage-Labor and
Capital\] written in German in which I combined the lectures I had held
on this subject at the German Workers\' Association in Brussels, was
interrupted by the February Revolution and my forcible removal from
Belgium in consequence.

[]{#011}

The publication of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in 1848 and 1849 and
subsequent events cut short my economic studies, which I could only
resume in London in 1850. The enormous amount of material relating to
the history of political economy assembled in the British Museum, the
fact that London is a convenient vantage point for the observation of
bourgeois society, and finally the new stage of development which this
society seemed to have entered with the discovery of gold in California
and Australia, induced me to start again from the very beginning and to
work carefully through the new material. These studies led partly of
their own accord to apparently quite remote subjects on which I had to
spend a certain amount of time. But it was in particular the imperative
necessity of earning my living which reduced the time at my disposal. My
collaboration, continued now for eight years, with the *New York
Tribune,* the leading Anglo-American newspaper, necessitated an
excessive fragmentation of my studies, for I wrote only exceptionally
newspaper correspondence in the strict sense. Since a considerable part
of my contributions consisted of articles dealing with important
economic events in Britain and on the continent, I was compelled to
become conversant with practical detail which, strictly speaking, lie
outside the sphere of political economy.

[]{#012}

This sketch of the course of my studies in the domain of political
economy is intended merely to show that my views -- no matter how they
may be judged and how little they conform to the interested prejudices
of the ruling classes -- are the outcome of conscientious research
carried on over many years. At the entrance to science, as at the
entrance to hell, the demand must be made:

[]{#013}

*Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto\
Ogni vilta convien che qui sia morta.\
*

\[From Dante, Divina Commedia:\
Here must all distrust be left;\
All cowardice must here be dead.\]

Karl Marx\
London, January 1859

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[A.](#eb1){#e1}]{.info} As a second footnote to the Communist
Manifesto, Engels wrote in 1888:

[]{#014} In 1847, the pre-history of society, the social organization
existing previous to recorded history, \[was\] all but unknown. Since
then, August von Haxthausen (1792-1866) discovered common ownership of
land in Russia, Georg Ludwig von Maurer proved it to be the social
foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and, by and
by, village communities were found to be, or to have been, the primitive
form of society everywhere from India to Ireland. The inner organization
of this primitive communistic society was laid bare, in its typical
form, by Lewis Henry Morgan\'s (1818-1861) crowning discovery of the
true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the
dissolution of the primeval communities, society begins to be
differentiated into separate and finally antagonistic classes. I have
attempted to retrace this dissolution in [The Origin of the Family,
Private Property, and the State](../../1884/origin-family/index.htm),
second edition, Stuttgart, 1886.

[]{#015} Thus, as the science of understanding pre-history progressed
(pre-history being that time before written records of human
civilization exist), Marx & Engels changed their understanding and
descriptions accordingly. In the above text, Marx mentions "Asiatic"
modes of production. In the idea of an Asiatic mode of production, Marx
and Engels were following Hegel's schema, see: [The Oriental
Realm](../../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/pr/prstate.htm#PR341)).
They later dropped the idea of a distinctive Asiatic mode of production,
and kept four basic forms: tribal, ancient, feudal, and capitalist.

\
 \

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[\[See also: the Abstracted version\]](preface-abs.htm)

Next: [I. The Commodity](ch01.htm)

[Table of Contents](index.htm) \| [Marx Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
