Karl Marx 1845

# Theses On Feuerbach

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written]{.info}: by Marx in Brussels in the spring of 1845, under the
title "1) *ad* Feuerbach";\
Marx's original text was first published in 1924, in German and in
Russian translation, by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in
*Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow. The English translation was
first published in the Lawrence and Wishart edition of *The German
Ideology*  in 1938.\
The most widely known version of the *Theses* is that based on Engels'
edited version, published as an appendix to his *Ludwig Feuerbach* in
1888, where he gave it the title *Theses on Feuerbach*;\
[Translated]{.info}: by Cyril Smith 2002, based on work done jointly
with Don Cuckson.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#001}

### 1

The main defect of all hitherto-existing materialism --- that of
Feuerbach included --- is that the Object [\[*der
Gegenstand*\]]{.context}, actuality, sensuousness, are conceived only in
the form of the object [\[*Objekts*\]]{.context}, or of contemplation
[\[*Anschauung*\]]{.context}, but not as human sensuous activity,
practice [\[*Praxis*\]]{.context}, not subjectively. Hence it happened
that the active side, in opposition to materialism, was developed by
idealism --- but only abstractly, since, of course, idealism does not
know real, sensuous activity as such. []{#002}Feuerbach wants sensuous
objects [\[*Objekte*\]]{.context}, differentiated from thought-objects,
but he does not conceive human activity itself as objective
[\[*gegenständliche*\]]{.context} activity. In *The Essence of
Christianity* [\[*Das Wesen des Christenthums*\]]{.context}, he
therefore regards the theoretical attitude as the only genuinely human
attitude, while practice [\[*Praxis*\]]{.context} is conceived and
defined only in its dirty-Jewish form of appearance
[\[*Erscheinungsform*\]]{.context}^[\[1\]](#jewish)^. Hence he does not
grasp the significance of 'revolutionary', of 'practical-critical',
activity.

[]{#003}

### 2

The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking
is not a question of theory but is a **practical** question. Man must
prove the truth, *i.e.*, the reality and power, the this-sidedness
[\[*Diesseitigkeit*\]]{.context} of his thinking, in practice. The
dispute over the reality or non-reality of thinking which is isolated
from practice is a purely scholastic question.

[]{#004}

### 3

The materialist doctrine that men are products of circumstances and
upbringing, and that, therefore, changed men are products of changed
circumstances and changed upbringing, forgets that it is men who change
circumstances and that the educator must himself be educated. Hence this
doctrine is bound to divide society into two parts, one of which is
superior to society. []{#005}The coincidence of the changing of
circumstances and of human activity or self-change
[\[*Selbstveränderung*\]]{.context} can be conceived and rationally
understood only as **revolutionary practice**.

[]{#006}

### 4

Feuerbach starts off from the fact of religious self-estrangement
[\[*Selbstentfremdung*\]]{.context}, of the duplication of the world
into a religious, imaginary world, and a secular
[\[*weltliche*\]]{.context} one. His work consists in resolving the
religious world into its secular basis. He overlooks the fact that after
completing this work, the chief thing still remains to be done.
[]{#007}For the fact that the secular basis lifts off from itself and
establishes itself in the clouds as an independent realm can only be
explained by the inner strife and intrinsic contradictoriness of this
secular basis. The latter must itself be understood in its contradiction
and then, by the removal of the contradiction, revolutionised. Thus, for
instance, once the earthly family is discovered to be the secret of the
holy family, the former must itself be annihilated
[\[*vernichtet*\]]{.context} theoretically and practically.

[]{#008}

### 5

Feuerbach, not satisfied with **abstract thinking**, wants **sensuous
contemplation** [\[*Anschauung*\]]{.context}; but he does not conceive
sensuousness as **practical**, human-sensuous activity.

[]{#009}

### 6

Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the essence of man
[\[*menschliche Wesen* = 'human nature'\]]{.context}. But the essence of
man is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. []{#010}In
reality, it is the ensemble of the social relations. []{#011}Feuerbach,
who does not enter upon a criticism of this real essence is hence
obliged:

[]{#012}1. To abstract from the historical process and to define the
religious sentiment regarded by itself, and to presuppose an abstract
--- isolated - human individual.

[]{#013}2. The essence therefore can by him only be regarded as
'species', as an inner 'dumb' generality which unites many individuals
only in a **natural** way.

[]{#014}

### 7

Feuerbach consequently does not see that the 'religious sentiment' is
itself a **social product**, and that the abstract individual that he
analyses belongs in reality to a particular social form.

[]{#015}

### 8

All social life is essentially **practical**. All mysteries which lead
theory to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and
in the comprehension of this practice.

[]{#016}

### 9

The highest point reached by contemplative [\[*anschauende*\]]{.context}
materialism, that is, materialism which does not comprehend sensuousness
as practical activity, is the contemplation of single individuals and of
civil society [\[*bürgerlichen Gesellschaft*\]]{.context}.

[]{#017}

### 10

The standpoint of the old materialism is civil society; the standpoint
of the new is human society or social humanity.

 

[]{#018}

### 11

Philosophers have hitherto only *interpreted* the world in various ways;
the point is to *change* it.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1.](#002){#jewish}]{.info} "Dirty-Jewish" --- according to Marhsall
Berman, this is an allusion to the Jewish God of the Old Testament, who
had to 'get his hands dirty' making the world, tied up with a symbolic
contrast between the Christian God of the Word, and the God of the Deed,
symbolising practical life. See [The Significance of the Creation in
Judaism](../../../../../reference/archive/feuerbach/works/essence/ec11.htm),
Essence of Christianity 1841

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Deutsch](../../../../../deutsch/archiv/marx-engels/1845/thesen/thesfeue-or.htm)
\| [1938 translation of Marx's original](original.htm){.mecw} \| [1969
Selected Works translation](theses.htm) \| [Engels' 1888
version](engels.htm)

[Marx/Engels Works Archive](../../../index.htm) \| [Study
Guide](guide.htm) \| [Engels on Feuerbach](feuerbach.htm){.mecw} \|
[Image of Thesis 11](../../cw/volume05/thesis11.gif) \| [Works
Index](../../date/index.htm)
