---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1904

### Synopsis of Lecture 'Scientific Socialism and Religion'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 56-63.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The lecture "Scientific Socialism and Religion"
was delivered by Plekhanov in Zurich in 1904. Only the synopsis, some
points of which were developed by Plekhanov in his later articles on
religion, is extant"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### First Hour

The theme. It may appear to be somewhat abstract. It does not touch on
even one of the urgent issues around which there is so much heated
argument, so many swords are being broken and so much ink is flowing in
the disputes between the various revolutionary parties, and, within
these, between the various shades of one and the same trend: neither the
question of the proletariat and the peasantry, nor the attitude of the
'Bund' ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ to the party, nor the organisational question.

But I thought it worthwhile sometimes to dwell on abstract questions.
Each of us will find it useful to pay attention to them; this will help
each of us to become a *whole man* (Heine). Heine (Romantische Schule)
says that Lessing was a whole man (*ein ganzer Mann*). Like another
German writer, he compared him to those pious Jews who, while building
the second temple of Jerusalem, repulsed their enemies with one hand and
continued erecting the temple with the other. As far as we can, we must
act in the same way; with one hand fight incessantly and tirelessly
against our numerous enemies, beginning with those who arrest and
imprison us, exile and shoot us (Yakutsk) ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ and ending with
those who *more or less intentionally, more or less consciously, more or
less systematically, distort our ideas --* and with the other hand we
must try to bring together at least a few stones for the construction of
our *theoretical* edifice. He who cannot extend it, must at least keep
it in order. 'Wissen ist Macht, Macht ist Wissen.' This thought has
encouraged me not to fear the abstract character of the theme. Besides,
the question is not without practical significance.

In the year 1902, the editors of the journal *Mouvement socialiste*
produced a whole *enquÃªte* on the question of the attitude of the
socialist parties of the various countries to *clericalism*.
^[\[3\]](#n3)^ This question is now becoming an important *practical*
one for international socialism. And this *practical* question has an
obvious and close connection with that *theoretical* question which you
and I will examine this evening. This practical question is not yet on
the order of the day for us in Russia; we still cannot influence
legislation directly; but we have another practical question -- the
dissenters and sectarians. Religion means very much to them.

Terms: *Scientific Socialism, Religion*.

1\. *Scientific socialism* I define as that socialism whose adherents
are convinced of the future triumph of their ideal, not because it seems
great and beautiful to them, but because the realisation of this ideal
-- which they undoubtedly consider both great and beautiful and react to
with the greatest enthusiasm, as is recognised even by their enemies --
because they are of the opinion that its realisation is being determined
and prepared by the whole course of the internal development of
contemporary, that is to say, *capitalist* society. Examples: a)
communism, b) *international peace*. (Stammler. Eclipse of the moon.)
^[\[4\]](#n4)^

In explaining the course of social development, the adherents of
scientific socialism adopt the standpoint of the *materialist
explanation of history*. The *materialist explanation of history is its
essential foundation*. What must we bear in mind of the principles of
the materialist explanation of history? Not consciousness determines
being, but being consciousness. The *mode of thought is determined by
the mode of life*. The mode of life -- by the economy.

All ideologies are, in the last analysis, the fruits of *economic
development*. So too is *religion*. Example from the history of art:
*bourgeois drama* in Britain and France. Religion. We shall see shortly
how to understand this in its application to religion. Marx: *Der Mensch
macht die Religion, nicht die Religion den Menschen*. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

2\. *What is religion?* Derivation. *Religio* -- *bond*. Some contest
this derivation. In my opinion, it is very probable. Historically,
religion can be considered as *having arisen* only when a bond between
social man and certain powers is established: with *spirits* whose
existence he acknowledges and who, in his opinion, can influence his
destiny. Religion distinguishes man from animal. Yes, as the ability *to
make mistakes*.

*Animism*. At the first stage of his development man imagined that the
whole of nature was peopled by spirits. He *personified* individual
*phenomena* and *forces* of nature. Why? Because he judged these
phenomena and forces *by analogy with himself*; the world appeared to
him to be *animated*; he conceived *phenomena* to be the result of the
activity of living creatures like himself, that is, endowed with
consciousness, will, needs, desires and passions. These living creatures
are spirits. What is a spirit? Where did this conception come from?
Dreams; fainting fits; death.

*The world as perceived by primitive man is a realm of spirits*.
*Spiritualism* -- primitive philosophy, *the savage*'s *conception of
the world*. Evaluation of the spirits: equal to him, lower, higher. He
is afraid of the latter. He tries to win their favour by *bribes, gifts
of sacrifice*.

Lucretius: *Primus in orbe deos fecit timor.* This is indisputable,
although *not every frightening spirit is a god*; *the devil is
terrifying* to the Russian peasant (the devil was terrifying even to
Luther), but the devil is not a god. *What then is a god? A god is the
spirit with whom the savage has established relations of moral
dependence* (religio), I would say goodwill relations. The savage
reveres the god; the god bestows patronage on the savage (The Old
Testament -- Abraham's Covenant with Jehovah). When such a covenant has
been established, then there is a god. But -- you ask -- what has the
*economy* to do with it? Well, listen. The fact is that every stage of
*economic* development has its own distinct conception of the role of
the god. Example: Jupiter. Primitive communist society -- mutual
guarantee; individualistic society -- punishment after death. The
conception of immortality as understood by contemporary Christians is
the outcome of prolonged historical development. Another example:
Jupiter (Zeus), *daylight, clear skies*; with the development of
cattle-breeding and agriculture his god is the giver of fertility and
abundance (*Liber*) (in his honour, feasts of the gathering of the
grapes), the patron of agriculture; with the development of intercourse,
protector of covenants -- *Deus Fidius*. He becomes the guardian of
frontiers, property (Juppiter Terminus) and so forth.

In the measure that social relations develop, these relations and the
abstract concepts arising from them are deified: Fides, Concordia,
Virtus and so on.

Now we know that there are two elements in religion: 1) a conception of
the world, 2) social morality. This conception of the world is the
conception of the ignoramus. It is founded upon ignorance. But the
boundaries of the *unknown* shrink with the broadening out of
*experience, with the increase of man's power over nature*; when man *is
able to influence nature without prayer*, by *technical influence*, he
*ceases to pray*. Auguste Compte's remark about the god of gravity. *Put
your trust in God, but keep your powder dry*. Here are two elements: God
and Self. *The Australian Bishop* refusing to pray for rain: no trust in
God here, only keep your powder dry. But does the Bishop also believe?
Of course: 1) there is much in nature he still does not know; 2) the
social relations themselves are mysterious and obscure to him.

When will the need for religion disappear? *When man feels himself
master of nature and his own social relations.*

Conclusions from the *Ramayana*. A holy and wise anchorite -- one of
those who inhabit the deserts of India in great numbers -- once prayed
to the god Indra. But the capricious god would not listen to him; the
prayer, ascending to heaven from the pure heart of the pious man,
returned without having achieved the desired results. The holy man then
became angry with Indra and rebelled against him. He brought to bear all
the holiness he had 'accumulated by his innumerable sacrifices and
prolonged self-tortures', and felt himself stronger than Indra. He in
turn began to command the heavens. At his command, new stars were born.
He himself became a *creator*. He wished even to create new and *better*
gods. Indra took fright, granted the will of the holy man and peace was
restored. The history of mankind is partly similar to this from the
religious aspect. But only partly. First of all, it is *not holiness*
that men have accumulated, but now *knowledge*, *power over nature* and
-- with time -- over their own social relations. And the time will come
when this knowledge will be sufficient for there to be no need of Indra.
Mankind will manage without God. But no matter how much God takes
fright, man will not conclude peace with him; *poor Indra will be
irrevocably doomed to die*. There are no better gods, they are all bad,
there are only some less bad than others (Schopenhauer), Engels:
^[\[6\]](#n6)^

We want to sweep away everything that claims to be supernatural and
superhuman\... For that reason we have once and for all declared war on
religion and religious ideas\... ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

But morality?

We have no need, in order\... to recognise the development of the human
species through history, its irresistible progress, its ever-certain
victory over the unreason of the individual\..., its hard but successful
struggle against nature until the final achievement of free, human
self-consciousness, the discernment of the unity of man and nature, and
the independent creation -- voluntarily and by its own effort -- of a
new world based on purely human and moral social relationships -- in
order to recognise all that in its greatness, we have no need first to
summon up the abstraction of a 'God' and to attribute to it everything
beautiful, great, sublime and truly human; we do not need to follow this
roundabout path, we do not need first to imprint the stamp of the
'divine' on what is truly human, in order to be sure of its greatness
and splendour. On the contrary, the 'more divine', in other words, the
more inhuman, something is, the less we shall be able to admire it\...
The more 'godly' they are, the more inhuman\... ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

### Second Hour

The primitive religious notion has two elements: 1) a philosophical
element, a *conception of the world*, 2) a *social-moral* element. There
is no doubt that *experience* ousts the first element of religion. As an
explanation of *phenomena*, reference to *God* is untenable. But some
people, believing in religion, or desiring to live at peace with it,
have allotted the other sphere to it. Spencer, Kant, our neo-Kantians.

1\. *The unknowable*. We do not know that which is inaccessible to our
senses. There will always be *an unknown*. But why shall we *deify* it?
It will be a subject of hypotheses but not of religious *worship*.
Spencer calls *religious thought* that which studies what is
inaccessible to our *senses*. But this is partly *science*, or, if you
will, philosophy. The moon, etc.

Man, says Spencer, will always feel himself to be in the presence of
*infinite and eternal energy*, the source of all being. Of course, but
why must man *endow* this infinite energy, this source of all being,
*with personality*? On what basis will he isolate it from nature and
place it above nature? But only on this condition can it become an
object of religious worship.

*Kant*. Religion -- die Erkenntnis aller unserer Pflichten als
gÃ¶ttlicher Gebote. Die Moral in Beziehung auf Gott als Gesetzgeber (K d
Urth Â§ 89). But morality is not identical with *religion*. Historical
reference: Morality *united* with religion; it will also separate from
religion. Lastly, morality is a question of *social estates, of classes,
of mankind*, but not of the *world*. It is a question of *humanity*
rather than of the *universe*. Bulgakov ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ and Smerdyakov.
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ To Bulgakov: you feel the need for God because your
ghosts are inordinately strong, as the witch Wittichen says in
Hauptmann's play. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ This is *lack of moral development*.
*'Marxism will not prove that I must serve the working class*.' No. And
it is not necessary. *Feeling does not require proof*. Sonate, que me
veux tu?' ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ *Ni dieu, ni maÃ®tre*. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^

**Psychology of Religion**: Here Feuerbach's analysis remains true to
the present day. Religion *deprives* man and nature of their best
properties and attributes these to God.

Engels:

Religion by its very essence drains man and nature of substance, and
transfers this substance to the phantom of the otherworldly God, who in
turn then graciously permits man and nature to receive some of his
superfluity. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^

Once we have understood *the secret of this draining* we cannot
conscientiously abandon ourselves to it.

Quelch:

The Church is one of the pillars of capitalism and the true function of
the clergy is to chloroform the workers to make them docile wage-slaves,
patient and contented with their lot in this world while expecting a
glorious reward in the next. As long as the Church holds the minds of
the workers in its grip, there will be little hope of freeing their
bodies from capitalist domination.

The way out: RÃ¼ckkehr, nicht zu Gott, sondern zu sich selbst.
^[\[15\]](#n15)^

Marx: the abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people
is required for their real happiness. See quotations. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

Marx \[I\]:

The criticism of religion is\... in embryo the criticism of the vale of
tears, the halo of which is religion.

Criticism has torn up the imaginary flowers from the chain not so that
man shall wear the unadorned, bleak chain but so that he will shake off
the chain and pluck the living flower.

Marx \[II\]:

The criticism of religion disillusions man to make him think and act and
shape his reality like a man who has been disillusioned and has come to
reason, so that he will revolve round himself and therefore round his
true sun.

'*Religion is a private affair*.' There can be no peace with religion,
as there can be no peace with error. Schopenhauer. Our attitude to the
dissenters: religion is a private matter. But we retain the right to
struggle against the *religious* idea and supplant it with the
*scientific*.

Social-Democracy must, to use a well-known expression, snatch from
*tyrants* their *sceptres* and from *heaven* its *fire*.

### Notes During the Discussion of the Report

**Kharazov**: *Formulation of the question*.

1\) G Kharazov's bewilderment. *My definition*. If we are to agree with
him, we must admit that the question of religion is finished. The
existence of God cannot be proved. He considers my ideas common to all
people. Very glad!

The religious question is not reduced to the existence of a deity. The
concept of god had its own evolution. Many people use the word god while
not sharing the superstitious idea of god as a personality.

Remark. The origin of religion. Allegedly I began from the etymological
definition of the word religion. That again is *Cicero*. False. I said
and *proved* that it is *right*. I pointed to the development of
religious conceptions. Then I indicated Spencer, Kant, for whom religion
is a moral world system. Deity is not God. And what is it? A pity *you
did not say*. Historical remarks. *Mutual guarantee* before God. My idea
is original but not proved. The story of Alcibiades. Allegedly I said
that Alcibiades, etc. Where did I get it from, etc.

History of Egypt. Personal responsibility there. Yes, but what of that?
Probably it can be explained by theocratic organisation.

Abraham and Sarah -- head of tribe.

Kant. He is surprised at comparing of Kant and Berdyaev. Not Berdyaev,
but Bulgakov. Kant: the idea of God is a regulative idea. With Kant, God
is not a personality but an idea. I am supposed to have distorted Kant's
argument. No, I indicated his two *Critiques*, ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ quoting
almost his own words. I am supposed to have said that the Westphalian
miners are Kantians. Never said anything of the kind. How does that
follow?

**Volsky**: ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ Social-Democracy will not be able to combat
concealed religious aspirations. But the examination of religion in
concealed form is beyond the scope of scientific socialism. Religious
people penetrate the ranks of Social-Democracy. I said too little about
religion being founded on the conservative aspirations of the ruling
classes. Good; I shall repeat: Social-Democracy cannot protect the
proletariat from the intrigues of the ruling classes. For scientific
socialism itself is not rid of religious conceptions. Proof. *First of
May*. The workers' assembly on First of May is a religious event. Why?
We think of the time when there will be neither rich nor poor. No, it is
not so. There is no religion here.

Bourgeois property cannot be attacked today. Only our descendants can do
this. And you? Why don't you attack? The business of socialism is to
propagate the future system and not to attack the present one. If we
follow up, etc, at first the time of the socialist revolution seems very
near, but later it has to be postponed further and further. The 'real
acquisition' of scientific socialism -- the masses convinced of the
triumph of socialism. The working class already *values* bourgeois
progress. Changes in the matter of attacking bourgeois property and
religion appear with special clarity in Russia. There the working class
is accomplishing the bourgeois revolution. This means that it is
strengthening and not demolishing the house of bondage. We see the same
in Poland. The question arises: where is there even a trace of a
religious basis in scientific socialism? The religious basis is found in
scientific socialism itself.

What is the basis of religious sentiments? The fact that in the
contemporary system of human bondage, mankind will unite and strive
towards a common goal. The same in the bourgeoisie. It is absolutely
essential to unite the bourgeoisie and the proletariat for the attack on
the autocracy. No, we are not uniting. Apparently, Mr Volsky calls
anything that does not please him religion. But that is too sweeping.

First work of creating religious fiction -- point to the economy. We
conceive society as a united whole. No, *we speak of the struggle of
classes*.

*Collaboration and slavery*. What is our altitude to this? Providence,
creating slavery as a step towards socialism.

In place of scientific socialism? Social-Democracy did nothing but
refashion the revolutionary movement of the working class into
collaboration with other classes. Antagonism of the working masses to
scientific socialism *will manifest itself*. I make so bold as to
pronounce this a *religious prophecy*. Religious prediction which is
based on no one knows what.

Not enough to attack only the class of capitalists but all society.
Rupture with the intelligentsia. Expropriation of all bourgeois society.
Family right, according to which some are born with property and others
propertyless.

**Akimov**: *My position*. Akimov differs from me on the formulation of
the question. Social-Democracy for me is something unitary. I spoke not
about Social-Democracy but about *Marxism*, about *scientific
socialism*. According to Akimov, Marx and Engels do not exhaust the
whole of scientific socialism. Let's assume that. But show me what
exactly. Opinions of Vandervelde as a representative of scientific
socialism. Is Vandervelde a Marxist? He has said so himself more than
once.

*Typical feature of my views*. I did not give a solution for the
problems facing us. That is exactly what Bulgakov said. I do not give
one either. But why did you not name the problems that apparently face
us?

Windelband, and not only primitive man, takes his stand on religion.

What motive compels us to act thus and not otherwise? This\...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by the Moscow editors of this edition of the work, which are
noted 'Editor'.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. In 1904, on the eve of the first Russian revolution,
a sharp struggle was going on within the RSDLP on the attitude of the
proletariat towards the peasantry and against the nationalism of the
Bund and others. The Bund (the General Jewish Workers Union of
Lithuania, Poland and Russia) was organised in 1897; in 1898 it joined
the RSDLP 'as an autonomous organisation, independent only in respect to
issues specifically concerning the Jewish proletariat'. After the Second
Congress of the RSDLP (1903), which rejected a demand to recognise the
Bund as the sole representative of the Jewish proletariat, the latter
left the party. Bundists had continuously supported the opportunists
within the RSDLP (Mensheviks, 'economists', etc) -- Editor.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Plekhanov is here referring to the 'Yakutsk protest'
of 18 February 1904 against the arduous conditions of life in exile and
arbitrariness of the authorities, when fifty-seven exiles barricaded
themselves in the house of Romanov, a local inhabitant. During the
firing the exile Matlakhov was killed. On 7 March the 'Romanovists'
surrendered -- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. This questionnaire was circulated by the socialist
journal *Le Mouvement socialiste* (published from 1899 and edited by
Lagardelle) in connection with the bitter struggle between the French
republican government and the Catholic church which ended in separation
of the church from the state. Replies to the questionnaire were received
from socialists in various countries and printed in nos 107-110 of the
journal for 1902 -- Editor.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. The reference is to a statement by Rudolf Stammler in
his work *Wirtschaft und Recht nach der materialistischen
Geschichtsauffassung* (*Economy and Law from the Standpoint of the
Materialist Understanding of History*) concerning the contradiction into
which the Social-Democrats allegedly fall, on the one hand, by
considering the proletarian revolution to be inevitable and, on the
other, by calling for action to bring it about. To Stammler this seemed
just as strange as organising a group to assist lunar eclipses --
Editor.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 175 -- Editor.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. Below in the text there are two excerpts from Engels'
article 'The Condition of England: *Past and Present* by Thomas Carlyle,
London, 1843', used by Plekhanov in his lecture -- Editor.

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 463 -- Editor.

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 464 -- Editor.

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. The Russian philosopher and economist Bulgakov
considered socialism not as a necessary phase in social development, nor
as a result of the class struggle, but merely as the moral ideal of
human free will -- Editor.

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. *Smerdyakov --* a character from Dostoyevsky's
novel *The Brothers*, who commits murder under the influence of ideas
suggested to him by Ivan Karamazov. Bulgakov writes about Ivan
Karamazov: 'Ivan speaks indecisively and conditionally about morality:
he says: "If there is no God and no immortality of the soul, then all is
permissible.\"' -- Editor.

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. Plekhanov rephrases a line from Hauptmann's play
*Die Versunkene Glocke* (*The Sunken Bell*) -- Editor.

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. 'Sonate, que me veux-tu?' ('sonata, what do you
want of me?') -- an expression used by the French writer and scientist
Fontenelle. The meaning of Plekhanov's comparison is apparently as
follows: Fontenelle, who had no musical ear, demands that the sonata
prove its value to him, so Bulgakov, who is hostile to the working-class
movement and socialism, demands that the workers prove to him something
that cannot be proved -- Editor.

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. *Ni dieu, ni maÃ®tre!* (Neither God, nor Master!) --
the revolutionary slogan that the French revolutionary Blanqui used as
the heading for his newspaper -- Editor.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 461 -- Editor.

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 465 -- Editor.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. The two quotations cited below are taken from
Marx's article: 'Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of
Law, Introduction', Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 176 -- Editor.

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. The reference is to Kant's books *Kritik der reinen
Vernunft* (*Critique of Pure Reason*) and *Kritik der praktischen
Vernunft* (*Critique of Practical Reason*) -- Editor.

[[18]{#n18}]{.info}. In the notes on the discussion with Volsky
(Makhaisky) the latter's points are intermingled with Plekhanov's
objections. A Volsky -- an ideologist of Makhayevism -- a
petty-bourgeois anarchist trend which was hostile to the intelligentsia
-- Editor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
