Marx-Engels Correspondence 1868

### Karl Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, 30 January 1868

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Karl Marx, *Letters to Dr Kugelmann* (Martin Lawrence,
London, undated). Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive
by Paul Flewers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dear Kugelmann

Cut, lanced, etc, in short treated in every respect *secundum legem
artis*. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ In spite of that the thing is continually
breaking out again so that, with the exception of two or three days, I
have been lying quite fallow for eight weeks. Last Saturday I went out
again for the first time -- Monday another relapse. I hope that it will
finish this week, but who will guarantee me against new eruptions? It is
extremely disagreeable. Moreover it attacks my head. My friend, Dr
Gumpert ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ in Manchester, urges me to use arsenic. What do
you think of it?

Your Koppel is not yet here.

Kertbeny ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ is a German-Hungarian whose real name, between
ourselves, is Benkert. The German-Hungarians love to Magyarise their
names. I do not know him personally. Since he had a quarrel with Vogt
^[\[4\]](#n4)^ about 1860, I asked him for some notes but received
nothing of any use. (My Hungarian material was obtained partly from
Szemere, ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ partly from my own experience in London.) Later
he applied to me in a quarrel he had with Kossuth. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ As far
as I have been able to learn, there is nothing politically suspicious
against him. He seems to be a literary busybody. His heresies with
regard to Bonaparte are held by many otherwise honest eastern barbarians
-- in any case watch him. I also consider it more diplomatic not to show
any mistrust of him (and for that reason I am enclosing the biographical
notice ^[\[7\]](#n7)^ which he requested). Nevertheless, as soon as the
writing position no longer troubles me, I shall 'order' information
about him from other sources.

You guessed rightly about *Plagiarismus*. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ I was
intentionally uncivil and hair-raising in order to make Hofstetten
^[\[9\]](#n9)^ suspect Liebknecht and to conceal my authorship. This
between ourselves. You probably know that Engels and Siebel
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ have got articles about my book published in the
*Barmen-Zeitung*, *Elberfelder Zeitung*, *Frankfurt Börsen-Zeitung* and
-- to the great grief of Heinrich Bürgers -- in the
*Düsseldorf-Zeitung*. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ Siebel was the man in Barmen
whose acquaintance I wanted you to make. He is now in Madeira for his
health.

Last week the *Saturday Review* -- the 'blood and culture' paper -- had
a notice about my book in a review of recent German books. I have come
off pretty well, as you will see from the following passage:

The author's views may be as pernicious as we conceive them to be, but
there can be no question as to the plausibility of his logic, the vigour
of his rhetoric, and the charm with which he invests the driest problems
of political economy.

Ouff!

My best greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen. You will get other
photographs from here, for we have now discovered that the water colours
which looked good the first day dissolved in patches immediately after.

Write to me as often as your time permits. During my illness and the
many occasions for vexation, letters from friends are very welcome.

Salut\
Yours\
**KM**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} According to all the rules of the art --
Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Edward Gumpert (?-1895) -- German doctor in
Manchester and friend of Marx and Engels -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Charles (Károly) Kertbeny (1824-1882) -- Hungarian
writer, active in the Revolution of 1848-49. While in emigration he
wrote for the German press -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Karl Vogt (1817-1895) -- German natural scientist,
vulgar materialist and petty-bourgeois democrat. After the Revolution of
1848-49 he lived in Switzerland, an active member of the 'League of
Peace and Liberty'. In his book, *Herr Vogt*, Marx proved that during
the Italian war Vogt acted as agent of Napoleon III (in 1870 it was
proved by documentary evidence that he was in the pay of Napoleon) --
Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} Bartholomew (Bertalan) Szemere (1812-1869) -- One of
the leaders of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848-49. In the 1850s while
in emigration he headed the Left opposition against Kossuth. In this
period Marx supported him -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Louis (Lajos) Kossuth (1802-1894) -- Leader of the
Hungarian Revolutionary Government of 1848-49 and of the Hungarian
national struggle against Austria -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} The autobiographical note read as follows:

Karl Marx, doctor of philosophy, born at Trier, 5 May 1818.

**1842-43**: At first collaborator, then chief editor of the *Rheinische
Zeitung* (Cologne). During the period that he edited the paper, it was
subject to double censorship, a second censor being appointed by the
government in addition to the local censor. Finally suppressed by order
of the government. Marx left Germany and went to Paris. In 1844, in
Paris, he published with A Rüge the *Deutsch-Französischen Jahrbücher*
(*Franco-German Annuals*). In addition, *Die heilige Familie*. *Kritik
der kritischen Kritik*, *gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten* ([*The Holy
Family*: *Critique of the Critical Criticism*, *contra Bruno Bauer and
Company*](../../1845/holy-family/index.htm).

**December 1845**: Expelled from France by Guizot, at the instigation of
the Prussian government, Marx went to Brussels, founded there, in 1846,
the Association of German Workers, gave lectures on political economy,
wrote for the *Réforme* (Paris), etc\...

**1847**: *Misère de la philosophie. Réponse à la Philosophie de la
misère de M Proudhon* ([*The Poverty of Philosophy: Reply to M
Proudhon's Philosophy of
Poverty*](../../1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm)); ditto: *Discours
sur le libre échange* ([*Speech on Free
Trade*](../../1848/free-trade/index.htm)) and various other pamphlets.

**1848**: In collaboration with F Engels, [*Manifesto of the Communist
Party*](../../1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm). Arrested and expelled
from Belgium, invited to France by a letter from the provisional
government. Left France in April 1848, founded at Cologne the *Neue
Rheinische Zeitung* (June 1848 -- May 1849). Marx was then expelled from
Prussia, after the government had conducted an unsuccessful prosecution
against him. Appeared twice in court (the first time to answer a charge
against the paper, the second for inciting to rebellion; acquitted both
times). Marx's speeches in his own defence were printed in [*Two
Political Processes*](../../1849/two-political-trials/index.htm)
(Cologne).

**1849**: The last number -- printed in red -- of the *Neue Rheinische
Zeitung*. Marx went to Paris. Expelled in September 1849 with the choice
of being interned in Brittany (Morbihan). Refused and went to London
where he is now living.

**1850**: Published the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*,
*politisch-okonomische Revue* (Hamburg).

**1852**: [*The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte*](../../1852/18th-brumaire/index.htm) (New York).
[*Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial at
Cologne*](../../1853/revelations/index.htm). This edition was
confiscated at the German frontier, and a new edition was published in
Boston in 1853.

**1853-54**: *Flysheets against Lord Palmerston*.

**1859**: [*Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy*](../../1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm) (Berlin).

**1860**: *Herr Vogt*.

**1851-60**: Regular contributor to the *New York Daily Tribune* and the
*New American Cyclopaedia*.

**1861**: Went to Berlin after the Amnesty; the Prussian government
refused him renaturalisation.

**1864**: Published for the Central Council of the International
Working-Men's Association the [*Address to the Working Classes of
Europe*](../../1864/10/27.htm).

**1867**: [*Capital*](../../1867-c1/index.htm), Volume 1 (Hamburg)
(Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute)

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} The [title of an anonymous
article](../../1867/reviews-capital/plagiarism.htm) by Marx in the
Berlin journal *Zukunft* (*Future*) of 12 December 1867, in which he
proved that two Social-Democratic Reichstag deputies, Geib and
Hofstetten, in their speeches used arguments from Volume 1 of *Capital*
without mentioning the author -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} Johann Baptist von Hofstetten (?-1857) -- Formerly a
Prussian officer, then co-editor of the Lassallean organ *Neuer
Sozialdemokrat* -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Karl Siebel (1836-1868) -- Radical poet and distant
relation of Engels. During his stay in England during 1856-60 he became
a friend of Marx and contributed to the popularisation of *Capital* in
Germany -- Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} See [Engels' reviews of
*Capital*](../../1867/reviews-capital/index.htm).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Letters Archive](../../../letters/date/index.htm)
