Marx-Engels Correspondence 1873

### Engels to [August Bebel](../../../../../glossary/people/b/e.htm#august-bebel) In Hubertsburg

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*, International
Publishers (1968);\
Additional text from Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Correspondence*, Progress Publishers (1975);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gesamtausgabe*, International Publishers
(1942);\
[Transcribed:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, 20 June, 1873

**Dear Bebel**

I am answering your letter first because Liebknecht's is still with
Marx, who cannot locate it just now.

It was not Hepner ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ but Yorck's ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ letter to
him, signed by the Committee, which caused us here to be afraid that
your imprisonment would be used by the Party authorities, which
unfortunately are entirely Lassallean, to transform the *Volksstaat*
into an 'honest' *Neue-Sozial-Demokrat*. Yorck plainly confessed to such
an intention, and as the Committee claimed to have the right to appoint
and remove the editors the danger was surely great enough. Hepner's
impending deportation ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ gave them another pretext for
carrying out these plans. Under these circumstances it was absolutely
necessary for us to know what the situation was; hence this
correspondence. \...

\... With regard to the attitude of the Party towards
[Lassalleanism](../../../../../glossary/terms/l/a.htm#lasalleans), you
can of course judge what tactics should be adopted better than we,
especially in particular cases. But there is also this to be considered.
When, as in your case, one is to a certain extent in the position of a
competitor to the *Allgemeine Deutsche Arbeiter Verein* (General
Association of German Workers) it is easy to pay too much attention to
one\'s rival and to get into the habit of always thinking about him
first. But both the General Association of German Workers and the
Social-Democratic Workers\' Party together still only form a very small
minority of the German working class. Our view, which we have found
confirmed by long practice, is that the correct tactic in propaganda is
not to draw away a few individuals and members here and there from
one\'s opponent, but to work on the great mass which still remains
apathetic. The primitive force of a single individual whom we have
ourselves attracted from the crude mass is worth more than ten
Lassallean renegades, who always bring the seeds of their false
tendencies into the Party with them. And if one could only get the
masses without their local leaders it would still be all right. But one
always has to take a whole crowd of these leaders into the bargain, and
they are bound by their previous public utterances, if not by their
previous views, and have above all things to prove that they have not
deserted their principles but that on the contrary the Social-Democratic
Workers\' Party preaches true Lassalleanism. This was the unfortunate
thing at Eisenach, not to be avoided at that time, perhaps, but there is
no doubt at all that these elements have done harm to the Party and I am
not sure that the Party would not have been at least as strong to-day
without that addition. In any case, however, I should regard it as a
misfortune if these elements were reinforced.

One must not allow oneself to be misled by the cry for "unity." Those
who have this word most often on their lips are those who sow the most
dissension, just as at present the Jura Bakuninists in Switzerland, who
have provoked all the splits, scream for nothing so much as for unity.
Those unity fanatics are either the people of limited intelligence who
want to stir everything up together into one nondescript brew, which,
the moment it is left to settle, throws up the differences again in much
more acute opposition because they are now all together in one pot (you
have a fine example of this in Germany with the people who preach the
reconciliation of the workers and the petty bourgeoisie)\--or else they
are people who consciously or unconsciously (like
Mühlberger^[\[\*\]](#n2)^, for instance) want to adulterate the
movement. For this reason the greatest sectarians and the biggest
brawlers and rogues are at certain moments the loudest shouters for
unity. Nobody in our lifetime has given us more trouble and been more
treacherous than the unity shouters.

Naturally every party leadership wants to see successes and this is
quite good too. But there are circumstances in which one must have the
courage to sacrifice momentary success for more important things.
Especially a party like ours, whose ultimate success is so absolutely
certain, and which has developed so enormously in our own lifetime and
under our own eyes, momentary success is by no means always and
absolutely necessary. Take the International, for instance. After the
Commune it had its colossal success. The bourgeoisie, struck all of a
heap, ascribed omnipotence to it. The great mass of the membership
believed things would stay like that for all eternity. We knew very well
that the bubble must burst. All the riff-raff attached themselves to it.
The sectarians within it began to flourish, and misused the
International in the hope that the most stupid and mean actions would be
permitted them. We did not allow that. Well knowing that the bubble must
burst some time all the same, our concern was not to delay the
catastrophe but to take care that the International emerged from it pure
and unadulterated. The bubble burst at the Hague, and you know that the
majority of Congress members went home sick with disappointment. And yet
nearly all these disappointed people, who imagined they would find the
ideal of universal brotherhood and reconciliation in the International,
had far more bitter quarrels at home than those which broke out at the
Hague! Now the sectarian quarrel-mongers are preaching conciliation and
decrying us as the intolerant and the dictators. And if we had come out
in a conciliatory way at the Hague, if we had hushed up the breaking out
of the split\--what would have been the result? The sectarians,
especially the Bakuninists, would have got another year in which to
perpetrate, in the name of the International, much greater stupidities
and infamies even; the workers of the most developed countries would
have turned away in disgust; the bubble would not have burst but,
pierced by pinpricks, would have slowly collapsed, and the next
Congress, which would have been bound to bring the crisis anyhow, would
have turned into the lowest kind of personal row, because principles had
already been sacrificed at the Hague. Then the International would
indeed have gone to pieces\-\--gone to pieces through \"unity\"! Instead
of this we have now got rid of the rotten elements with honour to
ourselves\--the members of the Commune who were present at the last
decisive session say that no session of the Commune left such a terrible
impression upon them as this session of the tribunal which passed
judgment on the traitors to the European proletariat\--we have left them
to expend all their forces in lying, slander and intrigue for ten
months\--and where are they? They, the alleged representatives of the
great majority of the International, now announce that they do not dare
to come to the next Congress (more details in an article which is being
sent off for the
[*Volksstaat*](../../../../../glossary/periodicals/v/o.htm#volkstaat)
with this letter). And if we had to do it again we should not, taking it
all together, act any differently \-- tactical mistakes are of course
always committed.

In any case I think the efficient elements among the Lassalleans will
fall to you of themselves in course of time and that it would therefore
be unwise to break off the fruit before it is ripe, as the unity people
want.

For the rest, old [Hegel](../../../../../glossary/people/h/e.htm#hegel)
has already said: A party proves itself a victorious party by the fact
that it splits and can stand the split. The movement of the proletariat
necessarily passes through different stages of development; at every
stage one section of people lags behind and does not join in the further
advance; and this alone explains why it is that actually the
\"solidarity of the proletariat\" is everywhere realised in different
party groupings which carry on life and death feuds with one another, as
the Christian sects in the Roman Empire did amidst the worst
persecutions.

If the *Neue Sozial-Demokrat* for example has more subscribers than the
*Volksstaat*, you ought not to forget either that each *sect* is
necessarily fanatic and through this fanaticism obtains, particularly in
regions where it is new (as for instance the General Association of
German Workers is in Schleswig-Holstein), much greater momentary
successes than the Party, which simply represents the real movement,
without any sectarian oddities. But on the other hand, fanaticism does
not last long.

I have to close my letter as the mail is about to be dispatched. Let me
only add hurriedly: Marx cannot tackle Lassalle ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ until the
French translation is finished (approx end of July), after which he will
definitely need a rest as he has greatly overworked himself.

That you have been serving your jail sentence stoically and are studying
is very good. We shall all be glad to see you here next year.

Cordial greetings to Liebknecht.

Sincerely yours\
**F Engels**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[[\*]{.info}]{#n*} Mühlberger, Arthur. A physician, follower of
Proudhon; anonymous author of a series of articles on the housing
question (1872) to which Engels addressed in his book, *The Housing
Question.*

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Adolf Hepner (1846-1923) -- German Social-Democrat,
an editor of *Volksstaat*, delegate to Hague Congress of International
(1872), later emigrated to USA -- Progress Publishers.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Theodor Yorck (?-1875) -- a leading member of German
working-class movement, Lassallean, member of Executive of General
Association of German Workers, in 1889 joined opposition against
Schweitzer and took part in founding of Social-Democratic Workers Party,
party Secretary (1871-74) -- Progress Publishers.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Hepner, who was accused of 'having worked for the
International' and having attended the Hague Congress, was sentenced to
four weeks' imprisonment at the end of 1872, and in the spring of 1873
he was deported from Leipzig -- Progress Publishers.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} During 1872 and 1873 Liebknecht and Hepner had asked
Marx many times to write a critique of Lassalle's views either as a
pamphlet or a series of articles for the *Volksstaat* -- Progress
Publishers.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1873 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
