---
layout: default
title: 
---
G V Plekhanov 1917

### From Idealism to Materialism: Hegel and Left Hegelians --- David Friedrich Strauss --- The Brothers Bruno and Edgar Bauer --- Feuerbach

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 600-43.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article was written for *The History of
Western Literature in the Nineteenth Century* which was being prepared
by Mir Publishers. The article was completed by Plekhanov at the
beginning of 1915 and was published in Moscow in 1917 as the first
chapter of Volume Four of *The History of Western Literature in the
Nineteenth Century*.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

German idealist philosophy played an extremely important role in the
history of the development of science in the nineteenth century. It had
an impressive impact even on natural science. But incomparably more
powerful was its influence on those 'disciplines' which in France are
called the moral and political sciences. Here the influence of German
idealist philosophy must be recognised as decisive in the full meaning
of the word. It raised, and to some extent solved, problems of which the
solution was absolutely imperative if scientific investigation of the
process of social development was to be possible. As an example, it is
sufficient to refer to Schelling's solution of the problem of the
relationship of freedom to necessity (in his *System des
transzendentalen Idealismus*, Tübingen, 1800). But Schelling was only a
forerunner; German idealism found its most complete exponent in the
person of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.

It was quite natural that his influence should be felt most of all in
his native land, Germany. But after Germany, there was no country where
Hegel's teaching had such an influence as it had in Russia.
^[\[1\]](#n1)^

It is impossible to understand the history of West European philosophy
and West European social science in the nineteenth century unless one is
acquainted with the main features of the philosophies of Hegel and
Feuerbach. That is self-evident. But at first glance it is much less
easy to grasp the incontestable fact that it was precisely to these two
non-Russian thinkers that those Russian writers had to refer who were
attempting to solve what might appear to be purely Russian problems.
Further consideration will show, I hope, that there was in fact nothing
at all strange about that. For the moment I will confine myself to
saying that the whole point is the *scientific character of the
philosophical systems of Hegel and Feuerbach*. It is this character in
particular we have to note above all, beginning, of course, with Hegel.

### I

After the forcible removal of Chernyshevsky from the literary scene,
^[\[2\]](#n2)^ a disregard for German 'metaphysics' began to spread in
our advanced circles, where Hegel came to be regarded as predominantly a
conservative, if not reactionary, thinker. This was a grave error. It is
indisputable that towards the end of his life, Hegel was very far from
being what he had been earlier. As young men, he and Schelling had
planted a tree of liberty in a meadow near Tübingen, and he had filled
pages of his album with exclamations such as 'Vive la liberté', 'Vive
Jean-Jacques!', etc. And in the sunset of his day, as he worked on his
*Philosophie des Rechts*, he was indeed ready to preach philosophical
'reconciliation with reality' (Belinsky well understood Hegel as he was
then). But the chief distinguishing feature of the Hegelian system is by
no means that in his old age its creator drew conservative practical
conclusions from his theoretical premises. That system occupies one of
the first places --- if not the very first --- in the history of
philosophical thought, not because it came to any specially valuable
practical conclusions, but because it established certain theoretical
principles of such outstanding importance that they must be mastered,
not only by the thinker who wishes to work out for himself a correct
theoretical conception of the world, but also by every practical worker
consciously striving to reconstruct the social order around him. Hegel
himself used to say that in philosophy the important thing is *method*
and not results, that is to say, not some particular conclusions or
others. So it is from the point of view of method that we should look
first of all at his philosophy.

We know that Hegel called his method *dialectical*; why did he do so?

In his *Phänomenologie des Geistes* he compares human life with
dialogue, in the sense that under the pressure of experience our views
gradually change, as happens to the opinions of disputants participating
in a discussion of a profound intellectual nature. Comparing the course
of development of consciousness with the progress of such a discussion,
Hegel designated it by the word *dialectics*, or dialectical motion.
This word had already been used by Plato, but it was Hegel who gave it
its especially profound and important meaning. To Hegel, dialectics is
the soul of all scientific knowledge. It is of extraordinary importance
to comprehend its nature. It is the principle of all motion, of all
life, of all that occurs in reality. According to Hegel, the finite is
not only limited from without, but by virtue of its own nature it
negates itself and passes into its own opposite. All that exists can be
taken as an example to explain the nature of dialectics. Everything is
fluid, everything changes, everything passes away. Hegel compares the
power of dialectics with divine omnipotence. Dialectics is that
universal irresistible force which nothing can withstand. At the same
time dialectics makes itself felt in each separate phenomenon of each
separate sphere of life. Take motion. At a given moment, a body in
motion is at a given point, but at the very same moment it is also
beyond that point too, since if it remained *only* at the given point it
would be *motionless*. All motion is a living contradiction; all motion
is a dialectical process. But the whole life of nature is motion; so
that in the study of nature it is absolutely essential to adopt the
dialectical viewpoint. Hegel sharply condemns those naturalists who
forget this. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ But the main reproach he addresses to them
is that in their classifications they put a wide and impassable gulf
between things which in fact pass into one another in obedience to the
irresistible force of the law of dialectical motion. The subsequent
triumph of transformism in biology clearly demonstrated that this
reproach had a quite sound theoretical basis. Exactly the same is being
demonstrated by the remarkable discoveries in chemistry which are
proceeding before our very eyes. However, there is no doubt that the
philosophy of nature is the weakest part of Hegel's system. He is
incomparably stronger in his 'logic', in the 'philosophy of history',
and in the philosophy of social life in general, as well as in the
'philosophy of mind'. It was here especially that his influence upon the
development of social thought in the nineteenth century was most
fruitful.

The following, however, should be noted. Hegel's viewpoint was that of
development. But development may be understood variously. Even now there
are naturalists who reiterate with an air of importance: 'Nature does
not make leaps.' Sociologists, too, frequently say: 'Social development
is accomplished through slow, gradual changes.' Hegel, on the contrary,
affirmed that just as in nature so also in history, *leaps are
inevitable*:

The changes of Being \[he says\] are in general not only a transition of
one quantity into another, but also a transition from the qualitative
into the quantitative, and conversely; a process of becoming other which
breaks off graduality \[ein Abbrechen des Allmählichen\] and is
qualitatively other as against the preceding determinate being. Water on
being cooled does not little by little become solid\... but is suddenly
solid; when it has already attained freezing point it may (if it stands
still) be wholly liquid, and a slight shake brings it into the state of
solidity.

Development becomes comprehensible only when we regard *gradual changes*
as a process through which a leap (or leaps) is prepared and evoked.
Whoever wishes to explain the origin of a given phenomenon by slow
changes alone is in fact unconsciously assuming that it *is already
actually there and is imperceptible only on account of its smallness*.
Such a supposed explanation substitutes for the concept of *origin* the
concept of *growth*, of a simple change in magnitude, that is to say, it
arbitrarily eliminates precisely that which required explanation.
^[\[4\]](#n4)^ We know that modern biology fully recognises the
importance of 'breaks of graduality in the process of development of
animal and vegetable species'.

Hegel was an absolute idealist. He taught that the motive force of world
development is, in the final analysis, the power of the absolute idea.
That, of course, is quite an arbitrary and, one might say, fantastic
assumption. Trendelenburg had no difficulty later in demonstrating in
his *Logische Untersuchungen* that reference to the idea in reality has
never explained anything. However, as I remarked in another place,
Trendelenburg, in aiming his blows against dialectics, actually hit only
its *idealist basis*. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ Trendelenburg was quite right when
he blamed *Hegel's dialectics* for 'asserting the spontaneous motion of
pure thought constituting at the same time the self-generation of
being'. But in this assertion lies not the nature of all dialectics in
general, but the shortcoming of *idealist* dialectics. This shortcoming
was eliminated by the materialist Marx, so that Trendelenburg's
objection to dialectics has now lost all importance. But Marx himself,
before he became a materialist, was a follower of Hegel.

### II

Hegel erred *as an idealist*, that is to say, in so far as he believed
the power of the idea to be the motive force of world development. But
he was right as *a dialectician*, that is to say, in so far as he
observed all phenomena from the standpoint of their development. Whoever
regards phenomena from the standpoint of their development refuses to
apply to them the yardstick of this or that abstract principle. This was
explained excellently by Chernyshevsky. 'Everything depends on
circumstances, on conditions of place and time', he wrote in his *Essays
on the Gogol Period in Russian Literature*, describing the chief
distinguishing feature of the dialectical view of phenomena. This view
was especially fertile in the field of journalism and in the social
sciences, in which it had become the custom to pronounce judgement on
phenomena proceeding from this or that abstract principle, accepted once
and for all. It was no accident that the French called these sciences
'*sciences morales et politiques*'. In the same *Essays*, Chernyshevsky
wrote: 'There is no abstract truth; truth is always concrete.' He
pointed to war, among other things, as an example:

Is war disastrous or beneficial? This cannot be answered definitely, as
a general rule. One must know what kind of war is meant\... For
civilised peoples, war usually does more harm than good. But\... the war
of 1812 was a war of salvation for the Russian people. The Battle of
Marathon was a most beneficial event in the history of mankind.

That is so. And if that is so, there is no point in asking which
particular social and political structure must be regarded as the best;
surely here, too, everything depends upon the circumstances, upon the
conditions of place and lime. Thus Hegel's philosophy mercilessly
condemned utopianism. A pupil of Hegel, if he remained true to his
teacher's method, could become a socialist only if scientific
investigation of the modern economic system led him to conclude that the
internal laws of development of that system would bring about the
formation of a socialist system. Socialism had to become a science or
cease to exist. This makes it understandable why Marx and Engels, the
founders of scientific socialism, came precisely from Hegel's school.

Take another example. JB Say considered it a waste of time to study the
history of political economy, on the ground that before Adam Smith,
whose follower he mistakenly thought himself to be, all economists had
held erroneous views. Hegel, his contemporary, viewed the history of
philosophy quite differently. To Hegel, philosophy was the
self-knowledge of the spirit. Since the spirit progresses, since it
develops with the development of mankind, philosophy, too, does not
stand still. Each, now 'surpassed' philosophical system was the
intellectual expression of its time (*seine Zeit in Gedanken erfasst*),
and this constitutes its relative justification. Besides, 'the latest
philosophy in point of time is the result of all preceding philosophies
and consequently must embrace the principles of all of them'.
^[\[6\]](#n6)^

Only being viewed in this way could the history of philosophy become a
subject of close, *scientific* study. And although Hegel was accused,
not without reason, of treating historical data at times with a fair
amount of disrespect, arranging them to suit the needs of his
philosophical system, ^[\[7\]](#n7)^ nevertheless there is no doubt at
all that his *Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie* is still
the best history of philosophy, that is, the most instructive, shedding
the clearest light on the theoretical content of the various
philosophical doctrines.

Hegel considered the problems of law, morality, art and religion from
the selfsame dialectical viewpoint. All these 'disciplines' were studied
by him in their mutual relationships. He taught that 'only in connection
with this particular religion, can this particular form of state exist;
just as only this philosophy and this art can exist in this state'.
^[\[8\]](#n8)^ This view is interpreted sometimes very superficially; it
is said that each of the myriad aspects of social life influences all
the rest, and, in turn, experiences the influence of all other aspects
on itself. This is the well-known theory of the interaction of social
phenomena. But though Hegel accepted this theory, he maintained that we
could not stop at it.

The inadequacy of the method of examining phenomena from the point of
view of reciprocal action \[he says\] consists of this, that the
relation of reciprocal action, instead of serving as the equivalent of
concept, must itself be understood.

The meaning of this is: if I succeed in discovering that the state
structure of a particular country influences its religion and its
religion influences its state structure, my discovery will, naturally,
be of a certain amount of use to me. However, it will not explain to me
the origin of these interacting phenomena --- the particular state
structure and the particular religion. To solve *this* problem, I must
dig deeper and, not content with the *interaction* of religion and state
structure, try *to discover the common basis upon which both religion
and state structure rest*. Hegel expressed this very well when he said
that 'cause not only has an effect, but in the effect, as cause, it
stands related to itself', ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ and that the interacting sides
cannot be accepted just as they stand, but must be conceived as elements
of a third, 'higher', something.

In respect of methodology, this demand was extremely important, because
it impelled a search for the *root cause* which, in *the last analysis*,
brings about the historical motion of mankind. Hegel as an idealist
considered the root cause of this motion to be the universal spirit.
History is nothing more than its 'exposition and realisation', that is,
to put it simply, motion. This motion takes place in stages. Each
separate stage has its own special principle, whose bearer in a
particular epoch is a particular nation, constituting then something in
the nature of a chosen people. This special principle determines the
whole spirit of the epoch. The specific spirit of a nation, says Hegel:

\... expresses in concrete form all aspects of the consciousness and
will of that people, its entire reality; this specific spirit is a
common hallmark of the nation's religion, system of government, ethics,
legislation, customs, and also science, art and technical skill. These
special peculiarities are to be understood from the common peculiarity,
a particular principle of a nation, in the same way as, on the contrary,
the common in the special should be detected in the factual detail of
history. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^

References to the specific spirit of the nation are much misused in
social science and by journalists. But every particular theory is
subject to misuse, *especially when it is already outliving its time*.
In itself, the doctrine that the 'spirit' of a particular nation is
distinguished by special features at a particular stage of the nation's
development is not so mistaken as might be thought, when reading the
opinions of some nationalists. There is not the slightest doubt that
'social man' has a particular psychology, the qualities of which
determine all the ideologies he creates. This *psychology* of his might,
if you like, be called his *spirit*. Of course it must always be
remembered that the psychology of social man *develops*, that is,
*changes*. But Hegel was well aware of this. It is also necessary to
bear in mind that the *psychology* of social man *does not explain his
historical progress: it is itself explained by it*. Hegel, however, put
this the other way round: the 'spirit' of every particular nation
explained its *historical destiny*, and indeed all its *reality*, that
is to say, all its social *life*. That is a mistake, the origin of which
is quite comprehensible. As an idealist, Hegel was convinced that
*being* is conditioned by *consciousness* and not the other way round.
Apply this general idealist view to history, and you will have social
being determined by social consciousness, or, if you prefer the
expression, by the national spirit. That is why Hegel contended that the
spirit of each particular nation determines --- note, however, *only in
the final analysis* --- not only its art, its religion, and its
philosophy, that is, not only the totality of its ideologies, but also
its political system and even its technology and the sum-total of its
social relationships. His error was brought to light only with the
discovery of the unsoundness of the general (*idealist*) basis of his
philosophy and then by no means at once. Every stage of the development
of the world spirit is represented on the historical scene by a separate
nation. *The present historical epoch* is the epoch of *German* culture.
According to Hegel, the nation representing the highest stage of
development of the world spirit is entitled to regard other nations as
mere instruments for the realisation of its historical aims. This is
worth noting. If today the Germans do not stand on ceremony with the
vanquished, there is in this, unfortunately, a drop of Hegelian honey.

But the Slav peoples could not willingly accept the hegemony of the
Germans. Since Schelling's time part of the intelligentsia in the Slav
countries have been busily occupied with the question of which exact
stage of development of the world spirit these peoples are fated to
represent.

Earlier I said that Hegel had often been accused of arbitrarily
arranging *facts*, historical and others, in the interests *of his
system*. Now I will add that, as an idealist, he could not entirely deny
himself some arbitrariness in the treatment of factual data. But he was
much less guilty in this respect than other founders of idealist
systems. Those who, through ignorance of Hegel's philosophy of history,
naively believe that in it Hegel never descended to concrete historical
ground ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ are very much mistaken. On the contrary, he did
so often, and when he did, his *philosophical-historical* considerations
vividly illuminated many important problems of mankind's historical
development. Speaking, for instance, of the fall of Sparta, he was not
content with what could be said of it from the standpoint of the 'world
spirit', and sought its cause in the inequality of property
(*Ungleichheit des Besitzes*). He explains the origin of the *state*,
too, by the growth of property inequality, and this absolute 'idealist'
believed that *agriculture* was the historical basis of marriage. Hegel
was fond of repeating that on closer examination idealism proves to be
the truth of *materialism*. The examples I have just mentioned --- and I
could easily advance many more --- convincingly demonstrate that, in
fact, in his own philosophy of history, it turned out that on closer
examination the opposite was the case: *materialism proved to be the
truth of idealism*. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ This circumstance will become of no
small importance to us when we recall that Marx and Engels, who
subsequently founded the theory of *historical materialism*, were
*Hegelians* to start with.

### III

Whoever regards social relationships from the standpoint of their
*development* cannot be a supporter of *stagnation*.

When Herzen became acquainted with Hegel's philosophy, he called it the
*algebra of revolution*. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ Even though this assessment
was not without a certain element of exaggeration, it is nevertheless
incontestable that so long as Hegel remained true to his powerful
dialectical method he was an advocate of progress. In concluding his
lectures on the history of philosophy, he said that the world spirit
never stands still, since forward motion is its intimate nature:

Frequently it seems that the world spirit has forgotten and lost itself.
But inside it resists. Internally it continues to labour --- as Hamlet
said of his father's ghost: 'Well said, old mole! canst work i' the
ground so fast?' --- until it gathers strength, and breaks through the
earth's crust separating it from its sun, from its reason. And then the
world spirit forges ahead rejuvenated with giant strides.
^[\[14\]](#n14)^

The same can be said of the world spirit: 'It works fast!'

Call this what you will, but it is not the philosophy of a guardian of
the existing order of things!

As we know, Hegel was accused of conservatism on the grounds that he
proclaimed the identity of the *rational* and the *real*. But *in
themselves*, the words 'what is real is rational; what is rational is
real' (\'*was wirklich ist, das ist vernünftig; was vornünftig ist, das
ist wirklich*') are not an indication of Hegel's readiness to accept
every given social order, or, for that matter, every given social
institution. To be convinced of this, it will be sufficient to remember
his attitude to the excessive power of the father in the Roman family.
To Hegel, not everything by far that existed was real. He actually said:
'Reality is *higher than existence*.' (\'*Die Wirklichkeit steht höher
als die Existenz.*') The real is necessary, while not all that exists is
necessary. As we have seen, the world spirit does not stand still. Its
eternal motion, its tireless work, little by little deprives the given
social order of its essential content, transforms it into an empty form
that has outlived its time and therefore makes necessary its replacement
by a new order. If the real is rational, it must be remembered that the
rational is real. But if the *rational is real*, it follows that there
is not, and cannot be any authority capable of halting its progressive
dialectical motion. It was not for nothing that Hegel defined dialectics
as a universal irresistible force which must destroy even that which is
most stable.

### IV

'Everything is fluid, everything changes; one cannot enter the same
stream twice and no one touches the fatal essence twice.' So spoke the
profound (the 'dark') thinker of Ephesus. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ This same
thought, but tempered in the crucible of an incomparably stricter logic,
underlies Hegel's philosophy. But if everything is fluid, if everything
changes, and if the mighty force of dialectical motion does not spare
even the most stable phenomena, we have no right to regard any of the
latter *from the viewpoint of mysticism*. On the contrary, they can and
must be examined only *from the standpoint of science*.

The reader must be aware of the celebrated contrast of the infiniteness
of the Universe to moral law made by Kant in his *Critique of Practical
Reason*:

The very first view of the infiniteness of the Universe annihilates as
it were my importance as an animal creature\... Moral law, on the
contrary, infinitely raises my value as an intelligent being owing to my
personality in which the moral law reveals to me a life independent of
the world of beasts, and even of the entire sensible world.

Thus for Kant, as well as for Fichte, moral law was a kind of key which
opened the door to the world beyond. Hegel saw it quite differently.
According to his teaching morality is the inevitable product and
necessary condition of social life. Hegel recalls Aristotle's saying
that the people existed before the individual man. The individual person
is something dependent, and therefore must exist in unity with the
whole. *To be moral is to live according to the morals of one*'s
*country.* For man to be given a good upbringing, he had to be made a
citizen of a well-ordered state. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

It would appear from this that ethics is rooted in politics. There is a
strong resemblance here to the revolutionary doctrine on morality
elaborated by the eighteenth-century French Enlighteners. This
resemblance could, however, give rise to misunderstanding. If to be
moral means to live in accordance with the morals of one's own country,
this would appear to condemn beforehand *innovators*, whose activity
always and unavoidably places them *in opposition to some of their
country*'s *morals*, that is to say, it makes them *immoral*, in a
certain sense of the word. Aristophanes charged Socrates with
immorality. And the death of Socrates demonstrates that the people of
Athens found this charge grounded.

However, the contradiction may be solved easily with the aid of the
dialectical method. In the Introduction to his *Philosophy of History*,
Hegel notes:

Generally, as regards the withering, the injury and decline of
religious, ethical and moral aims and conditions it must be said that,
although by their inner essence these aims and conditions are infinite
and eternal, their manifestation, however, may be of a limited
character, they have a natural bond with each other and are subject to
the command of chance. Therefore they are transient, subject to
withering and injury.

There, too, Hegel expresses a thought which was developed in detail
later by Lassalle in his *Systeme der erworbenen Rechte*: 'The right of
the world spirit is higher than all particular rights.' (\'*Das Recht
des Weltgeistes geht über alle besonderen Berechtigungen.*')

Great personalities, appearing in history as the bearers and defenders
of 'the right of the world spirit', found their complete justification,
in Hegel's philosophy of history, notwithstanding the fact that their
actions constituted a violation of particular rights and threatened the
prevailing social order. Hegel called these personalities *heroes* who
by their activity created a new world. He says that:

They come into collision with the old order and destroy it, they are the
violators of the existing laws. Therefore they perish, but perish as
individual personalities. Their punishment does not destroy the
principle they represent\... the principle triumphs later although in
another form.

Aristophanes was not mistaken; Socrates was, in fact, destroying the old
morality of his people, who could not be blamed for condemning him to
death when they sensed he was a danger to their cherished social system.
The Athenians were right in their own way; however, Socrates too was
right, and even more than his judges, since he was the conscious
spokesman of a new and higher principle.

Hegel had a positive weakness for these 'violators of existing laws' and
poured scorn on those erudite psychologists who tried to explain the
actions of great historical figures by self-interest and personal
motives. He thought it was perfectly natural that, if a man is devoted
to a cause, his work for this cause will bring him, among other things,
personal satisfaction which may, perhaps, be decomposed into all the
forms of self-love. But to think on these grounds that great historical
figures were guided solely by personal motives is possible only for
'psychological valets' to whom no man is a hero, not because there
actually are no heroes, but because these judges are *only valets*.

### V

Hegel's *ethics* was a great step forward by philosophy in the
scientific explanation of the moral development of mankind. His
*aesthetics* is just as great a step forward in comprehending the
essence and history of art. Through Belinsky, it exerted an enormous
influence on Russian criticism, and even for this reason alone its
fundamental propositions deserve the greatest attention of the Russian
reader.

Hegel's aesthetics is akin to the views of his nearest philosophical
predecessor, Schelling, on this question. Schelling said that beauty is
the *infinite* expressed in a *finite form*. And since the poetically
creative fantasy is conditioned by the epochs of world development, art
is subject to law-governed and necessary development, the portrayal
(Schelling called it the *designing*) of which is the task of
aesthetics. To place such a task before aesthetics was to proclaim the
necessity for scientific study of the history of art. Of course, there's
many a slip twixt the cup and the lip. It is one thing to *pose* a
certain problem; it is quite another matter to *solve* it. Moreover,
scientific problems are not solved by 'designing', and without it it was
very difficult for the idealist philosophers to get along. However,
Schelling did an unforgettable service in correctly posing the problem.

Besides, to define beauty as the expression of the infinite in a finite
form is to show that content is not something of no consequence in a
work of art, but is, on the contrary, of the greatest importance. In any
case, from Schelling's point of view, the contraposing of *form to
content* was void of all meaning. Schelling insisted that *form cannot
exist without content, since form is determined by content*. A work of
art exists only for its own sake. In this lies the sanctity of art, that
its creations arise, not for the sake of any aims alien to it --- for
example, sensuous enjoyment, or economic advantage, or the moral
improvement of man, or his enlightenment. *Art exists for art*'s *sake*.
This idea of Schelling's was repeated with enthusiasm by all Schelling's
followers in general and our Russian ones in particular. In a certain
sense they were absolutely right. However, if *works* of art are the
finite expression of the *infinite*, while *its evolution* is determined
by the *evolution of the world*, it is clear that the art of each
particular historical epoch has as its content that which is most
important to the people of that epoch.

Schelling's basic ideas on aesthetics were still more deeply propounded
and much more systematically elaborated by Hegel.

We already know that the *spirit*, to which Hegel is always appealing as
the final authority, is not an unchangeable, immobile *substance*. It
moves; it develops; it differs in itself; it reveals itself in nature,
in the state, in universal history. The *aim* --- it would be more exact
to say the *fruit ---* of its eternal motion is *self-cognition*. It is
for the spirit precisely to cognise itself. This striving towards
self-cognition is realised in the process of the spiritual development
of humanity, expressed in art, in religion and in philosophy. The spirit
freely *contemplating* its own essence is *fine, or aesthetic, art*; the
spirit reverently *representing* this essence to itself is *religion*;
lastly, the spirit, *cognising* this essence is *philosophy*.

The definition of art as the *free contemplation by the spirit of its
own essence* is important because it brings out the complete
independence of the domain of artistic creation and enjoyment. According
to Hegel, as well as Schelling and Kant, works of art exist and must
exist not for the sake of any outside aims:

Contemplation of the beautiful \[says Hegel\] is liberal \[*liberaler
Art*\]; it treats the objects as free and infinite in themselves,
without wishing to possess and utilise them as useful for finite needs
and designs.

At the same time, the definition of art as the domain in which the
spirit contemplates its own essence signifies that the *subject* of art
is identical with the subject of philosophy (and religion). This brings
out the enormous value of the *content* of artistic productions.
Philosophy has to do with truth. Art, too, has to do with truth. But
whereas the *philosopher* cognises the truth in the *concept*, the
*artist* contemplates it in the *image*. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ Since we
already know that the *true* (the '*rational*') is *real*, we may say
that it is precisely *reality* that serves as the content of art. In
saying this, however, we must remember that by far not all that exists
is real. Hegel remarks that it would be a mistake to think that artistic
creation is the simple reproduction of a thing seen by the artist, only
in an embellished form, that the artist's ideal is related to the
existing as a portrait in which the painter has flattered the original.
The artistic ideal is reality freed from those elements of chance which
are unavoidable in every finite existence. Art brings things ---
blemished, in Hegel's expression, by the fortuities and externals of
everyday existence --- into harmony with their concept, casting aside
all that is irrelevant.

It is by such casting aside that the artistic ideal is created. That is
why Hegel says that the artistic ideal is reality in all the fullness of
its power.

There were three main stages in the historical development of mankind:
the Eastern world, the world of antiquity and the Christian or German
world. And since to the stages of historical development there
correspond stages in the development of the artistic ideal, Hegel
counted three of these too.

The art of the Eastern world has a symbolic character; in it the idea is
connected with the material object, but has not yet penetrated it.
Besides, the idea itself remains undefined. The definiteness of the idea
and its penetration of the object are achieved only in the art of the
antique world, in other words, in classical art. Here the artistic ideal
appears in human form. Such humanising of the ideal was subjected to
condemnation, but Hegel says that, inasmuch as art has the aim of
expressing spiritual content in a sensuous form, it had to resort to
such humanising, since only the human body can serve as the sensuous
form corresponding to the spirit. That is why classical art is the realm
of beauty. 'There is not and cannot be greater beauty', says Hegel
rapturously. But when the world of antiquity had outlived its time, a
new world-outlook came to be, and with it a new artistic ideal --- the
romantic. The new world-outlook consisted in the spirit seeking its
purpose not outside itself, but only within itself. In Romantic art, the
idea began to take precedence over sensuous form. Consequently, external
beauty began to play a subordinate part in it, with the main role now
being played by spiritual beauty. However, because of this, *art*
displayed a tendency to overstep its limits and enter the domain of
religion.

In Hegel's view architecture is a predominantly symbolic art, whereas
*sculpture* is a classical art and *painting, music and poetry* are
essentially romantic.

We can see what a close theoretical connection exists between Hegel's
aesthetics and his philosophy of history. In both there is the same
method and the same point of departure: *the motion of the spirit* is
proclaimed the basic cause of development. Hence in both domains there
is one and the same defect: in order to depict the course of development
as the result of the motion of the spirit, one sometimes has to resort
to an arbitrary treatment of facts. But both in aesthetics and in the
philosophy of history Hegel reveals a striking depth of thought. Apart
from this, in aesthetics he readily descends to 'concrete historical
ground', ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ and then his observations on the evolution of
art become truly enlightening. Unfortunately, lack of space prevents me
from confirming this by examples. I shall, however, mention the superb
pages he devotes to the history of Dutch painting in the seventeenth
century. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

### VI

*Fine art* arises because the spirit freely *contemplates* its own
essence. Religion owes its origin to the circumstance that the spirit
*conceives* of this essence. So taught Hegel. But can the domain of
conception be separated from the domain of contemplation? If so, it is
not without difficulty, since when we *conceive* of a particular object
we at the same time *contemplate* it. Not without reason did Hegel
himself point out that Romantic art oversteps the limits of aesthetic
creation and enters the domain of religion. To understand the subsequent
course of development of philosophical thought in Germany it is
essential to know Hegel's views on religion as thoroughly as possible.
Therefore I invite the reader to look at the question from another
angle.

According to Hegel the spirit is in a process of constant motion. The
process of its *motion* is the process of its *self-revelation*. The
spirit reveals itself in nature, in social life, in world history. Its
self-revelation is realised *in time and in space*. The *infinite* power
of the spirit is thus *manifested* in *finite* form. Do away with this
finite form and you have the *religious point of view*. Hegel says that
the person holding this view conceives of God as an absolute force and
absolute substance, into which all the wealth of the natural and
spiritual world returns. The spirit is revealed to the imagination as
something supernatural, quite independent of the finite subject, but for
all that closely bound to it. But here too it is not always revealed in
the same way. The conception of the spirit as a supernatural being
changes --- *develops* --- together with the historical development of
man. In the East, God is conceived of as an absolute force of nature, or
as substance before which man admits himself to be insignificant and
unfree. At the next stage, God is conceived of as a *subject*. Finally,
there is Christianity, which Hegel sees as the *absolute religion*,
proclaiming the absolute unity and reconciliation of the infinite and
the finite. In the centre of this religion is Christ as the redeemer of
the world, as the son of God, and above all as God the Man.

That is what is meant by the phrase: religion is true content in a
conceptual form. But this form is not yet an adequate expression of
absolute truth. This adequate expression of truth is to be found only in
philosophy. The concept preserves figurative forms and considers them
essential. Religion speaks of divine wrath, of the birth of the Son of
God, and so on. Hegel defended energetically the 'inner truth' of
Christianity, but he did not find it possible to believe in the
authenticity of the Bible stories presenting divine actions as
historical events. He said they had to be regarded as allegorical
portrayals of the truth, like the myths of Plato. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^
Hegel's philosophy was inimical to *subjective arbitrariness*. From the
point of view of this philosophy, the ideal of a particular personality
has value only when it expresses the objective course of social
development, conditioned by the motion of the world spirit. The heroes
about whom Hegel speaks with such sympathy were instruments of this
development. For this reason alone his philosophy left no place for
*Utopianism*. Apart from this, his philosophy could not find common
ground with Utopianism for another reason, that the firm belief in the
possibility of devising a plan for the best social order, which is
characteristic of Utopianism, is devoid of all meaning in the light of
dialectics. If everything depends on the circumstances of time and
place, if everything is relative, if everything is fluid and everything
changes, then there is no doubt about one thing: the social order
changes in conformity with the social relations formed in the particular
country at the particular time. It is no wonder that Hegel was disliked
both by the *Romanticists*, who were so strongly attached to subjective
arbitrariness, and by the *Utopians*, who had no conception of the
dialectical method and, as is known, had the closest affinity with the
Romanticists. At first only very few representatives of the opposition
in Germany understood that Hegel's philosophy could provide the most
lasting theoretical foundation for the aspirations to freedom of its
age. Among these very few was Heinrich Heine. In the forties of last
century, humorously describing a conversation supposedly going on
between himself and Hegel, he warned the reader that the words
'Everything existing is rational' mean also that everything rational
must exist. It is worthy of note that Heine substituted the word
'*existing*' for the word '*real*' in Hegel's famous formula, probably
hoping to demonstrate that, even in a vulgar conception of this formula,
its progressive meaning was preserved.

After all that has been said, it is hardly necessary to add that Heine
was right, in so far as he was speaking of the *dialectical character of
Hegel*'s *philosophy*. It should not be forgotten, however, that with
the aid of the dialectical method Hegel attempted to construct a *system
of absolute idealism*.

A system of absolute idealism is a system of absolute truth. If Hegel
had constructed such a system --- and he believed he had succeeded in
doing so --- then, reasoning from the standpoint of idealism, we have to
recognise that the aim of the uninterrupted motion of the spirit had
already been achieved: in the person of Hegel, the spirit had arrived at
self-knowledge in its true, 'adequate' form, that is, in the *form of
concept*. And once the aim of motion has been achieved, motion must
cease. Thus, if *prior to Hegel*, philosophical thought *constantly
moved forward*, the appearance of Hegel heralds the *beginning of its
stagnation*. Hegel's *absolute idealism* came into irreconcilable
contradiction with his own dialectical method and --- please note ---
not only in the domain of philosophical thought. If every philosophy is
the intellectual expression of its time, the philosophy that represents
a system of absolute truth is the intellectual expression of that
historical period to which corresponds an absolute social order, that
is, an order serving as the objective realisation of absolute truth. And
since absolute truth is *eternal* truth, the social order which serves
as its objective expression acquires permanent significance. Certain
details may be modified in it, but it cannot be subjected to essential
changes. That is why, in those very lectures on the history of
philosophy in which Hegel speaks enthusiastically of the heroes of
antiquity who rebelled against the established order, we come upon an
edifying discourse on how, in modern society, in contrast to antiquity,
philosophical activity can and must be restricted to the *internal
world*, since the *external world*, the social system, has arrived at a
certain rational order, has become '*reconciled with itself*'. *Thus,
where previously there had been motion in the sphere of social
relations, too, now it must come to an end.* This means that, in its
teaching on the question of social relations also, Hegel's absolute
idealism came into conflict with his dialectical method.

And so Hegel's philosophy has two sides: a *progressive* side (closely
bound up with his method) and a *conservative* one (no less closely
linked with his claim to possession of absolute truth). With the passing
years, the conservative side increased very significantly at the expense
of the progressive. This is most vividly revealed in his *Philosophie
des Rechts*. This celebrated work is a veritable storehouse of profound
thought. But at the same time, on almost every page, there stands out
Hegel's desire to remain at peace with the existing order. It is
remarkable that we even meet here the expression '*peace with reality*',
so often used by Belinsky in the period of his articles on the Borodino
Anniversary. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^ It follows from this that if Hegel's idea
regarding the rationality of all reality gave occasion for
misunderstandings, he himself more than anyone was responsible for this,
in depriving the idea of its former dialectical content and recognising
dismal Russian reality as the very accomplishment of reason.

Those of Hegel's followers who were more influenced by the *dialectical
element* in his philosophy understood it, as Herzen did, as the *algebra
of revolution*; those who were mostly influenced by the element of
absolute idealism were inclined to perceive this philosophy as the
*arithmetic of stagnation*. In 1838 there appeared in Leipzig a book by
the Hegelian Karl Bayrhoffer (in its way a very interesting book), *Die
Ideen und Geschichte der Philosophie*. Bayrhoffer asserted that Hegel
was the peak of the world spirit, and that in him the idea of philosophy
existing in-itself-and-for-itself had found its double. (\'*Hegel ist
diese Spitze des Weltgeistes\... Die an-und-für-sich-seiende Idee der
Philosophie hat sich in Hegel verdoppelt.*') ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ It was
impossible to go further than this in recognising the absolute character
of Hegel's philosophy. Immediately following this pronouncement,
Bayrhoffer draws in this case inevitable and logical conclusion that now
the absolute idea itself has become reality ('s*elbst Wirklichkeit
geworden*'), ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ and that the world has now reached its aim
(\'*die Welt hat ihr Ziel erreicht*'). ^[\[24\]](#n24)^ It is hardly
necessary to enlarge upon the fact that such a conclusion favoured every
kind of conservative tendency both in Germany itself and in all the
other countries where the influence of German philosophy had penetrated.

### VII

Hegel's system had its own destiny, which confirmed for the
thousand-and-first time the truth that the course of development of
philosophy, as of every other ideology, is determined by the course of
historical development. So long as the pulse of public life in Germany
was beating sluggishly, conservative conclusions, in the main, were
being drawn from Hegel's philosophical teaching. That was when it became
the officially recognised Royal Prussian philosophy. But as the pulse of
public life quickened, the conservative element in Hegel's philosophy
was pushed more and more into the background by its *dialectical*
progressive element. In the second half of the 1830s, one could speak
with complete justification of a split in the Hegelian camp.

In 1838, A Ruge and T Echtermeyer founded the *Hallische Jahrbücher für
deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst*, which, in 1841, was transferred from
Halle to Leipzig, its title being changed to *Deutsche Jahrbücher*.
^[\[25\]](#n25)^ The journal was of a radical trend. In consequence it
was not destined to have a long life in Saxony. It was banned in 1843,
and Ruge then made an attempt to publish it in Paris under the title of
*Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher*. In its new form it proved to be quite
short-lived: only one issue (a double one) appeared. But it is very
remarkable in this respect that its publisher, in addition to Ruge, was
Karl Marx, while one of its active collaborators was Frederick Engels.
Left Hegelianism was gradually abandoning its own philosophical basis,
and more and more acquiring a political and socialist colouring.

But prior to its appearance in *politics* and in *socialism*, the onward
movement of philosophical thought inherited by the Hegelians from their
teacher revealed itself in *theology*.

As we already know, Hegel did not admit the historical authenticity of
the Bible stories and, like Schelling, regarded them as allegorical
myths similar to those of Plato (see above). On the other hand, Hegel
held that the task of philosophy of religion was the cognition of
positive religion. In this way, religion became for the philosopher a
subject of scientific cognition. But what does the cognition of religion
mean? It means, *among other things*, to submit to scientific, critical
examination the question of the origin of those narratives, those
allegorical myths, through which religion *conceives* of truth. *David
Friedrich Strauss* (1808-1874), a pupil of Hegel's, took this task upon
himself.

His book *Das Leben Jesu, kritisch bearbeitet* was published in 1835. It
was the first great theoretical event in the process of disintegration
of the Hegelian school. Strauss was at no time disposed to political
radicalism. In the revolutionary period of 1848-49, he showed himself to
be an out-and-out opportunist. However, in the theological literature of
Germany, the appearance of his book was a truly revolutionary
epoch-making event. T Ziegler thinks that hardly any other book had so
much influence in the nineteenth century as Strauss' *Life of Jesus*.

Strauss considered the miracles as the strongest proof of the very
meagre historical authenticity of the Gospel stories.

In the theological literature of Germany at that time there was a
twofold attitude to miracles. The '*Supernaturalists*' acknowledged them
as real, whereas the rationalists denied them and strove to find a
natural explanation of the alleged miracles. Strauss disagreed with both
these viewpoints. He not only refused to believe in the *miracles*, but
said that the *very events* which were presented by the Evangelists as
miracles, and which the resourceful rationalists were explaining by
natural causes, were themselves unauthentic. He declared that the time
was ripe to put an end to unscientific attempts to 'make the improbable
probable, to make historically conceivable that which had not occurred
in history'. Following Schelling and Hegel, he expressed the opinion
that the Gospel stories had to be taken not as accounts of real
happenings, but only as *myths* that had sprung up within the Christian
communities and reflected the Messianic ideas of the time. Here is how
he himself subsequently expounded his views on the origin of these
myths:

It would be of no avail, I said, to want to make intelligible as natural
processes, for example, the tales about the star appearing to the wise
men, about the transfiguration, the miraculous feeding, etc. But since
it is equally impossible to imagine unnatural things as having actually
occurred, all such tales are to be regarded as inventions. If it was
asked how, at the time when the Gospels came into being, such tales
about Jesus came to be invented I replied, first of all, by pointing to
the then prevailing expectation of the Messiah. I said that after first
a few, and then an ever growing number of people came to recognise Jesus
as the Messiah; they believed that everything must have been fulfilled
in him which they expected of the Messiah, in accordance with the Old
Testament prophecies and prefigures and their widespread
interpretations. No matter how well known it was that Jesus was born in
Nazareth, as the Messiah and the Son of David he had none the less to be
born in Bethlehem, because this had been prophesied by Micah. The so
severe reproaches addressed by Jesus to his fellow-countrymen for their
passion for miracles could be preserved in tradition, but since the
first liberator of the people, Moses, had performed miracles, so also
had the last liberator, the Messiah, that is, Jesus, to perform them.
Isaiah had prophesied that when the Messiah appeared, the eyes of the
blind would be opened, the deaf would hear, the lame would run like deer
and the tongue-tied would speak fluently. Thus, it was known exactly
even in detail which particular miracles must have been performed by
Jesus, since he was the Messiah. So it was that the first Christian
communities not only could but had to invent tales about Jesus, without
realising, however, that they were inventing them\... This view puts the
origin of the early Christian myths on the same footing with the origin
of those we meet in the history of the appearance of other religions.
This is just what constitutes the latest successes of science in the
sphere of mythology --- its understanding of how myths arise, in their
original shape representing, not the conscious and deliberate invention
of a single person, but the product of the collective consciousness of a
whole people or a religious group, expressed, perhaps originally by a
single individual, but believed precisely because thereby he is but the
mouthpiece of the general conviction. It was not the shell into which a
wise man put an idea conceived by him for the pious use of the ignorant
crowd, but in the tale, and in the form of the tale which he related he
became conscious of the idea which purely as such he himself could not
yet have grasped. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^

### VIII

There is no doubt that only such a way of posing the question may be
considered scientific. In the person of Strauss, the school of Hegel did
in fact approach religion --- or, at least, some fruits of religious
creation --- wielding the surgical knife of scientific research.
However, the correct *posing* of a problem is not equivalent to its
correct *solution*. Strauss' book excited much comment and objection.
Thus, for example, Weisse (*Die evangelische Geschichte kritisch und
philosophisch bearbeitet*, 1838) asserted that at the time when our
first three Gospels were written, no tradition 'of a definite type' had
yet taken shape in the Christian communities. Consequently, the content
of these Gospels could not be explained by tradition. Weisse, who
considered that the Gospel according to St Mark was the first in point
of time of our Gospels, sought to prove that this first Gospel had
provided the basis for the narrations of St Matthew and St Luke. But if
one Evangelist, borrowed his material from another, there was nothing to
stop him from rewriting it. This shows that in the Gospels we are
probably dealing not only with myths, but also with the products of the
Evangelists' personal creation. Finally, the opinion was expressed that,
in the period preceding the appearance of Christ and the formation of
the Christian communities, the notion of the Messiah was not so
widespread in the Jewish world as Strauss thought.

The most resolute of all Strauss' critics was *Bruno Bauer* (1809-1882).

In replying to his critics, Strauss noted that there were now three
shades of opinion in the Hegelian school: the centre had two wings, a
right and a left. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ Bruno Bauer, also a former pupil of
Hegel's, belonged at the start to the right wing. But at the end of the
thirties, he became one of the most extreme on the left wing. In 1840,
he published his *Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte des Johannes*, and
in 1841-42, *Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker und des
Johannes*. These works, especially the latter, created a great stir. The
orthodox were so irritated with Bauer that they succeeded in having him
deprived of his post as university lecturer. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

According to Bauer, Strauss' lasting merit lay in the fact that he had
made a final break with orthodoxy. But in doing so, he had taken only
the first step towards a proper understanding of the Gospel story. His
theory of myths would not stand up to criticism; it itself suffered from
mysticism. In saying that the Gospel story had its source in tradition
Strauss explained very little, since the task is precisely to
investigate the process which gives rise to tradition. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^
The Gospel story was not the mysterious and unconscious creation of the
Christian community, it was the quite conscious creation of individual
persons pursuing definite religious aims. This is most obvious from a
reading of the fourth Gospel, but is noticeable also in the others. The
so-called St Luke refashioned in his own way the Gospel of the so-called
St Mark, and the so-called St Matthew recarved both of these,
endeavouring to adapt their stories to the ideas and spiritual needs of
his own time. He tried to get them to agree with one another, but
himself became entangled in many contradictions.

Strauss had already come to the conclusion that there were insufficient
data at our disposal to permit us to form a definite impression of the
personality of Jesus. Bruno Bauer utterly rejected Jesus' existence in
history. It is understandable what indignation he must have aroused
among the immense majority of his readers. And, of course, it should not
be forgotten that Bauer had nevertheless posed the question much more
correctly than Strauss had done. The investigators who supported Bauer's
views had in any case to regard Christianity, not as the fruit that had
finally ripened in the soil of Jewish Messianic expectations, but as the
spiritual outcome of the development of Greco-Roman culture. Bauer
insisted that Christianity was the product of specific social relations.
True, he began to talk in this way only much later, in the seventies of
last century. At the time of his controversy with Strauss, he himself in
his comprehension of Christianity was a thoroughgoing idealist, and this
brought him some years later the reproach from Marx that, according to
Bauer, the Gospels were dictated not by the Holy Ghost but by infinite
self-consciousness. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^

To grasp the philosophical meaning of this reproach and thus elucidate
the role of Bauer in the history of German Hegelianism after Hegel, it
is necessary to take into account the significance Bauer himself
attached to his dispute with Strauss.

### IX

In his view, this dispute was one about *substance* on the one hand and
*self-consciousness* on the other. Strauss, in his explanation that the
Gospels were the unconscious creation of the Christian community,
adhered to the point of view of *substance*. Rejecting this viewpoint
and proving that the evangelical narratives had been consciously
invented by the Evangelists, Bruno Bauer proclaimed himself a
representative of *self-consciousness*.

The question upon which he had entered into controversy with Strauss was
in fact much wider than that of the origin of the Gospel stories. It was
the great philosophical and historical question of how the law-governed
course of history in general, and the history of thought in particular,
is related to the conscious activity of individual persons. This
question finds its complete answer in the proposition that the
law-governed course of history is determined by the aggregate of the
actions of individuals and that, in consequence, it must in no case be
considered in contrast to law-governed historical motion. True, the
concept of *conformity to law* coincides with the *concept of
necessity*, whereas the conscious activity of individual persons seems
to them not to be governed by necessity, or, to use an expression more
common in such cases, to be free. But it seems so to them because, being
conscious of themselves as the *cause* of certain social happenings,
they are not conscious of themselves as the consequence of that social
situation in which their desire to act in a particular way and not in
some other way was born. To act freely means to realise one's aims, and
not to be the instrument for the achievement of the aims of others ---
that and no more. *Freedom* is the opposite of *compulsion*, and not at
all of *necessity*. The conscious activity of great men in every
particular historical period was *free* in the sense that they were
achieving their own and not somebody else's ideals, and at the same time
it was *necessary*, because their decision to serve these ideals was
conditioned by all the previous course of social development.
Furthermore, even the most free and fruitful activity of individuals
always arouses, by the way, consequences which they themselves had not
foreseen at all. It is clear from even the first, superficial glance
that these consequences can find their explanation *only* in a certain
necessary law-governed connection between social phenomena. But no
matter how clear all this may be, the free activity of individual
persons all the same very often and --- for certain psychological
motives --- very willingly is contrasted to the law-governed general
course of development. Although Hegel's philosophy explained all the
futility of such an antinomy, even the most gifted Hegelians, which
Strauss and Bruno Bauer were without any doubt, could not always cope
with it. Strauss, in asserting that the Gospel story arose from
tradition, and in not admitting, at least at the beginning, that there
was any room for the elaboration of tradition by the creative effort of
individual persons, leaned to one side of the antinomy. In his own
Hegelian language Bauer expressed this by saying that Strauss adhered to
the point of view of substance. Citing Hegel, Bauer averred that such an
attitude on Strauss' part was a great sin against philosophy --- of
course, Hegelian philosophy --- which required progress from *substance
to self-consciousness*. He was prepared, perhaps, to admit the right of
substance, but demanded that self-consciousness, too, be accorded its
right. 'Strauss' error', he said, 'consists not in having brought into
motion that common force, but in compelling it to act directly from its
community.' ^[\[31\]](#n31)^ This was said truly superbly. However,
Bauer showed too much zeal in his defence of the right of
'self-consciousness'. He defended it with such enthusiasm that the
'common force' proved to be completely outside his view as well. In
other words, he leaned to the other side of the antinomy: he so
reconciled 'substance' with 'self-consciousness', that
self-consciousness became *all* to him, and substance *nothing*. It was
this that led Marx to make the mocking remark we quoted above, one that
was equivalent to reproaching him with extreme *historical idealism*.

The differences between Strauss and Bauer were differences based on
Hegelian speculation. But as we have seen, each of them leaned to one of
the opposing sides of the antinomy between the law-governed course of
history and the free activity of individuals. To the same extent that
they were guilty of this one-sidedness, they differed from their
teacher. Bauer's difference with Hegel involved rejection of the
Hegelian philosophy of history and a return to the views of the French
eighteenth-century Enlighteners, according to whom the 'world is
governed by opinion' (\'*c\'est l\'opinion qui gouverne le monde*').

But this return was a *step back*, a retrograde movement in the
understanding of the historical process. No one denies that 'opinion'
influences the course of social development. The question is, however,
must we not recognise that the process of the formation and development
of 'opinion' has its own conformity to law, that is to say, necessity?
Helvétius, one of the most brilliant and courageous representatives of
French Enlightenment philosophy of the eighteenth century, already
suspected that such necessity exists. He said that the development of
knowledge (and consequently of 'opinion' generally) is subject to
certain laws and that there are unknown causes by which that development
is determined. In saying this, he put before the philosophy of history
--- or, if you like, before social science --- the new and extremely
important task of discovering the unknown causes determining the course
of development of 'opinion'. The great Hegel grasped the vast importance
of this task, although maybe he was not aware of who had formulated it.
He touched upon it in his lectures on the history of philosophy while
making an assessment of Anaxagoras. The latter said that the world is
moved by reason. Hegel fully approved of this idea. But in applying it
to the explanation of the historical process, he remarked that reason
guides history only in the sense in which it guides the motion of the
celestial bodies, that is to say, in the sense of conformity to law. The
historical progress of humanity is subject to certain laws. This does
not mean, however, that its course is guided by men's opinions.
Minerva's owl flies only by night. Men start to ponder over their own
social relations only when these are tending to decay and are preparing
to give way to a new system. But how do social relations arise? We
already know that, in Hegel's view, the ultimate cause of historical
development is the motion of the world spirit. We know too that at times
Hegel himself seemed to feel the futility of referring to the world
spirit, and then this 'absolute idealist' made unexpected excursions
into the domain of the materialist explanation of history. Bruno Bauer
and those who held similar views to his, among whom a prominent role was
played by his brother Edgar, were even less satisfied than Hegel with
references to the world spirit, absolute reason and so forth. Edgar
Bauer wrote that contemplative (that is, Hegel's) philosophy was much in
error in speaking of reason as of an abstract absolute force. There is
no absolute reason, ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ he argued; and, of course, he was
right. But although the Hegelian reference to the world spirit or, what
is the same thing, to absolute reason, was unsound, nevertheless it
signified acknowledgement of that incontestable truth that the
progressive development of 'opinion' is not the ultimate cause of
historical development, since it itself depends upon some unknown and
hidden causes. In rejecting reference to absolute reason, it was
necessary either to forget altogether the existence of these causes ---
and thus overlook the most important task of the scientific explanation
of the historical process --- or to continue to search for them in the
same direction in which Hegel at times sought them, that is to say, in
the direction of historical materialism. There could be no third road.
However, Bruno Bauer and his associates attached absolutely no value to
Hegel's excursions into the domain of the materialist explanation of
history: they simply did not notice them. Therefore they could only go
back, return to the superficial historical idealism of the eighteenth
century. This they did, when they recognised 'opinion' as the motive
force of world history. ^[\[33\]](#n33)^

The historical idealism of the French Enlighteners did not prevent their
doing great revolutionary work. Although their own 'opinion', like all
others, was the natural outcome of social development, yet once formed,
it became a mighty lever of the further development of society. Bruno
Bauer and his associates also considered themselves to be great
revolutionaries. Edgar Bauer believed that our times are above all
distinguished by their revolutionary character. ^[\[34\]](#n34)^ Neither
he nor anyone else among the extreme representatives of 'criticism' ever
suspected that, at the stage of development reached by West European
society in the forties of last century, the idealist viewpoint was
incompatible with a revolutionary mode of thought in the field of social
and political theory. Here I have in mind, of course, a *consistently*
revolutionary mode of thought, since the *inconsistent adapts itself*
with great facility *to every point of departure*.

### X

The mode of thought of the Bauer brothers was very radical in the field
of *theology*. This need not be surprising. According to the theory of
their teacher Hegel, in religion the spirit conceives of its own
essence. However, the Bauer brothers had come to the conclusion that the
spirit generally did not exist as something independent of human
consciousness. It is clear that they could no longer look at religion
through Hegel's eyes. They argued that not *spirit* but *man* conceives
of his essence in religion. But the religious conception of the essence
of man is a *mistaken* one, and as such should be eliminated. The Bauers
took this viewpoint of religion from Ludwig Feuerbach, and we shall deal
with it when we come to speak of Feuerbach. Here it is only necessary to
note that in their view of religion --- although it was not an
independent one --- the Bauers were significantly in advance of Strauss,
who for a fairly long time stuck fast in the space separating Feuerbach
from Hegel. With the Bauers there was no question of peace between
religion and philosophy. When one of the supporters of such a peace said
that the thinker who rebelled against one religion was duty bound to put
another religion in its place, Bruno Bauer objected sharply, saying that
when we try to pull someone out of one blunder we are not obliged to
push him into another: and if we wish to expiate one crime it does not
follow that we must commit a new one. ^[\[35\]](#n35)^

The 'critics' desired to put philosophy in the place of religion.
However, in their eyes philosophy too was not an aim in itself. The
triumph of philosophy was to clear the path for the reconstruction of
society on rational foundations and for the further forward movement of
humanity. This would seem to be a fully progressive programme. But it
was here that it was revealed how difficult it was, in the middle of the
nineteenth century, to get agreement between consistent revolutionary
thinking and idealism.

The programme of Bruno Bauer and his associates remained progressive
only so long as it kept the form of an algebraic formula. But when it
became necessary to replace the *algebraic symbols with definite
arithmetical figures*, it acquired a dubious and even a directly
conservative character. The Bauer brothers were unable to link up the
abstract radicalism of their thinking with the social aspirations of
their time. Proud of their '*critical spirit*', they looked scornfully
on the 'mass', alien, as they thought, to all criticism, and considered
harmful any contact with it. They uttered the strange view that all
previous great historical actions had had no decisive success because
they had interested and attracted the masses, or, in other words,
because the idea in the name of which they were being accomplished had
to appeal to the masses. In this regard, Marx made the very valid point
that the 'idea' suffered shameful defeat every time it separated itself
from 'interest', that is to say, did not express the needs of society as
a whole or of a particular class. ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ The sublime contempt
of idealist 'criticism' for the material interests of the mass prevented
it from understanding the meaning of the proletarian emancipation
movement, and even brought it into opposition to this movement. In this
respect, Feuerbach showed much greater understanding of the movement;
but the remarkable thing is that in his person German philosophy was
breaking with idealism and becoming materialist.

### XI

In order to grasp *how this happened* and why it *had to happen*, we
have to recall in broad outline the progress of thought that brought
German philosophy to the absolute idealism of Hegel.

It was correctly said that the fundamental question of philosophy,
especially the philosophy of modern times, is the question of the
relationship of consciousness to nature, of the subject to the object.
Around this question, German philosophical thought of the nineteenth
century revolved as around its axis.

In the philosophy of Kant, the world of phenomena was sharply contrasted
to the world of noumena, man to nature, the subject to the object. This
is dualism; but philosophy, if it is not to mark time, cannot be content
with dualism. It strives towards *monism*. It is easy to understand why:
because *only* monism, explaining the world by means of *one* principle,
has the right to claim a (more or less correct) solution of the question
of the relationship of subject to object. Dualism does not solve this
question; it either declares it to be insoluble or appeals to a miracle,
that is to say, to the intervention of an omnipotent being standing
*above both subject and object*. But the supreme being is *one*: so that
the appeal to it is itself an attempt to solve --- true, by means of a
phantom --- the fundamental question of philosophy in a monistic sense.
^[\[37\]](#n37)^

Fichte wished to eliminate Kant's dualism by declaring it a mistake to
see in the *non-ego* (in the object, in nature) something independent of
the *ego* (of the subject, of self-consciousness) and separated from it
by an impassable gulf. In reality the 'ego' *contrasts itself to itself,
and thereby posits the non-*\'*ego*'. Thus all that exists does so in
the 'ego' and *through* the 'ego'. In other words, nature owes its
existence to the creative activity of consciousness, and exists only in
it. This solution of the problem of the relationship of subject to
object had two advantages in the eyes of his contemporaries; it was,
first of all, *monistic*, and, secondly, monistic in an idealist sense.
The celebrated Romanticist, Novalis, called Fichte the new Newton who
had discovered the law of the inner system of the worlds.
^[\[38\]](#n38)^ Schelling at first also came out as Fichte's pupil.
However, the Romanticists soon found that they were able to 'Fichticise'
better than Fichte (\'*besser fichtisieren als Fichte*'). They
proclaimed that the world was a dream, and the dream was the world,
becoming addicts of 'magical' idealism. The same Novalis asserted that
nature was a fantasy which had been transformed into a machine, and that
physics was the doctrine of fantasy. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ It was probably
such extravagances of the Romanticists that obliged Schelling to review
critically the question of what in Fichte's teaching is the 'ego' which
'*posits*' *nature*. He came to the conclusion that, in Fichte's
opinion, nature is created by the finite human *ego*, the subject,
possessing consciousness and will. To proclaim such an *ego* the creator
of nature was an absurdity to which no serious thinker could reconcile
himself. Schelling hastened to finish with it, and to see nature as the
fruit of the activity, not of a finite human *ego*, but of an infinite
subject, the absolute *ego*. It must be added here that the activity of
the absolute *ego* creating nature was, in Schelling's view,
*unconscious activity*. Schelling's philosophy of nature was engendered
by the effort to penetrate into the meaning of this unconscious activity
of the absolute *ego*. Some historians of philosophy contend that in
elaborating his philosophy of nature, Schelling indeed went further than
Fichte, but in the same direction. There is much truth in this; of
course, Fichte could not consider that nature is created by the finite
human *ego*. But, on the other hand, he never managed to cope with the
question of the relationship of the *finite* 'ego' to the *infinite*,
or, in other words, of *human self-consciousness to that infinite
subject whose unconscious activity creates nature*. Schelling analysed
the problem much more deeply.

To him the finite *ego* is also created by the activity of the infinite
*ego*, just as is nature. Nature is the necessary product of the
*infinite* 'ego' or --- because, strictly speaking, it is not, but
*originates* thanks to the activity of the absolute ego --- nature has
to be understood as the unconscious development of this *ego*. But the
activity of this *ego* is not confined to the unconscious creation of
nature. Among natural phenomena there is also *man* --- the *finite*
subject in whom the *infinite* 'ego' comes to self-consciousness. Thus
the *subject* has its beginning at the same point as the object: in the
*infinite subject, in the absolute* 'ego'.

And precisely because both subject and object have their beginning in
the *absolute* 'ego', the latter is *neither subject nor object*,
neither consciousness nor being; it is subject-object, that is to say,
*the unity, the identity* of thinking and being.

Hegel's system was but the further elaboration of Schelling's philosophy
of identity. Justice demands an unqualified acknowledgement of the fact
that Hegel gave this philosophy an incomparably more systematic form.
Thus, for instance, for the history of philosophical theory it is of
great significance that Hegel noted and eliminated the element of
dualism which had crept unnoticed into the system of identity and which
consisted *in the absolute* 'ego', *the spirit*, or simply *the
absolute*, being placed by Schelling *outside nature and outside human
consciousness*. According to Hegel, the world is *not only rooted* in
the absolute, *but is within it*. The world is the totality of nature
and spirit. The development of the world is the development of the
absolute, its revelation. Such a conception of the world process saved
the philosophy of identity from the risk of coming into contradiction
with itself and ending in dualism. You will agree, though, that it put a
barrier in the way of the reconciliation of philosophy with religion, to
which Hegel was sincerely striving. The conception of God as a power
beyond the world proved to be incompatible with the true character of
the world process. The Hegelians who wished to defend this conception
--- the right wing of the Hegelian school: Göschel, Marheineke --- were
moving away from their teacher. Even the left Hegelians were closer to
him --- Bruno Bauer, Feuerbach, both of whom had broken with religion;
and still closer to Hegel were those who composed the centre of the
school: Rosenkranz, Michelet and Strauss who inclined towards pantheism.
^[\[40\]](#n40)^ That is why there came from the Hegelian school the
criticism of the Gospel story in particular and criticism of religion in
general, whereas Schelling's philosophical thought inclined subsequently
to *theosophy*.

The most remarkable and most important circumstance for the further
history of philosophy was that idealist monism, which had received its
most orderly expression in Hegel's system, disclosed in the latter more
clearly than in any other, its extremely *one-sided nature*.

*The absolute is the subject-object, the identity of thinking and
being*. So taught Schelling; so taught Hegel. But at the same time, the
absolute is the *ego*, the infinite *subject of the spirit*. Schelling
and Hegel both insisted strongly on this conception. Both condemned
Spinoza, who, in their words, could not rise from the concept of
*substance* to the concept of *self-consciousness*. However, Spinoza's
substance, which had two attributes --- thinking and extension --- had
the advantage, that it was in fact the subject-object, the unity of
thinking and being. To 'rise' from substance to self-consciousness, that
is to say, to conceive of substance in the manner demanded by Schelling
and Hegel, as the absolute *ego*, as spirit, would have meant reducing
it to one of its attributes, namely *to thinking*. He who reduces
everything to thinking is, of course, a monist. But his monism does not
solve the problem of the relation of subject to object, of thinking to
being: it *evades its solution*, quite arbitrarily deleting one of the
conditions of the problem. Feuerbach, at the beginning an enthusiastic
pupil of Hegel's, later on noticed this weak side of *idealist* monism,
and then he became a materialist.

### XII

The idealist theory that nature owes its existence to the creative
activity of the infinite subject, or, as Hegel described it, is but the
other being of spirit, was conceived by Feuerbach simply as the
translation into the language of philosophy of the theological doctrine
of God having created the world. 'Our philosophers', he said, 'till now
have been nothing more than mediatised theologians.' ^[\[41\]](#n41)^
Hegel's philosophy --- that last stage in the development of German
idealism --- is the last refuge, the last rational basis of theology. He
who does not reject Hegelian philosophy, does not reject theology.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^

Idealism commits a grave error in taking the doctrine of *ego* as its
starting point. Philosophy has to find a new point of departure --- the
doctrine of *ego* and *tu*. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ I do not only *see*, but I
am also *seen* by others. The real *ego* is only that *ego* to which is
opposed *tu* and which, in turn, becomes *tu*, that is, an object for
another *ego*. *I* am a *subject* for myself and an *object* for others.
Therefore, *I* am simultaneously both *subject* and *object*, or,
briefly, a *subject-object*. Whoever regards consciousness as being
independent of men --- or, as Fichte would have said, independent of the
plurality of individuals --- severs all connection between consciousness
and the world. Yet the world is the necessary prerequisite of
consciousness. Our *ego* is by no means that abstract being which is the
plaything of the idealist philosophers. *I* am a real being. To my
essence belongs also my body. More than that, my body, seen in its
totality, is my true essence; it is what composes my *ego*. The process
of thinking takes place not in some abstract being, but precisely in my,
thy, his body. Thinking, consciousness, is but a predicate of the real
being, a property of being. Being precedes thinking (\'*das Sein geht
dem Denken vorher*'). And it is not thinking that determines being; it
is being that determines thinking.

In conformity with all this, Feuerbach establishes *his* categorical
imperative: 'Think not as a thinker, but as a living, real being, in
which capacity you breast the waves of the world sea.'

Feuerbach affirmed that only his theory of *ego* and *tu* resolves that
antinomy of spirit and matter with which neither Schelling nor Hegel
could cope. 'What for me, or subjectively, is a purely spiritual,
non-material, non-sensuous act, is in itself, objectively, a material,
sensuous act.' Neither side of the antinomy is eliminated here; and here
is revealed the true unity of these sides. ^[\[44\]](#n44)^

*Unity, but not by any means identity*. Identity was proclaimed by
idealist philosophy, which reduced everything to spirit.

The *idealist* monism of Fichte, Schelling and Hegel arose out of
opposition to Spinoza, who with his doctrine of the substance allegedly
'abolished' the freedom of man. Feuerbach, with his *materialist*
monism, returned to the viewpoint of Spinoza. In general he valued
Spinoza very highly, and called him the 'Moses of modern freethinkers
and materialists'.

This may appear strange, since Spinozism is usually interpreted nowadays
in an idealist sense. But Feuerbach looked at Spinoza's teaching through
quite different spectacles. To a question put by himself: 'What actually
is, on close examination, that which Spinoza *logically* or
*metaphysically* calls *substance*, and *theologically God*?' he
replied: 'Nothing else but *Nature*.' In Spinoza's teaching there was,
however, the shortcoming that nature in it appeared as an abstract,
metaphysical being. The actions of nature are presented as the actions
of God. Spinozism is materialism clad in theological garb. And this garb
has to be stripped from the essentially correct philosophical theory of
Spinoza. 'Not *Deus sive Natura* but *aut Deus, aut Natura*
^[\[45\]](#n45)^ is the watchword of truth', exclaims Feuerbach.

Since Lange's time, Feuerbach's philosophy has often been referred to as
'humanism'. To justify this, Feuerbach has been quoted --- again
following Lange's example --- in his famous sentence: 'God was my first
thought, Reason my second, Man my third and last thought.'
Unfortunately, Feuerbach's 'third and last thought' was understood very
badly at that. Actually, this sentence, characterising in abridged form
the course of his philosophical development, means only that in the end
he changed from a theologian into a materialist. We are already aware
that to him 'man' as a *real, material being* was contrasted to the
abstract *ego* of the idealists. Anyone who is not clear about the
philosophical meaning of this contrast should recall the following
observation of Feuerbach:

In the dispute between materialism and spiritualism\... the question at
issue is the human mind\... Once we know the matter of which the brain
is composed, we shall quickly reach a clear understanding concerning all
other matter, concerning matter in general. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^

Now it is quite easy to grasp the sense in which man was Feuerbach's
last thought: the study of man had to help fashion a correct conception
of matter and its relation to 'spirit', to consciousness.

Developing his 'third and last thought', Feuerbach asserted that man is
part of nature, part of being, and this assures him the possibility of
knowing the world. As the object is, so also is the subject (\'*wie
Objekt, so Subjekt*'). There can be no contradiction between being and
thinking. Space and time are forms of my contemplation, as Kant taught.
But they are also forms of being. And they can be forms of my
contemplation only because I myself am part of being, am a being living
in time and space. Generally, the laws of being are at the same time the
laws of thinking. This proposition of Feuerbach's is reminiscent of
Spinoza's well-known dictum: *ordo et connexio idearum idem est ac ordo
et connexio rerum* (the order and connection of ideas are the same as
the order and connection of things).

The opponents of materialism object that consciousness cannot be
explained by material phenomena. The preceding exposition of Feuerbach's
views has shown the reader, I trust, that this objection does not in any
way affect the basis of Feuerbach's materialist doctrine, which consists
in the proposition that the world of *subjective* phenomena is but the
other side of the world of objective phenomena. Anyone who would wish to
*explain* the subjective world *by means of* the objective world, to
*deduce* the first from the second, would thereby demonstrate that he
has understood nothing whatsoever of Feuerbach's materialism. This
doctrine, like that of Spinoza, does not *deduce* one side from the
other, but simply establishes that they are two sides of the one whole.
By the way, in this respect, other major varieties of materialism, at
least of present-day materialism, do not differ in any way from
Feuerbach's.

Efforts are sometimes made at present to bring Feuerbach's teaching
closer to monistic doctrines of the *Machian* type, according to which
matter is 'a complex of sensations'. But Feuerbach would have described
such monism as the restoration of idealism, solving the antinomy of
being and thinking by abstracting one side to the benefit of the other;
*being* to the benefit of *thinking*, or (in the present case) of
*sensation*. Feuerbach did not take to be as meaning *to exist only in
thinking or in sensation*. 'To prove that something exists is to prove
that it exists not only in thought', he said, having the idealists of
his time in mind. If he could only have foreseen the coming of the
idealist, or, if you will, the sensualist, monism of Mach, he would have
said that to exist means to exist *not only in sensation*.

### XIII

We are now well enough acquainted with Feuerbach's philosophy to
understand the conclusions drawn from it by him in application to
*religion, ethics* and *social life*, and by some of his pupils in
application to aesthetics.

As has been said above, the Bauer brothers, by affirming that in
religion it is not spirit but man that contemplates his own essence,
were following Feuerbach. No other view of religion could be held by any
thinker who, before returning to the Anglo-French materialism of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, had passed through that school of
idealism which, in the person of Hegel, made it obligatory for
philosophers to study phenomena in their process of development. The
French Enlighteners in general and in particular the French
materialists, who were the advance guard of the army of the
Enlighteners, regarded religion as the product of priests or
legislators, who had devised certain beliefs as a means of influencing
the simple-minded mass of the people, for the purpose of exploiting or
educating them. Remember Voltaire's tragedy *Le fanatisme, ou Mahomet le
prophète*. In the nineteenth century, it became obvious to Hegel's
followers that this conception of religion was untenable, being reduced
to the belief that 'opinion' not only rules the world, but also *creates
and refashions itself to suit the practical aims of its chief
representatives*. Hegel's dialectical method paved the way for a view of
religion, and indeed of every other ideology, as being the natural
outcome of the law-governed development of social consciousness. The
main distinguishing feature of this process is that its participants,
conscious of themselves as the *cause of subsequent events*, very rarely
rise to the height of seeing themselves as the consequence of
*foregoing* events. To put it differently, the process of the
development of social *consciousness* is itself, in a certain sense, an
*unconscious* process. According to Feuerbach, religion is the result of
this process in its unconscious aspect. Religion is the unconscious
deifying of essence --- not of spirit, of course, because spirit itself
exists only thanks to the abstract activity of philosophical thought ---
but of *man*. Therefore, Feuerbach says religion is the unconscious
consciousness of man. The essence of God is the essence of man, but an
essence freed from the limitedness of the individual, that is, the
essence of the given social whole, or, as Feuerbach expresses it, of the
*species*.

Thinking in this fashion, Feuerbach laid the theoretical foundations for
the conception of religion as a product of social development. He
himself said that the properties of God change in accordance with
changes in the essence of (*social*) man.

In religion, man is not conscious that he is deifying himself. He is
giving his own essence *objectivity*, conceiving of and revering it as
another being distinct from himself and stronger than himself. He is
*dividing* and *devastating* himself, attributing to a higher being his
own (social man's) best properties. This gives rise to a series of
contradictions.

When man says 'God is Love', he means that love transcends everything on
this earth. But in his consciousness, love is degraded to the level of
the property of a being independent of man. Consequently, belief in God
becomes for him a necessary condition of love for his neighbours. He
hates the atheist in the name of the selfsame love he preaches. Religion
damns in the name of salvation, commits cruelties in the name of
felicity. Reason which *has grown to self-consciousness* rejects
religion. It turns inside out the relations which religion has created.
Since these relations are themselves the result of the turning inside
out of true relationships, reason restores the latter, realising its aim
by turning inside out that which had been turned inside out. Virtue,
which has a great social significance, but which in religion has become
*a means of acquiring happiness beyond the grave*, must become an aim.
'Justice, truth, good, have their sacred justification in themselves, in
their own quality. For man there is no being higher than man.' This is
why Feuerbach proclaims, using the old terminology, that man to man is
God.

Terminology of this kind had its great inconveniences. To pronounce God
to be an illusion, and then to say that man is God is really tantamount
to transforming man himself into an illusion. At this point Feuerbach
himself got involved in a contradiction. In declaring 'Meine Religion
--- keine Religion' ^[\[47\]](#n47)^ --- 'My religion is no religion'
--- he recollected that the word 'religion' is derived from the verb
'religare', and at first meant 'bond'. From this he deduced that every
bond between people is a religion. Engels remarked that 'such
etymological tricks are the last resort of idealist philosophy'.
^[\[48\]](#n48)^ That is certainly right. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ However, the
historical significance of the book *Das Wesen des Christentums* which
was published in 1841 and was the first printed exposition of the
Feuerbachian philosophy of religion, is shown by the testimony of the
same Engels.

In relating the difficulties experienced by the extreme left-wing
Hegelians in reconciling their attraction to Anglo-French materialism
with Hegel's idealist teaching that nature is but the other being of
spirit, he went on:

Then came Feuerbach's *Essence of Christianity*. With one blow it
pulverised the contradiction, in that without circumlocutions it placed
materialism on the throne again\... Nothing exists outside nature and
man, and the higher beings our religious fantasies have created are only
the fantastic reflection of our own essence\... One must himself have
experienced the liberating effect of this book to get an idea of it.
Enthusiasm was general; we all became at once Feuerbachians.
^[\[50\]](#n50)^

### XIV

Having defined the essence of religion in the manner just expounded,
Feuerbach naturally could not agree with those who said: 'There is no
morality without faith.' To him, this was just the same as if we had
said: there is no education without barbarism, or there is no love
without hatred. The morality that results from religion is only the alms
which the church or theology throw from their treasuries to poor,
destitute humanity. Morality must have a totally different basis.
Materialism alone can be its solid basis: '*Der Materialismus ist die
einzige solide Grundlage der Moral.*' ^[\[51\]](#n51)^

By this, Feuerbach means that moral precepts must be based on
*interest*. In contrast to the Bauer brothers, he did not consider it
possible to disregard interest. A note has been preserved among his
papers containing the following excerpt from a speech by Emilio
Castelar, the renowned Spanish Republican: 'The history of mankind is a
constant struggle between ideas and interests. For a time the latter
win, in the long run, ideas are victorious.'

In the same note, Feuerbach objects:

What a contradiction! Are ideas then not also interests? Are they not
general interests of humanity, though for a time misunderstood,
despised, persecuted, not yet come into reality, unrecognised by law,
contradicting the particular interests of individual, now dominant
estates or classes, and as yet existing only in the idea? Is not justice
a general *interest*, ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ an interest of those who are
treated unjustly though naturally not of those who practise this
injustice, the interests of the estates and classes who find their
interests only in privileges? In short, the struggle between *ideas and
interests* is only the struggle between *the old* and *the new*.
^[\[53\]](#n53)^

It must be admitted that here the true essence of the matter is brought
out astonishingly well, even better than in the remark we quoted above,
which Marx addressed to 'the Holy Family' of the Bauers, that the idea
suffered shameful defeat wherever it diverged from interest.

What the moral rules of this terrible man were, who from his earliest
years did not believe in the immortality of the soul and based his
morality upon a materialist foundation, may be seen, incidentally, from
the following moral rule of his:

*In relation to oneself*, one cannot be *idealist* enough making
idealist demands of the will, 'categorical imperatives', but *in
relation to others*, with the exception of certain cases which are
extremely difficult to define, one cannot be *materialist* enough; in
relation to oneself, one cannot be a stoic enough, in relation to others
--- Epicurean enough. ^[\[54\]](#n54)^

These golden words embody the whole secret of the morality upheld by our
'people of the sixties', ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ who firmly kept to Feuerbach's
rules: read through Chernyshevsky's letters from Siberia, and you will
see that he was, indeed, harsh --- I almost wrote cruel --- in relation
to himself, and a mild Epicurean in relation to others. On the soil of
Feuerbach's materialist morality grew the luxuriant blooms of moral
selflessness (an idealist would say by force of habit: *idealism*).

How could this be? Is there not some contradiction here? Not the
slightest! The seeming contradiction disappears as soon as we take into
consideration Feuerbach's teaching on *ego* and *tu*, which is at the
root of his theory of cognition.

In accordance with this theory, the *ego* from which idealist philosophy
starts off in its attempt to understand the world, is an 'idealist
chimera', a mere fiction. Feuerbach held that his *ego* is just as much
a chimera, a mere fiction in the doctrine of morality.

Where outside *ego* there is no *tu*, no other person, there can be no
talk of morality. Only social man is man. *I* am *I* only through Thee
and with Thee. I am conscious of myself only because *Thou* art
contrasted to my consciousness as a visible and tangible *ego*, as
another person\... One may speak of morality only where there is
relationship of man to man, one to the other, *ego* to *tu*.

People talk of duties towards oneself. But for these duties to have
meaning one condition is essential: indirectly they must also be duties
towards others. I have duties towards myself only because I have duties
towards the family, the community, the people, the country. The good and
morality are one and the same thing. *But the good can be acknowledged
as such only if it is good in respect to others.* ^[\[56\]](#n56)^

The moral upbringing of people consists precisely in inculcating into
each one the consciousness of his duties towards all the others. Nature
herself assures us of the possibility of such upbringing, for it has
provided man with a twofold striving for happiness: the first, that
which is satisfied by assuring the exclusive interests of the given
person; the second, that which requires for its satisfaction at least
two persons (man and woman, mother and child, etc). Already from his
earliest years man is taught to use the good things of life in common
with other people. He who assimilates this lesson badly is punished by
the dissatisfaction of his neighbours, which finds the most varied
expressions --- from verbal reproach to blows. Conscience is not
something inborn in man; he has to acquire it by education, in which
example has its part to play. 'A man does with an easy conscience that
which he sees others do and approve', said Feuerbach, 'his parents,
those of his age and estate, his countrymen.' ^[\[57\]](#n57)^ In some
the motion of conscience is confined to fear of what others will say.
But a deeper education leads to the creation in man of an imperative
need to conduct himself thus, and not otherwise.

*Law*, like morality, must not be opposed to interest. It is founded
upon interest: of course, not personal interest, but social interest.
^[\[58\]](#n58)^

This is exactly that very doctrine of morality and law which was
preached by the French materialists of the eighteenth century.
Feuerbach, however, made a better analysis of the process of the
development of *altruistic* aspirations out of the *egotistical*. This
is not surprising, since Feuerbach learned dialectics from Hegel; but
the following is of particular interest.

In Hegel's system, morality and law already had a purely social origin.
Feuerbach, as we have seen, also deduces them from social relations. In
this, he is true to his teacher. But living in a different historical
period, he is in a different frame of mind. In his ethics one feels the
approach of 1848. The social origin of morality and law provides him in
the first place with a reason to link his theory concerning them with
the materialist basis of his theory of cognition. Besides, and this is
the main point, the materialist philosophy of morality and law leads him
to the very same revolutionary conclusions at which the French
materialists of the eighteenth century had arrived earlier.

Man aspires to happiness. This aspiration cannot and should not be taken
from him. It becomes harmful only when it becomes 'exclusive',
egotistical, that is to say, when the happiness of some is achieved by
the unhappiness of others. When the whole people, and not only a part of
it, aspires to happiness, this aspiration will coincide with the
aspiration to *justice*. That is why Feuerbach says: 'Happiness? No,
justice.' (\'*Glückseligkeit? Nein, Gerechtigkeit, la justice.*') In his
doctrine, justice is nothing else but reciprocal, mutual happiness as
opposed to the exclusive, egotistical happiness of the old world (\'*der
einseitigen, egoistischen oder parteiischen Glückseligkeit der alten
Welt*').

When society is so organised that its members cannot satisfy their
natural aspirations to happiness except by encroaching upon the
interests of other members, they will certainly do so.

People are people only where this conforms to their interests, or where
their interests do not prevent them from being people. \[Feuerbach
affirmed\] But where they can become people only by sacrificing their
interests, they prefer to become beasts \[Bestien\]. Therefore, in order
that they should become people, a social structure corresponding to
justice, that is to say, to the interests of the whole people, is
essential. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^

Accordingly, Feuerbach was strongly radical in politics and sympathised
warmly with the emancipation movement of his time. Just a few years
before his death, in a letter to L Kapp, he said that the terrorism
practised during the Great French Revolution was still necessary for
Germany. He is known to have become a Social-Democrat towards the end of
his life.

In this respect there was an immeasurable difference between him and
Bruno Bauer, who ended his life in the ranks of reaction.

### XV

As in morals, so also in politics, as well as in the social field,
Feuerbach quite consciously linked his *radicalism* with his
*materialism*. He wrote:

I do not understand how the idealist or the spiritualist, at least one
who is consistent, can make external political freedom the aim of his
practical activity. Spiritual freedom is enough for the spiritualist\...
From the spiritualist point of view, political freedom is materialism in
the field of politics\... For the spiritualist, freedom in thought is
sufficient. \[*Dem Spiritualisten genügt die gedachte Freiheit.*\]
^[\[60\]](#n60)^

In his *Letters on Dogmatism and Criticism*, Schelling accepted as
proved the proposition that the concept of freedom is incompatible with
Spinozism, that is to say, in effect, with materialism. The further
course of development of philosophical thought in Germany demonstrated
the utter groundlessness of this proposition, which, incidentally,
Schelling assimilated quite '*dogmatically*'.

If the idealist Fichte in his sympathy with the Great French Revolution
even went as far as to justify extreme revolutionary actions, German
idealism in its development moved gradually but very far away from such
views: while in the person of Schelling (in his latest style) it
completely hid the concept of freedom under its night-cap. It was only
in Feuerbach's materialist philosophy that the freedom-loving
aspirations of the noble Fichte were revived and further developed, on
an incomparably more reliable theoretical basis.

Feuerbach did not want to be a philosopher in the sense in which this
word had always been understood in Germany. Hence his remark: 'Meine
Philosophie --- keine Philosophie.' ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ Philosophy must not
move away from life. On the contrary, it must approach closer to life.
This is essential even for theory.

Marx wrote:

The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking
is not a question of theory but is a *practical* question. Man must
prove the truth, that is the reality and power, the this-worldliness of
his thinking in practice. ^[\[62\]](#n62)^

We find the same idea in the writings of Feuerbach, who said that the
cardinal defect of idealism was that 'it examined the problem of
objectivity or subjectivity, the reality or the unreality of the world,
exclusively from the point of view of theory, whereas the world became a
subject of debate only because first of all it became a subject of
desire'. ^[\[63\]](#n63)^ True, Feuerbach wrote this some twenty years
*after* Marx had penned the above lines. But chronology hardly counts
for anything in this case, since the idea of the destructive influence
on philosophical theory of its rupture with practical activity
corresponds fully with the spirit of Feuerbachian philosophy.
^[\[64\]](#n64)^ Not without reason did he write that philosophy in
comparison with practice is but a 'necessary evil' (\'*em notwendiges
Uebel*').

Marx was wrong when he reproached Feuerbach for not comprehending
'practical-critical' activity'. ^[\[65\]](#n65)^ Feuerbach did
understand it. But Marx was right in saying that Feuerbach's concept of
the 'essence of man', which he used in his explanation of the 'essence
of religion', suffered from abstractness. This was inevitable. Feuerbach
could have eliminated *this* defect in his teaching only by attaining
the materialist explanation of history. But that he did not manage to
reach, although he did feel a vague but fairly strong theoretical need
for it.

In his *Nachgelassene Aphorismen* there is a passage which has been a
source of error to many historians. Here it is:

To me materialism is the foundation of the edifice of the human essence
and knowledge; but for me it is not what it is for the physiologists,
the natural scientists in the narrower sense, for example, Moleschott.
For them it is not the foundation of the edifice, but the edifice
itself. Going backwards from this point, I fully agree with the
materialists, but going forwards, I disagree with them. ^[\[66\]](#n66)^

In referring to this passage, it is frequently said: 'There you are, you
can see for yourself that Feuerbach admits to being only half a
materialist.' However, those who say this forget to ask themselves
precisely what materialism is meant here. It will do no harm to clear
this up.

In his *Theogony*, Feuerbach denounces those who want 'to draw from one
and the same source both natural laws and human laws'. Of course,
indirectly --- inasmuch as man himself is a part of nature --- human
laws are also rooted in nature. But it does not follow from this that
(to use a picturesque phrase of Feuerbach's) the Ten Commandments are
written by the same hand that sends the peals of thunder. In the final
analysis, paper is a product of the vegetable world. However, it would
be highly ridiculous for anyone to claim that nature was a paper
manufacturer. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^

It was precisely with those materialists who did not see anything
ridiculous in this that Feuerbach found it impossible to go forward. It
was quite clear to Feuerbach that to regard nature as a manufacturer of
paper was the surest way to commit numerous gross errors both in
economic theory and in economic practice (politics). To accept this
proposition would be equal to reducing *sociology* to *natural science*.
Later, Marx described short-sighted materialism of this type as
*natural-scientific* materialism. Feuerbach was not satisfied with a
materialism that was incapable of distinguishing between man as the
object of biology and the man of social *science*. It is obvious from
this, however, not that he was *only partly* a materialist; on the
contrary, it is perfectly plain that he felt the need for a *consistent*
materialist world-outlook. For in fact, natural-scientific materialism
is *inconsistent*. When those who uphold this view discuss the phenomena
of social life, they show themselves to be *idealists*. It would be hard
to find more persistent adherents of the idealist interpretation of
history than these *materialists*. ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ None the less,
Feuerbach did not succeed in correcting the defect of the materialism of
the 'physiologists' by working out a materialist conception of history.
He, who felt so strongly the limitations of Moleschott's materialist
view, nevertheless made great and quite impermissible concessions to
Moleschott from the standpoint of correct theory. ^[\[69\]](#n69)^ It is
quite obvious that in making these concessions, he himself voiced
idealist views on social life. The materialist explanation of history
must be acknowledged as one of the most important theoretical services
rendered by Marx and Engels. But we already know that for some time Marx
and Engels themselves were followers of Feuerbach. Moreover, until the
end of their days they remained such followers as regards the general
philosophical view of the relation of subject to object.
^[\[70\]](#n70)^

The *dialectical* view of phenomena presupposes the conviction that they
*conform to law*, that is, are *necessary*. *Historical idealism* does
not concur with this conviction, since it sees the *conscious* (free)
*activity* of man as the mainspring of historical progress. Feuerbach,
who had not reached a complete understanding of historical materialism,
could not work out either *a dialectical view of social life*.
Dialectics again came into its own only with Marx and Engels, *who first
placed it on a materialist foundation*.

We are entitled to say that Feuerbach's starting point in his theory of
cognition --- not *ego*, but *ego* and *tu ---* was also the starting
point of some (in their own way interesting) trends of German social
thought. On the basis of the Utopian application of this doctrine to
questions of the social system there arose, in the person of Karl Grün
and others, '*German*' or '*true*' *socialism*. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^ The
*individualist* rejection of the doctrine in the domain of morals ---
that is, once again *ego*, not *tu* and *ego* --- led to the appearance
of an original German *anarchism*, as represented by Max Stirner
(pseudonym of Kaspar Schmidt) who in 1845 published a work, fairly well
known at one time, entitled *Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum*.
^[\[72\]](#n72)^

However, it should not be thought that Feuerbach's influence was
confined to the extreme trends of social thinking. It extended partly
even to natural science. Moleschott, sincerely though one-sidedly
attracted by Feuerbach, was a prominent naturalist. Feuerbach's
influence was at its strongest, as could be expected, in philosophy. But
here his influence was more *negative* than *positive*. True, that was
not his fault.

If Marx and Engels always remained, generally speaking, of the same mind
as Feuerbach on question of philosophy, strictly so called, the majority
of those Germans who were interested in philosophy did not find it
possible to accept his philosophical views. They were frightened both of
Feuerbach's *materialism* and his *socialism* which was closely
associated with his philosophical views. ^[\[73\]](#n73)^ The reaction
which followed the failure of the revolutionary movement of 1848-49
gradually brought German philosophy back into the fold of idealism. And
it is self-evident that the imperialist Germany of modern times could
not recognise Feuerbach as its ideologist. It required philosophers of
quite another brand\...

### XVI

Feuerbach himself rarely and only in passing touched upon art. But his
philosophy did not remain without a very considerable impact on
literature and aesthetics.

In the first place, his sober world-outlook, alien to all mysticism,
linked with his radicalism, facilitated the liberation of the advanced
German artists of the 'pre-March', that is, the pre-revolutionary
period, from some of their Romanticist conceptions. It is probable that
Heine wrote his 'New Song' under the influence of Feuerbach:

Ein neues Lied, ein besseres Lied,\
O Freunde, will ich euch dichten:\
Wir wollen hier auf Erden schon\
Das Himmelreich errichten \[etc\]. ^[\[74\]](#n74)^

That is the real echo of Feuerbach! Herwegh, and for some time too
Richard Wagner, were conscious followers of Feuerbach. ^[\[75\]](#n75)^
In German Switzerland, the now famous Gottfried Keller was his pupil.

From the standpoint of the new philosophy, the 'philosophy of the
future' (*Philosophie der Zukunft*), art could not be regarded as a
domain where the infinite spirit creates its own essence. The new
philosophy broke with Hegel's infinite spirit. Art, like religion, was
looked upon as expressing the essence of *man*. But religion proved to
be the sphere in which man could not express his own essence *otherwise*
than *by self-deception*. Consequently, only in art does this essence
find an expression in images free from self-deception. All the more
reason why it should be valued.

Furthermore, for the artist who holds the viewpoint of the new
philosophy, there is no being higher than man. But in man nature
recognises itself. *The human spirit is the self-consciousness of
nature*. Therefore the idealist opposing of nature to spirit is utterly
unfounded, and must cease in art no less than in philosophy.

Feuerbach's pupils were ready to reproach 'speculative aesthetics' for
not triumphantly enough proclaiming the independence of art. So highly
did they value that independence! However, they themselves gave a more
vivid and exact formulation of the idea they had inherited from
speculative aesthetics, that form is determined by content. In the
article 'Gegen die spekulative Aesthetik', Hermann Hettner ---
subsequently the author of a well-known history of literature in the
eighteenth century --- strove to demonstrate that no matter how
important *form* may be in works of art, it lives only *because of its
content* and without this it dies, becomes formal and abstract.
^[\[76\]](#n76)^

In addition to Hettner I shall mention Ludwig Pfau, poet and literary
critic, who like Hettner was a personal friend of Feuerbach's. He took
part in the Baden rebellion, and up to 1865 lived in emigration, chiefly
in Belgium and France, where he wrote his critical articles. In 1865-66
a collection of his articles was published in German, evoking a warm
response from Feuerbach. This collection can now too be recommended to
readers who have not as yet relinquished the completely erroneous idea
that art owes its existence to religion, and cannot flourish without it.
^[\[77\]](#n77)^

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} The consistent influence of Hegel and Feuerbach on
Belinsky and of Feuerbach on Chernyshevsky, who said that as a youth he
could recite whole pages of Feuerbach by heart, is generally known.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} The reference is to Chernyshevsky's arrest by the
tsarist government in 1862 after which he was sentenced to penal
servitude and exile to Siberia for life --- Editor.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Actually in Hegel's time almost all of them forgot
this.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} *Wissenschaft der Logik* (Nürnberg), pp 313-14.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} See the preface to my translation of Engels' *Ludwig
Feuerbach*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), pp 64-83 --- Editor.\]

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} *Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften*, p
13.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} We shall see later what led him to commit this sin.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} *Philosophie der Geschichte*, third edition,
Introduction, p 66.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} *Wissenschaft der Logik*, Volume 2, Part 3: 'Die
Wechselwirkung'.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} *Philosophie der Geschichte*, Introduction, p 79.
See also *Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts*, paragraphs 344 and
352.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} His own words.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} For more details concerning this, see my brochure;
*A Critique of Our Critics* (St Petersburg, 1906) and the article: 'For
the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel's Death'. \[See Georgi Plekhanov,
*Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp 401-26 ---
Editor.\]

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} A Herzen, *My Life and Thoughts*; see Herzen's
*Collected Works*, Volume 9 (Russian edition, 1956), p 23 --- Editor.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} *Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie*,
Volume 3, p 685.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} The reference is to Heraclitus --- Editor.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} *Rechtsphilosophie*, p 153, Note.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} Accordingly, Hegel calls *the beautiful the
sensuous manifestation of the idea*.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} His own expression.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} See his *Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik*, Part 1,
pp 217-18 and Part 2, pp 217-33. It would be instructive to compare what
Hegel says there with what Fromentin says of the character and origin of
the Dutch school in his famous book *Les maîtres d\'autrefois*.
Fromentin's basic idea is that Dutch painting was a portrayal of the
Dutch bourgeoisie at a certain stage of its development, and this fully
coincides with Hegel's view.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} The view of the Bible stories as myths had been
expressed already by Schelling: 'Christ', he said, 'is an historical
personality whose biography had already been written before he was
born.' (Cuno Fischer, *Schelling* (St Petersburg), p 768)

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} It was Hegel who said that man, having discovered
the intellect *hidden* in reality, does not rebel against reality, but
makes peace with it and rejoices in it.

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} Karl Bayrhoffer, *Die Ideen und Geschichte der
Philosophie* (Leipzig, 1838), pp 423-24.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} Ibid, p 424.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Ibid, p 425.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} The full title of this journal was *Deutsche
Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst* --- Editor.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} See *Das Leben Jesu, für das deutsche Volk
bearbeitet von David-Friedrich Strauss*, Third Edition, pp 150-54. There
is a Russian translation by M Sinyavsky, edited by NM Nikolsky, in two
volumes (Moscow, 1907).

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} See his interesting article 'Verschiedene
Richtungen innerhalb der Hegel'schen Schule in Betreff der Christologie'
in the collection *Streitschriften zur Verteidigung meiner Schrift über
das Leben Jesu und zur Charakteristik der gegenwärtigen Theologie*
\['the Various Trends in the Hegelian School in Relation to Christ' in
the collection *Polemical Works Dedicated to the Defence of My Life of
Jesus and the Characterisation of Contemporary Theology*\].

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} He was then an assistant professor at Bonn.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} *Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der
Synoptiker*, Second Edition (Leipzig, 1846), Volume 1, Preface, p vii.

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} Plekhanov refers here to Marx's criticism of Bruno
Bauer in *The Holy Family*. See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), pp 39-40 *et seq* ---
Editor.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} *Die gute Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene
Angelegenheit* (Zürich).

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} *Der Streit der Kritik mit Kirche und Staat*
(Berne, 1844), p 184.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} See ibid, p 185; also his work *Bruno Bauer und
seine Gegner* (Berlin, 1842), pp 89-90.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} \'Der Charakter unserer Zeit ist die Revolution',
see *Bruno Bauer und seine Gegner*, op cit, p 5.

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} *Die gute Sache*\..., p 201.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} See *Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der
kritischen Kritik*. *Gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten*. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 81 ---
Editor.\]

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} Science also strives towards monism. One of the
most brilliant representatives of science in modern times, Newton, was
attracted to it.

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} Haym, *The Romantic School*, Russian translation by
I Nevedomsky (Moscow, 1891), p 317.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} Novalis' phrase; see E Spenlé, *Novalis* (Paris,
1904), p 133, also Haym, op cit, p 324.

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} Later Strauss became a materialist, and did not
hesitate to express his new views in the work *Der alte und der neue
Glaube*. *Ein Bekenntnis*. It had an immense success. But this occurred
much later: the book just mentioned appeared in October 1872.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} Feuerbach's *Nachgelassene Aphorismen*, *Werke*,
Volume 10 (new edition, Stuttgart, 1911), p 318.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} \'Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie',
*Werke*, Volume 2 (the same edition), p 239.

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} Nicht Ich, nein! Ich und Du, Subjekt und Objekt,
unterschieden und doch unzertrennlich verbunden, ist das wahre Princip
des Denkens und Lebens, der Philosophie und der Physiologie (*Über
Spiritualismus und Materialismus*, Feuerbach's *Werke*, Volume 10, new
edition). \[\'Not I, no! I and Thou, subject and object, distinct yet
indissolubly connected --- this is the true principle of thinking and
life, of philosophy and physiology.\'\]

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} \'Das Objekt ist\... für uns nicht nur Gegenstand
der Empfindung, es ist auch die Grundlage, die Bedingung, die
Voraussetzung der Empfindung; wir haben in \[nerhalb\] der Haut eine
objektive Welt, und nur diese ist der Grund, dass wir eine ihr
entsprechende ausser unsere Haut hinaussetzen.' (Feuerbach's *Werke*,
Volume 10, p 220) ('the object for us is not only an object of
sensation; it is also the basis, the condition, the prerequisite of
sensation; we have an objective world inside our skin and that alone is
the reason why we presuppose one corresponding to it outside our
skin.\'\]

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} Not *God or nature*, but *either God or nature* ---
Editor.

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} It is interesting to note that Feuerbach's
contemporaries had no hesitation in listing him among the materialists.
This was the case with AS Khomyakov in our philosophical literature (see
his article 'Contemporary Phenomena in the Domain of Philosophy', letter
to YF Samarin).

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} Feuerbach's actual words are: 'Keine Religion ---
ist meine Religion' (*Sämmtliche Werke*, Volume 2, 1846, p 414) ---
Editor.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 354 --- Editor.

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} As confirmation of this, one may quote Feuerbach's
own truly excellent remark: 'Every religious or theological
sanctification is simply a phantom. That which has foundation and truth
can stand by itself, without being proclaimed holy.' (\'Was Grund und
Wahrheit hat, behauptet sich durch sich selbst, ohne heilig gesprochen
zu werden.')

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} Engels, *Ludwig Feuerbach*, p 10 of the foreign
edition of my Russian translation of this pamphlet. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 344 ---
Editor.\] In Germany, many of Feuerbach's admirers shared his views on
religion, but did not follow him into accepting the materialist basis of
these views. This was the case originally with Herzen too (see my
article 'The Philosophical Views of AI Herzen' in *Contemporary World*,
1912, Books 3 and 4).

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} *Werke*, Volume 10, p 151.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} Italics in the original.

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} *Werke*, Volume 10, pp 315-16. Again the italics
are in the original.

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} *Werke*, Volume 10, p 291.

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} The self-sacrificing young men and women of the
Russian educated classes who in those years, seeing the misery of the
peasantry following the end of serfdom in 1861, began the movement known
as 'going to the people' --- Editor.

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} *Werke*, Volume 10, pp 269-70.

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} 'theogonie', *Feuerbach's Werke*, Volume 9, p 169
(I have only the 1857 edition of this volume by me at the moment).

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} *Werke*, Volume 10, pp 269-70.

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} L Feuerbach's *Briefwechsel und Nachlass*, Volume
2, p 317. This argument of Feuerbach's is almost word for word repeated
in Chernyshevsky's article 'The Anthropological Principle' mentioned
above and in his novel *What Is To Be Done?*.

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} *Briefwechsel und Nachlass*, Volume 2, p 328.

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} Feuerbach's actual words are 'Keine Philosophie!
--- meine Philosophie' (*Sämmtliche Werke*, Volume 2, 1846, p 414) ---
Editor.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 5 (Moscow, 1976), p 3 --- Editor.

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} See the chapter 'Kritik des Idealismus' in the work
*Spiritualismus und Materialismus*.

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} I think it my duty to say that in my pamphlet
*Fundamental Problems of Marxism* the relationship between Marx and
Feuerbach is presented not quite like this as far as the question of
method is concerned. I think I have now explained this relationship more
correctly.

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 5 (Moscow, 1976), p 3 --- Editor.

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} L Feuerbach's *Briefwechsel und Nachlass*, Volume
2, p 308. \[Compare the passage in Marx and Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 2 (Moscow, 1958), p 376 --- Editor.\]

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} *Theogonie*, pp 280-81. Feuerbach makes there the
striking remark that as distinct from man, nature does not know the
difference between 'können und müssen' \[\'can and must\'\].

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} Perhaps an even more vivid expression of
Feuerbach's true attitude to the natural-scientific materialism is his
letter to G Bäuerle of 31 May 1867 (*Nachlass*, Volume 2, pp 187-88).
Feuerbach says there: 'For me, as for you, man is a being of nature,
originating in nature; but the main subject of my investigations are
those ideas and fantastic beings originating in man which in the
opinions and traditions of mankind are accepted as real beings.' It goes
without saying that Feuerbach could not have studied *this* subject
while confining himself to the point of view of *biology*.

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} For example, in the article 'Naturwissenschaft und
die Revolution' written in connection with the publication of
Moleschott's book *Die Lehre der Nahrungsmittel*. *Für das Volk*
(Erlangen, 1850).

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} It is interesting that Chernyshevsky, the Russian
student of Feuerbach, also declared his disagreement with Moleschott;
but neither did he reach historical materialism.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} 'true socialism' --- a trend which existed among
the German petty bourgeoisie in the 1840s. They called for a rejection
of political activity and of the struggle for democracy and proclaimed
the cult of love for next-of-kin and abstract 'humaneness'. For
criticism of this trend see Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 'The German
Ideology', *Collected Works*, Volume 5 --- Editor.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} There is a Russian translation. Marx and Engels
sharply criticised Stirner's teaching in the article: 'Sankt Max' \[see
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 'The German Ideology', *Collected
Works*, Volume 5 (Moscow, 1976), pp 117-450 --- Editor\], which appeared
recently in *Dokumente des Sozialismus*, published by Ed Bernstein, July
and August 1903, and May, June, July, August and September 1904. I
should like also to point out that there is a chapter on Max Stirner in
my pamphlet on anarchism and socialism (a Russian translation has been
published by Mme Malykh).

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} Granted, not all 'true' German socialists, though
accepting Feuerbach's teaching, were reconciled to his materialism. But
more of this in another article.

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} A song, friends, that's new, and a better one, too,
/ Shall be now for your benefit given! / Our object is, that here on
earth / We may mount to the realms of heaven.

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} Regarding Feuerbach's influence upon Herwegh and R
Wagner see the work of Albert Levy, *La philosophie de Feuerbach*
(Paris, 1904), Part 2, Chapter 8 (Herwegh) and Chapter 9 (R Wagner).

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} See his *Kleine Schriften* (Braunschweig, 1884), p
205. The article 'Gegen die spekulative Aesthetik' appeared first in
1845 in *Wigand*'s *Quarterly* (*Wigand's Vierteljahrschrift*).

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} See *Freie Studien: Die Kunst im Staat* (third
edition, Stuttgart, 1888). See also another article by Pfau, 'Proudhon
und die Franzosen', in the sixth volume of his *Aesthetischen Schriften*
(Stuttgart, 1888).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[G V Plekhanov Archive](../../../index.htm)

1
