---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue September 1897

### Socialism in France 1874-1896

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Paul Lafargue, (trans. Aveling) "Socialism in France
1874-1896," *Nineteenth Century*, Sept 1897, pp. 445-458;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Ted Crawford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scientific Socialism in France dates from the war of 1870-71. That war,
which involved defeat and the ravaging and pillaging of one-third of the
country by the Prussian troops, the loss of the two provinces in which
industry had been most highly developed, the loss of their two million
inhabitants and of the milliards swallowed up by the defence and the war
indemnity, so far from ruining France, gave her a commercial activity
until then unknown. Hence, only a year or so after the fall of the
Commune, a renewal of agitation amongst the working classes made itself
felt. Paris, however, had just lost a revolutionary battle, which had
drained her of her lifeblood. Those who had taken part in the
insurrection and had not fallen fighting, were in exile or in prison. A
great mass of workers had fled from the capital to escape the mad fury
of the victorious reactionaries. A few months after the fall of the
Commune it was estimated that Paris had lost more than 100,000 workers
of all trades. But, although the massacres of June, 1848, had been
succeeded by eighteen years of benumbed silence, within five years of
the butcheries, transportations, and emigration *en masse* of 1871,
socialism began to show signs of life.

A political movement which has been in a state of suspended animation
never begins again exactly where it stopped. The men who take it up
afresh are like children repeating their lessons: they must go back to
the beginning and run rapidly through the stages already traversed.
Instead of carrying on the movement initiated by the International, the
Paris workers went back to co-operation; the first congress held in
Paris, 1876, was exclusively a congress of co-operators. In spite of its
reactionary character, this congress must be regarded as the point of
departure of the present socialistic movement in France, although there
was, in Paris, a certain amount of working-class agitation at the time
of the election of delegates to the Vienna Exhibition of 1876.

This reawakening of the labour movement was fomented by the republican
*bourgeoisie,* who were afraid that a Republic proclaimed amidst the
turmoil of defeat might be overturned by a monarchical conspiracy, for
the elections of 1871 had filled the Chamber of Deputies with ghosts of
royalists long since dead and buried. The *bourgeois* republicans,
knowing that in the workers lay their only hope of defending the
Republic against the ever-advancing royalist reaction, helped and
encouraged them in their first attempts at organization. The Workers'
Congress of 1876 was the work of the *bourgeois* republicans; the
*Reformé,* a radical journal, started the idea of a congress, and
Cremieux, the ex-colleague of Gambetta in the Government of National
Defence, found the money for the expenses of the provincial delegates to
Paris.

M. Thiers' Government had not yet finished its work, and was still
engaged in shooting the defenders of the Commune at Satory, when the
Congress of 1876 opened its sittings. All such workers as had concerned
themselves with politics under the Empire, or had born arms under the
Commune, were dead or exiled or in hiding, and anxious not to attract
the attention of the police. Under these circumstances the delegates to
the congress could only be quite young people, people who knew nothing
of socialism or of the International. Hence they proposed to avoid the
rocks of socialism by advocating such methods of ameliorating the lot of
the workers as co-operative production, mutual credit, and people's
banks. They trotted out again all those small shopkeepers' Utopias which
Proudhon had advocated before 1848. The institutions that the Congress
of 1876 wished establish were the equitable labour exchanges, which had
been started at Bray's instigation in the year 1840, in London,
Sheffield, Leeds and other towns, and which, after absorbing vast
capital, had gone bankrupt under scandalous circumstances. But Bray, in
his remarkable work, "Labour's Wrongs, and Labour's Remedy" (Leeds,
1839), had at least refrained from calling these exchanges a solution of
the social problem. They might be that to Proudhon; to Bray they were
only a means of smoothing over the transition from the capitalist to the
communist *régime.*

This Iabour movement, begun so modestly, was soon to come under the
influence of a man destined to turn it out of the beaten track, and to
abandon the Utopian ways of philanthropy for the path revolutionary
socialism. That man was Jules Guesde. He had just returned to France
after an absence of five years, rendered necessary by his desire to
escape a sentence of five years' imprisonment for taking the side of the
Commune in the journal *Le Droit de l'Homme*, which he was editing at
Montpellier. He had been in exile in Switzerland and Italy, where he
came into contact with the men of International, who inspired him with
his first socialist ideas. Guesde, gifted with literary and oratorical
talents of the highest order, became at once the leader of the reviving
socialist movement, and may be called the founder of the French
socialist party.

He soon gathered around him some of the young folk and certain foreign
refugees. With their help he started the *Egalité,* the first socialist
journal published in France since 1849. The ideas that the *Egalité,*
propagated were novel and ran counter to the philanthropic phrase-making
which constituted the whole socialist stock-in-trade the *bourgeois*
radicals and of the workers under their influence. They frightened the
good co-operators of the Congress of Paris, who did not, however, dare
to come to an open rupture with Guesde and his friends. Nevertheless
they began an underhand campaign against them, treating them as
ambitious "carpet-baggers," whom the men with blouses and horny hands
ought to distrust, whilst they themselves were *bonâ fide* working men,
manual labourers, true representatives of their comrades of the
workshop, the *practical men* who demanded only such reforms as could be
carried out without attacking any one's interest and without any
disturbance of society. The anarchists, who have not even the merit of
having invented their own stupidities, have dug up out of the vocabulary
of the co-operators many of the imbecile slanders that they cast in the
teeth of the socialists.

The propaganda of the *Egalité* bore fruit. A party was founded whose
influence made itself immediately felt, as is proved by the following
quotation from the Berlin *Correspondance,* one of Bismarck's organs,
January, 1878.

"Out of the chaos of news from France one fact stands out more and more
clearly; viz., that the socialist democracy of France has already become
a power. \... Undoubtedly the chiefs of the socialist movement in
France, who are displaying so much zeal in their correspondence with the
German socialist organs, may have exaggerated the facts a little, hut
there is no denying the existence of the movement, and it cannot be
killed by silence \.... This movement, when it was checked in Paris by
the failure of the Commune, and was under the rigid surveillance of the
police, had to shift its sails and tack, but for six months back the
socialists have been openly at work again \.... It is interesting to see
that ill France, as in Prussia, the socialist chiefs use every means to
get their people returned upon all kinds of elective bodies."

The socialist movement, which had been developing in the shade,
blossomed out freely at the Lyons Congress (February, 1878), summoned by
the organizations that had attended the Congress of Paris. At first this
congress threatened to be a mere replica of the Congress of Paris.
During its earlier sittings the praises of Liberty were chanted in every
possible false key. All that was necessary was to give the workers
freedom to form trade unions, co-operative societies, credit banks, and
the like, and then all misery would vanish into thin air. But the
apparition of collectivist delegates, with Guesde at their head, threw
the apple of discord into this amiable conclave of the gods of liberty,
and, to the huge scandal of the cooperators, there was actually a
minority vote of twenty for the following resolution proposed by two
delegates from Paris:-

"Seeing that the economic emancipation of the workers can only be
brought about when the workers enjoy all that is produced by their
labour, the workers in order to gain this end, must themselves become
owners of the elements of production -- raw materials and the
instruments of labour. Therefore the Congress invites all workers'
associations to study the methods of putting into practice the principle
of collective ownership of the soil and the instruments of labour."

This appearance of collectivism was the event of the Congress.
Gambetta's organ, the *République Française* was filled with rage and
fury, and declared that --

"The partisans of the reactionary *régime* of collective *property,*
preached for some time past by certain will-o'-the-wisps as a sort of
social panacea, met, at the Worker's Congress of Lyons, opponents
thoroughly imbued with *sound French common sense*."

In like manner we were assured that the *sound common sense* of the
English workers would guard them against the follies of socialism, which
at most could only appeal to Continental workers. But sound French
common sense appeared insufficient for the defence of the sacrosanct
doctrine of capitalist property, the Government commenced prosecutions
against the will-o'-the-wisps of the *Egalité*. They were persecuted in
every possible way; but when the Government saw that it could not
intimidate them or force them to stop their propaganda, it resolved to
suppress the journal by inflicting fines and terms of imprisonment
impartially on the contributors.

Before the *Egalité* ceased to exist it raised its battle-cry in the
concluding issue\--

"We shall re-appear very soon, not more earnest, but more powerful, in
the work we have undertaken -- a work, let no man mistake us, which is
the constitution or the reconstitution of the French revolutionary
party. And that is the reason why we say to our readers, 'au revoir et à
bientôt'"

The movement had begun and nothing could stop it. The collectivist
propaganda went on with renewed vigour in spite of the imprisonment of
Guesde, Deville, and many of their friends. And it bore fruit. At the
Congress of Lyons only a minority of twenty delegates voted for a
resolution asking that the collectivist solution of the social riddle
should be studied. The Marseilles Congress, held the. following year
(October, 1879), carried by an immense majority and with acclamation a
resolution in favour of the collectivist theory.

The Marseilles Congress is the most important of all the congresses
which were held in France prior to 1889; both on account of the number
of its delegates, and on account of the resolutions passed, as well as
the effect produced by them upon the constitution of the socialist
party.

The French people have a harmless mania for trying to find a solution
once and for all for all kinds of questions, in order to formulate a
sort of creed which may serve as a guide to their conduct in every-day
life. Thus the agenda paper of the Marseilles Congress was crammed with
innumerable questions bearing more or less upon the social problem,
which would have required months for discussion and study. They were
settled in a week. Nevertheless some of the resolutions, summary as they
were, wrapped up in the antiquated phraseology of Proudhon, and
encumbered with Liberty, Equality, Justice, and the like entities of
political metaphysics, breathed a new spirit that had never before
appeared in France.

Collectivism, for instance, is asserted in no measured terms in the
resolution on property.

"Property is the one social question. Seeing that the present system of
property is opposed to those equal rights that will condition the
society of the future; that it is unjust and inhuman that some should
produce everything and others nothing, and that it is precisely the
latter who have all the wealth, all the enjoyment, and all the
privilege; seeing that this state of affairs will not be put an end to
by the good-will of those whose whole interest lies in its continuance;
the Congress adopts as its end and aim the collective ownership of the
soil, the subsoil, the instruments of labour, raw materials, and would
render them for ever inalienable from that society to which they ought
to return."

This resolution, the most characteristic one passed by the Marseilles
Congress, drawn up by Guesde, then in prison, moved by Parisian
delegates, and opposed by a certain number of the other delegates, was
carried by a large majority, and its adoption greeted with prolonged
applause. It was the first time that the nationalisation of property had
been inscribed upon the flag of the French proletariat. When we remember
that at the congresses of the International the majority of the French
delegates had always declared for individual ownership of the land, when
we call to mind the timidity of the revolutionaries of the Commune in
the matter of economic reforms, it is really surprising that, within
eight years of their defeat in Paris and the massacres of the Bloody
Week, there should have been a majority vote at the Congress of
Marseilles for the nationalisation of the instruments of production.

The socialist movement had started with the co-operators. These were
soon joined by the anarchists, for co-operators and anarchists, although
they appear to be as far asunder as the poles, are really as a matter of
fact only representatives of different capitalist ideas. The
co-operators represent the benevolent notions of the philanthropists,
who attempt to lull the awakening spirit of the working class by
measures not of a very compromising nature. The anarchists, when they
are neither wittingly nor unwittingly police agents, represent the ideas
of the *laissez-faire* economists and push these ideas to their ultimate
logical conclusion. The Marseilles Congress declared itself openly
opposed both to co-operation and to anarchy. Hence it rejected
co-operation as a means of emancipation, and, on the other hand,
declared plainly for political action, for the entrance of socialists
into elective bodies, and for the moral obligation of, at any rate,
running socialist candidates at all elections where this was possible.
But before beginning its struggle in the political arena, the congress
recommended as a preliminary step, that the proletariat should
absolutely sever itself from all *bourgeois* political parties, and form
a separate party under the name of the Socialist Workers' Party of
France. The Marseilles Congress, in a word, revived the tradition of the
International, which had advised the proletariat to form a distinct
political party in order to seize political power, and to bring about
the transformation capitalism into nationalism. The International
Socialist Congress held last year in London, was a proof that everyone
of the twenty countries represented had of its own accord, under the
compulsion the daily and hourly struggle, put into practice the advice
of the International. And the London Congress, whose business was
neither to discuss theories nor formulate doctrines, but to bring face
to face and to unite in fraternal and international bonds the
socialistic parties of the Old World and the New, defining the theories
and practices held in common, that congress, I say, in the name of the
socialist parties thus gathered together from the Eastern and Western
hemispheres, reaffirmed the resolutions of the International.

Although the collectivist resolutions had been carried by a large
majority, they had also been most vigorously opposed at the Marseilles
Congress. The vote on property produced an uproar. Th minority protested
noisily against having a resolution which seemed to them madness forced
upon the congress by a few delegates from Paris. The republican press,
which up to that time had patted the workers' congresses on the back,
suddenly changed its tone. It had been friendly and even patronising.
Now it became hostile. The necessity of an organ to answer the
*bourgeois* press and to maintain the victory won at Marseilles was
evident, and the *Egalité* came out again with a staff reinforced by
certain Communist refugees.^[\[1\]](#n1)^ This, *Egalité* No. 2 played a
very considerable part in the spreading of the economic and historical
theories of Marx and Engels, and in the formation of the French Workers'
Party.

But socialism in France could not develop as long as no amnesty had been
granted to the Communists. "No holidays or fêtes until the amnesty is
granted," was the refrain of a popular song sung everywhere and at every
opportunity. The writers on the *Egalité*, whilst they never ceased to
propagate their socialistic theories, devoted themselves especially to
the task of bringing about this amnesty. Deville was amongst the
promoters of the candidature of Blanqui, who had been in prison without
having been tried ever since the 18th of March, 1871, and his election
at Bordeaux threw open the gates of France to the men condemned. . They
came back again in triumph. The reception given by the populace to the
first batch of criminals who landed from New Caledonia was a scene of
delirious enthusiasm.

As soon as the emotion and commotion caused by the amnesty and the
return to France of the combatants of March 18th had subsided, the
socialist propaganda could be resumed. The Marseilles Congress had
clearly marked out the goal towards which all the efforts of the
proletariat should tend; it only remained to draw up a definite
programme for use at electoral contests. At the house of Frederick
Engels, where Marx, Guesde, and Lafargue met together, this programme
was drawn up -- a programme which afterwards gave rise to so many
quarrels and divisions. Marx himself dictated the various, "preambles,"
so notable for their clearness and conciseness.

They were followed by a series of immediate political and economic
reforms, such as -- liberty of the press and of public meetings, doing
away with the national debt, abolition of standing armies, a general
arming of the people, the reduction by law of the working day to eight
hours, and the like.

The preamble presented socialism in quite a new light. We saw above that
in the resolution about property the delegates to the Marseilles
Congress took as their basis, "The injustice and inhumanity of the
*régime* of property as it exists to-day," in order to demand collective
property in the name "of those equal rights which will be the expression
of the society of the future"; that is to say, in the name of rights
which as yet only existed in the minds of those present at the congress.
The preamble took quite a different point of view. It said, in so many
words, that capitalist society, which by its industrial progress
eliminates more and more completely small individual holders of
property, bears in its own bosom a new collectivist society. The
elements of this society, whether material (factories, mines, railways,
banks, & c.) or intellectual (the manual and intellectual proletariat
dispossessed of all property), are brought into being by the very
development of capitalist society. Socialism must therefore seek to
drive capitalism on to its doom, and to give birth to the collectivist
society as yet imprisoned within the womb of capitalist society.

This manner of regarding history and the historical problem of our time
could only be understood and accepted by minds that had broken away from
subjective and idealist methods of thought. So when this programme
appeared in the *Egalité* of June 30th, 1880, it caused. much outpouring
of vials of wrath on the part of those whose interests were adversely
affected by it, and also of those whose ideas were upset by it.
Reactionaries, radicals, co-operators, anarchists, all attacked it *ad
libitum.* This scientific socialism, formulated by "the London
programme," as its adversaries called it, in order to show that it could
not possibly be of French but was of foreign extraction was, as a matter
of fact, a great novelty. The men who had fought in the Commune and
returned to France after the amnesty, and looked upon themselves as the
real representatives of the holy French revolutionary tradition,
declared .against collectivism. Its programme was violently attacked by
the *Commune,* edited by Felix Pyat, ex-member of the Commune, in which
Emil Gauthier wrote.

Gauthier was then the orator and leader of the anarchist party; to-day
he is a journalist of all work for the opportunist press. It not
infrequently happens that ferocious anarchists end by becoming quite
model reactionaries. The attitude of the Communists is quite
intelligible. The insurrection of March 18th was far from being a
socialist movement. Patriotism, humiliated by defeat and anger at the
treason of Jules Favre, Jules Ferry, and other members of the Government
of National Defence, had stirred up the mass of the Parisian population
against M. Thiers and his Government. But when the Commune had been
vanquished by M. Thiers, and insulted and calumniated by all the
capitalist newspapers, it was defended by the General Council of the
International, in which Marx and Engels were the leading spirits. The
manifesto of the civil war drawn up by Marx for the General Council
invested the Commune with a socialist character that it had certainly
not possessed during its ephemeral existence. The Communist refugees
thereafter took themselves quite seriously as representing a socialism
of which they did not know a single letter. When they came back to
France, after the amnesty, they founded the Socialist Republican
Alliance, under the direction of two members of the Commune, Longuet and
Jourde, in opposition to the working-class party, then in course of
formation. After some years of an obscure and chequered existence, the
Alliance vanished, leaving behind it nothing but its name.

The working-class party, therefore, was born and grew up in the very
midst of difficulties. Whilst it was assailed by adversaries from
without, it was torn by quarrels from within. But gifted with a vitality
capable of triumphing over all obstacles, it developed like an organic
cell, by a double process of assimilation and excretion. The
collectivist ideas of its programme drew to it adherents from every
point of the political compass, and, on the other hand, repelled all
those who were attracted to it by mere enthusiasm or by ambitious hopes.
The Workers' Congress of Havre (November 1880) voted the programme of
the party by a great majority. The minority, made up of trades union
delegates, under the patronage of Gambetta and the Opportunist party,
withdrew with much declamation and noise, in order mark their horror of
the absurd and criminal theories of collectivism. Two years later, at
the Congress of St. Etienne (September, 1882), there was a much more
important schism. Some of the co-operators of the Paris trade unions and
of the revolutionists, with Brousse and Allemand at their head, rose in
rebellion against the programme which they said had been forced upon
them. They ranged altar against altar, and drew up a new programme more
radical than socialist. The men who gathered themselves together round
this hybrid programme fluctuated, "driven by the wind and tossed" now
upon this current now upon that, sometimes allying themselves with
opportunists, as at the time of the Boulangist crisis, sometimes making
common cause with the anarchists, just as their successors did recently
at the International Congress of London. After having tried to found a
party they split up into groups, which only had an existence in Paris,
and whose influence never extended beyond the narrow limits of their own
circle of action.

Now that socialism had drawn up its programme and mapped out its
tactics, the next work to be done was to enrol the socialist army, to
teach it to march and countermarch on the political battlefield, and to
train it so to use universal suffrage so as to get hold of political
power. The propagandists of the earlier movement, reinforced by many
valuable recruits, set themselves bravely to work, publishing weekly
newspapers and pamphlets in Paris and in the provinces and delivering
lectures. The spoken word is *par excellence* the special weapon of
socialist propaganda. For years and years the "commercial travellers of
disorder," as the reactionaries called them, were ploughing the fields
all over France, preaching to the multitude the new gospel, and
challenging the defenders of the faith to meet them in discussion. These
meetings for debate quite won the hearts of the French people, who, as
all the world knows, are lovers of the duello.

Active propaganda began first in the industrial centres, and for many
reasons. Industrial progress has despoiled the producers of the
instruments of their labour, in order to centralise them in the
workshops or the capitalist, where the producers work hand-in-wheel with
the machines which belong to their employer. In the workshops all those
instincts of the small proprietor which the producers retained as a
memory of the individual property or their forefathers are swept away
from them. Living in the very presence of the colossal machinery which
employs them, they understand instinctively that they can never possess
it as individuals -- that its collective possession is the only thing
possible.

Mechanical production has cleared completely out of the proletarian head
all idea of individual property, and has fixed firmly there the idea of
collective property. This cerebral transformation has been effected
quite independently of the work of collectivists; it is the result of
mechanical production organized under the direction of the capitalist
class.

When the working-class party had obtained a certain power in the towns,
it began to bethink itself of attacking the country districts which the
reactionaries declared were impervious to socialism. It had been said
that the *common sense* of the French workers would never accept the
erroneous theories of collectivism. It was repeated again and again that
the *common sense* of the peasants would make them reject any proposal
of communal or national property, which could only appeal at most to the
proletarians of modern industry, and that the peasants would receive
with pitchforks any apostles of socialism who might venture into the
villages. Socialism has no message for landowners. Now, in France there
are, in the country districts, more than seven million owners of land.
It is true that twenty-nine thousand of these own themselves thirty
million acres, *i.e.,* about one fourth of all the cultivable land,
whilst, on the other hand, five million peasants only possess about six
million acres, an average of a little more than an acre apiece. Since
this scrap of land is not sufficient for them and their families to live
upon, they are obliged to go to work upon the land of the large
proprietors, who only leave them this microscopic piece of property in
order to keep them in the country and to have at all seasons
day-labourers on hand. Thirty million acres are owned by 3,180,000
proprietors, whose holdings range from two and a-half to a hundred and
twenty-two acres. These men are so burdened with debts and mortgages
that they are only nominal owners. Their land is really in pawn to the
banker and the usurer.

This financial situation, although it differs from the situation of
industrial property, is, nevertheless, favourable to socialist
propaganda, which, as soon as it begins, makes rapid progress wherever
propagandists can be found who know how to talk to the peasants about
the way in which all their interests are sacrificed, and about the evils
they undergo when they try to contend against the large landowners. The
French Parti Ouvrier drew up an agricultural programme which was
received with joy by those peasants who came across it; and this
programme, at the municipal elections of May, 1896, was adopted by
municipal councillors who were elected even in the smallest villages.
Dr. Delon, who lives, at Nîmes, in the Department of the Gard,
represented at the London International Congress the municipal council
of a small commune in the Gard, consisting of 97 inhabitants who,
although they are all small proprietors, are all socialists, "and who,"
says Dr. Delon, "understand that peasant proprietorship is doomed, and
must vanish because the means of production in agriculture becoming more
and more expensive, and necessitate the possession larger and larger
capital."

The socialists have been helped in their propagandist work by the French
Government, which was simple-minded enough to think that it could stop
the progress of socialism by persecuting its apostles, It distributed
amongst them terms of imprisonment with a free hand, with the sole
result of kindling their ardour, which, perhaps, without this
persecution, might have cooled down, and indicating them to the workers
as men in whom they might place confidence. Carrette and Dormoy, at the
present moment the mayors of Roubaix and Montluçon became the leaders of
the socialists in their respective towns from the hour that the
Government thought fit to send them to prison. Lafargue was in prison
for a year -- this was the third time that the Republican Government was
good enough to provide him with lodging gratis -- when the workers of
Lille chose him as their representative in the Chamber of Deputies. The
masters, on their side, did what they could in the way of persecution.
Every working man known as a socialist was dismissed from the workshop
and black-listed to all the other masters of the locality, which sooner
or later he had to leave, as he was unable to get any work. These
persecutions, more dangerous than those of the Government in that they
deprived the whole of the worker's family of bread, were no more
effective than the Government persecutions in taking the linch-pin out
of the wheels of socialism. The socialists, obliged to quit their own
town, carried socialist ideas away with them, and spread them abroad in
the places where they went to seek for work. It was Bismarck who sent
socialism to the United States, for every socialist whom he expelled
from Germany carried socialism to America. The brewers of the northern
district of France, although capitalists and reactionaries of the
extremist type, took the working men under their wing when they were
driven out of the workshops on account of their socialism. And for the
following reason: In anyone can, without any licence, set up as a seller
of beer and liquors. The brewers, who own numberless small cabarets,
placed the socialist victims in them as managers. Solambier, mayor of
Calais, Delory, mayor of Lille, and many others, were set up in this way
by brewers anxious to get a good sale for their beer. The number of
socialist cabaretiers in the north was so great, that the *Temps*
christened the socialist party the party of cabaretiers. The Catholic
clergy also lent indirect aid to the propagandists of collectivist
theories. When the priests saw the success of the socialists among the
working classes, they thought that they had only to imitate them to
reconquer for the Church the ancient influence she possessed over the
people of the Middle Ages. It was at this time that Pope Leo XIII. sent
out his Encyclical upon the condition of the workers, and upon his the
priests ventured into public meetings in order to contend with the
socialists for the workers who were becoming converts to collectivism.
They manufactured a sort of Christian socialism with variations
corresponding to the particular surroundings in which it developed. When
the Christian socialist found himself in a working-class meeting, face
to face with socialist opponents, he talked like them, and railed
against the rich with as much fury as St John or Chrysostom and other
holy demagogues of the early Church who courted the favour of the
plebeians of Constantinople and Alexandria. But when, on the other hand,
he laid down his doctrines in a meeting of masters, he became gentle as
a lamb, and confined himself to giving the rich such wise and
philanthropic advice as not to excite the envious desires of the poor;
he only asked them to give to the worker a necessary wage, which in the
industrial district of the north the learned doctors of Christian
socialism actually raised to the fabulous a amount of 16s. 10d. for a
family of five. As the priests called themselves socialists, the word
socialism became quite respectable -- a word which to many had hitherto
signified robbery, arson, murder. And by being present at the meetings
and willing to discuss and debate the real merits and demerits of
Christianity and socialism in getting rid of the evils of society, it
almost always happened that they were beaten compelled to admit that,
after eighteen centuries of the Gospel, Christianity had culminated in a
capitalist society, which they themselves admitted was intolerable for
the workers. The Christian socialists arrived at a result so opposite to
that which they were aiming at, that the bishops and archbishops had to
stay this crusade, and to forbid the priests to attend these
discussions. But by the time they retired from the contest the mischief
was done.

Boulangism; which failed to compromise the existence of the Republic,
did for one moment put a spoke in the wheel of socialism. Boulangism was
the trade union of the discontented. The discontented workers, seeing
their lot grow worse and worse with the progress of industry, the
radicals discontented at the failure to realise the reforms promised,
the business men and the artisans discontented with the stagnation of
business, the small capitalists and the thrifty folk discontented at
having lost their beloved money in Panamas, Portuguese Loans, *& c.,*
the Bonapartists and Monarchists discontented at seeing the Ragbag, as
they called the Republic, hold on, turned pell-mell towards General
Boulanger and his black horse, as if the rider were in very truth
Messiah. Since general discontent is the vivifying force of socialism
(if everybody was contented with their lot, there would be no need
either of socialism or a Messiah), and Boulangism enlisted all the
discontented, it was a terrible rival to socialism. But when the brave
General took to his heels at the first threat which Constans made of
throwing him into prison, the workers and the radicals, seeing that his
competition had been of a disloyal nature, and that he was not the hero
they had fancied him, turned again towards socialism, which, not being
embodied in a god or a miraculous man, could never disappoint them in
like fashion.

Then followed the Panama and other financial scandals, which decapitated
all political parties by compromising their leaders to a greater or less
extent, and so threw the workers and the small shopkeepers again into
the socialist ranks. The masses of the town and country populace, deeply
stirred by these events, bore witness to their discontent by voting for
the socialists at the election of 1893. Some forty socialist candidates
were elected, and even those who did not obtain an actual majority of
votes were in a minority so large that it foretold a victory in the near
future. At this moment collectivism made two invaluable recruits, Jaurès
and Millerand, whose social position and oratorical talents were sure to
make collectivism penetrate into circles which had not yet been touched
by the militant socialists. The socialist group in the Chamber of
Deputies, with its extremely clever parliamentary tactics, became a
dangerous party to be reckoned with, a party which overturned certain
Ministries and at least one President of the Republic, and which, by its
benevolent neutrality alone, gave the Bourgeois Ministry a chance of
continuing to hold office; indeed it would have been still in office
despite the Senate and the President Felix Faure, but for the cowardice
or Bourgeois, who turned tail at the very moment when his adversaries
were about to lay down their arms.

The immense success of these parliamentary tactics more than
counterbalanced the horror and terror caused by the anarchist outrages,
which were more imbecile than criminal, and gave an extraordinary
impetus to socialism, since it could now no longer be confounded with
anarchism.

The elections of May, 1896, revealed the immense progress that socialism
had made in all lands since the year 1893. Towns as important as Lille,
Roubaix, Calais, Montluçon, Narbonne, re-elected socialist majorities to
administer their affairs; and even where there was only a socialist
minority, a socialist mayor was elected, as in the case of Dr.
Flaissières at Marseilles, and Cousteau at Bordeaux. But in the small
towns and the villages our victories have been especially remarkable.
The Parti Ouvrier alone can reckon more than eighteen hundred municipal
councillors elected upon its collectivist programme; and at the Lille
Congress, which was held a few days before the International Congress in
London, thirty-eight socialist municipal councils and twenty-one
socialist minorities of municipal councils were represented by their
mayors or by delegates chosen by party.

It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of this municipal victory,
which the ostrich-like policy of M. Meline has tried to minimise by
certain fantastic statistics. He has proved that, as clearly as two and
two make four, socialism has lost ground since the municipal elections
of 1892. This is a form of ophthalmia not confined the French. Those
municipal councils which have been conquered by the socialists have
given them valuable lessons in administration. By learning to manage the
material interests of a single town, they are preparing themselves for
the administration and direction of the affairs of the whole of France.
The administrative capacity of the socialists has astonished their foes
as much as it has delighted their friends. Workers like Dormoy, a
metal-worker, and Carrette, a weaver, who in the whole of their lives
had never been masters of £20, between 1892 and 1896 were at the head of
the administration of towns whose yearly budget ranged from £80,000 to
£200,000, and who have managed to effect economies and to bring about
reforms. For example, at Roubaix all the children of the communal
schools, some eleven thousand in number, are in part given free food and
clothing by the socialist municipality. They receive their dinner at the
school, which consists of soup, as much bread as they want, a dish of
vegetables, an ounce of meat, boiled or roast, and a glass of beer; and
they are given a complete suit of clothes at the beginning of winter and
summer. Carrette and his municipal councillors have found means to meet
the expense of these "cantines scolaires" without at all increasing the
taxes that weigh upon the workers.

Ten or fifteen years ago the Government thought that it must teach
people to trust the socialists, then only known for the countless number
of crimes of which they were accused, by sentencing them to terms of
imprisonment. That day is over. The socialists, whom their most
courteous adversaries treat as Utopians quite incapable of any practical
action, no longer need this benevolent intervention on the part of the
Government. They are even now showing their true value in the municipal
councils, are enlisting the sympathies of the workers and of the small
shopkeepers, and are even winning the respect of those capitalists who
are not absolutely blinded by their own interests. The confidence that
the socialist mayors and councillors have inspired in the men they
direct will play a great part in the elections of May, 1898. In the
small commune it often happens that the vote of the mayor, or even of
one councillor, carries in its train the votes of the majority of the
electorate.

In my opinion the elections of 1898 will be a victory for socialism; and
will prepare its final triumph.

PAUL LAFARGUE, (Translated by Edward Aveling)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Among these was the present writer, who was a regular
contributor, and who wrote almost all the theoretical articles. Malon,
at the same time, brought out the *Revue Socialiste,* in which Engels
published his wonderful "Socialisme utopique et socialisme
scientifique," translated into English by the translator of this
article, and published by Messrs. Sonnenschein.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
