---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Dublin Lock Out: On the Eve

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Irish Worker**, August 30, 1913.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Perhaps before this issue of **The Irish Worker** is in the hands of its
readers the issues now at stake in Dublin will be brought to a final
determination. All the capitalist newspapers of Friday last join in
urging, or giving favourable publicity to the views of others urging the
employers of Dublin to join in a general lock-out of the members of the
Irish Transport and General Workers' Union. It is as well. Possibly some
such act is necessary in order to make that portion of the working class
which still halts undecided to understand dearly what it is that lies
behind the tyrannical and brow-beating attitude of the proprietors of
the Dublin tramway system.

The fault of the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union! What is it?
Let us tell it in plain language. Its fault is this, that it found the
labourers of Ireland on their knees, and has striven to raise them to
the erect position of manhood; it found them with all the vices of
slavery in their souls, and it strove to eradicate these vices and
replace them with some of the virtues of free men; it found them with no
other weapons of defence than the arts of the liar, the lickspittle, and
the toady, and it combined them and taught them to abhor those arts and
rely proudly on the defensive power of combination; it, in short, found
a class in whom seven centuries of social outlawry had added fresh
degradations upon the burden it bore as the members of a nation
suffering from the cumulative effects of seven centuries of national
bondage, and out of this class, the degraded slaves of slaves more
degraded still -- for what degradation is more abysmal than that of
those who prostitute their manhood on the altar of profit-mongering? --
out of this class of slaves the labourers of Dublin, the Irish Transport
and General Workers' Union has created an army of intelligent
self-reliant men, abhorring the old arts of the toady, the lickspittle,
and the crawler and trusting alone to the disciplined use of their power
to labour or to withdraw their labour to assert and maintain their right
as men. To put it in other words, but words as pregnant with truth and
meaning: the Irish Transport and General Workers' Union found that
before its advent the working class of Dublin had been taught by all the
educational agencies of the country, by all the social influences of
their masters, that this world was created for the special benefit of
the various sections of the master class, that kings and lords and
capitalists were of value; that even flunkeys, toadies, lickspittle and
poodle dogs had an honoured place in the scheme of the universe, but
that there was neither honour, credit, nor consideration to the man or
woman who toils to maintain them all. Against all this the Irish
Transport and General Workers' Union has taught that they who toil are
the only ones that do matter, that all others are but beggars upon the
bounty of those who work with hand or brain, and that this superiority
of social value can at any time be realised, be translated into actual
fact, by the combination of the labouring class. Preaching, organising,
and fighting upon this basis, the Irish Transport and General Workers'
Union has done what? If the value of a city is to be found in the
development of self-respect and high conception of social
responsibilities among a people, then the Irish Transport and General
Workers' Union found Dublin the poorest city in these countries by
reason of its lack of these qualities. And by imbuing the workers with
them, it has made Dublin the richest city in Europe today, rich by all
that counts for greatness in the history of nations. It is then upon
this working class so enslaved, this working class so led and so
enriched with moral purposes and high aims that the employers propose to
make general war. Shall we shrink from it; cower before their onset? A
thousand times no! Shall we crawl back into our slums, abase our hearts,
bow our knees, and crawl once more to lick the hand that would smite us?
Shall we, who have been carving out for our children a brighter future,
a cleaner city, a freer life, consent to betray them instead into the
grasp of the blood-suckers from whom we have dreamt of escaping? No, no,
and yet again no! Let them declare their lock-out; it will only hasten
the day when the working class will lock-out the capitalist class for
good and all. If for taking the side of the Tram men we are threatened
with suffering, why we have suffered before. But let them understand
well that once they start that ball rolling no capitalist power on earth
can prevent it continuing to roll, that every day will add to the
impetus it will give to the working class purpose, to the thousands it
will bring to the working class ranks and every added suffering
inflicted upon the workers will be a fresh obstacle in the way of
moderation when the day of final settlement arrives.

Yes, indeed, if it is going to be a wedding, let it be a wedding; and if
it is going to be a wake, let it be a wake: we are ready for either.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.8.2003
