---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# North-East Ulster

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 2 August, 1913.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A Dublin Comrade once remarked to the writer of these notes that as two
things cannot occupy the same space at the same time, so the mind of the
working class cannot take up two items at the same time. Meaning thereby
that when that working class is obsessed with visions of glory,
patriotism, war, loyalty or political or religious bigotry, it can find
no room in its mind for considerations of its own interests as a class.

Somewhere upon these lines must be found the explanation of the fact
that whereas Dublin and Nationalist Ireland generally is seething with
rebellion against industrial conditions and manifesting that rebellion
by a crop of strikes, in Belfast and the quarter dominated by the
loyalist element, class feeling or industrial discontent is at present
scarcely manifested at all.

For Dublin and its Nationalist allies, the Home Rule question has long
gone beyond the stage of controversy; it is regarded as out of the
region of dispute and consequently the mind of the working class is no
more excited over that question than it can be considered to be excited
over the general proposition that the whole is greater than its parts.

In North-East Ulster, on the other hand, the question of Home Rule is
not a settled question in men's minds, much less settled politically,
and hence its unsettled character makes it still possible for that
question to so possess the minds of the multitude that all other
questions such as wages, hours aid conditions of labour, must take a
subordinate place and lose their power to attract attention, much less
to compel action.

According to all Socialist theories North-East Ulster, being the most
developed industrially, ought to be the quarter in which class lines of
cleavage, politically and industrially, should be the most pronounced
and class rebellion the most common.

As a cold matter of fact, it is the happy hunting ground of the
slave-driver and the home of the least rebellious slaves in the
industrial world.

Dublin, on the other hand, has more strongly developed working-class
feeling, more strongly accentuated instincts of loyalty to the working
class than any city of its size in the globe.

I have explained before how the perfectly devilish ingenuity of the
master class had sought its ends in North-East Ulster. How the lands
were stolen from Catholics, given to Episcopalians, but planted by
Presbyterians; how the latter were persecuted by the Government, but
could not avoid the necessity of defending it against the Catholics, and
how out of this complicated situation there inevitably grew up a feeling
of common interests between the slaves and the slave-drivers.

As the march of the Irish towards emancipation developed, as step by
step they secured more and more political rights and greater and greater
recognition, so in like ratio the disabilities of the Presbyterians and
other dissenters were abolished.

For a brief period during the closing years of the eighteenth century,
it did indeed seem probably that the common disabilities of
Presbyterians and Catholics would unite them all under the common name
of Irishmen. Hence the rebel society of that time took the significant
name of 'United Irishmen'.

But the removal of the religious disabilities from the dissenting
community had, as its effect, the obliteration of all political
difference between the sects and their practical political unity under
the common designation of Protestants, as against the Catholics, upon
whom the fetters of religious disability still clung.

Humanly speaking, one would have confidently predicted that as the
Presbyterians and Dissenters were emancipated as a result of a clamorous
agitation against religious inequality, and as that agitation derived
its chief force and menace from the power of Catholic numbers in
Ireland, then the members of these sects would unite with the agitators
to win for all an enjoyment of these rights the agitators and rebels had
won for them.

But the prediction would have missed the mark by several million miles.
Instead, the Protestants who had been persecuted joined with the
Protestants who had persecuted them against the menace of an intrusion
by the Catholics into the fold of political and religious freedom --
'Civil and religious liberty'.

There is no use blaming them. It is common experience in history that as
each order fought its way upward into the circle of governing classes,
it joined with its former tyrants in an endeavour to curb the
aspirations of these orders still unfree.

That in Ireland religious sects played the same game as elsewhere was
played by economic or social classes does not prove the wickedness of
the Irish players, but does serve to illustrate the universality of the
passions that operate upon the stage of the world's history.

It also serves to illustrate the wisdom of the Socialist contention that
as the working class has no subject class beneath it, therefore, to the
working class of necessity belongs the honour of being the class
destined to put an end to class rule, since, in emancipating itself, it
cannot help emancipating all other classes.

Individuals out of other classes must and will help as individual
Protestants have helped in the fight for Catholic emancipation in
Ireland; but on the whole, the burden must rest upon the shoulders of
the most subject class.

If the North-East corner of Ireland is, therefore, the home of a people
whose minds are saturated with conceptions of political activity fit
only for the atmosphere of the seventeenth century, if the sublime ideas
of an all-embracing democracy equally as insistent upon its duties as
upon its rights have as yet found poor lodgment here, the fault lies not
with this generation of toilers, but with those pastors and masters who
deceived it and enslaved it in the past -- and deceived it in order that
they might enslave it.

But as no good can come of blaming it, so also no good, but infinite
evil, can come of truckling to it. Let the truth be told, however ugly.
Here, the Orange working class are slaves in spirit because they have
been reared up among a people whose conditions of servitude were more
slavish than their own. In Catholic Ireland the working class are rebels
in spirit and democratic in feeling because for hundreds of years they
have found no class as lowly paid or as hardly treated as themselves.

At one time in the industrial world of Great Britain and Ireland the
skilled labourer looked down with contempt upon the unskilled and
bitterly resented his attempt to get his children taught any of the
skilled trades; the feeling of the Orangemen of Ireland towards the
Catholics is but a glorified representation on a big stage of the same
passions inspired by the same unworthy motives.

An atavistic survival of a dark and ignorant past!

Viewing Irish politics in the light of this analysis, one can see how
futile and vain are the criticisms of the Labour Party in Parliament
which are based upon a comparison of what was done by the Nationalist
group in the past and what is being left undone by the Labour group
to-day. I am neither criticising nor defending the Labour Group in
Parliament; I am simply pointing out that any criticism based upon an
analogy with the actions, past or present, of the Irish party, is
necessarily faulty and misleading.

The Irish party had all the political traditions and prejudices of
centuries to reinforce its attitude of hostility to the Government, nay,
more, its only serious rival among its own constituents was a party more
uncompromisingly hostile to the Government than itself -- the republican
or physical force party.

The Labour party, on the other hand, has had to meet and overcome all
the political traditions and prejudices of its supporters in order to
win their votes, and knows that at any time it may lose these suffrages
so tardily given.

The Irish Party never needed to let the question of retaining the
suffrages of the Irish electors enter into their calculations. They were
almost always returned unopposed. The Labour party knows that a forward
move on the part of either Liberal or Tory will always endanger a
certain portion of Labour votes.

In other words, the Irish group was a party to whose aid the mental
habits formed by centuries of struggle came as a reinforcement among its
constituents at every stage of the struggle. But the Labour party is a
party which, in order to progress, must be continually breaking with and
outraging institutions which the mental habits of its supporters had for
centuries accustomed them to venerate.

I have written in vain if I have not helped the reader to realise that
the historical backgrounds of the movement in England and Ireland are so
essentially different that the Irish Socialist movement can only be
truly served by a party indigenous to the soil, and explained by a
literature having the same source: that the phrases and watchwords which
might serve to express the soul of the movement in one country may
possibly stifle its soul and suffocate its expression in the other.

One great need of the movement in Ireland is a literature of its very
own. When that is written people will begin to understand why it is that
the Irish Catholic worker is a good democrat and a revolutionist, though
he knows nothing of the fine spun theories of democracy or revolution;
and how and why it is that the doctrine that because the workers of
Belfast live under the same industrial conditions as do those of Great
Britain, they are therefore subject to the same passions and to be
influenced by the same methods of propaganda, is a doctrine almost
screamingly funny in its absurdity.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
