Frederick Engels

# On The History of the Communist League

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[First Published:]{.info} Nov 12-26, 1885 in *Sozialdemokrat*;\
[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Selected Works*, Volume 3, Progress
Publishers, Moscow 1970;\
[Transcribed by:]{.info} zodiac@io.org.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

London\
October 8, 1885

With the sentence of the Cologne Communists in 1852, the curtain falls
on the first period of the independent German workers' movement. Today
this period is almost forgotten. Yet it lasted from 1836 to 1852 and,
with the spread of German workers abroad, the movement developed in
almost all civilized countries. Nor is that all. The present-day
international workers' movement is in substance a direct continuation of
the German workers' movement of that time, which was the *first
international workers' movement* of all time, and which brought forth
many of those who took the leading role in he International Working
Men's Association. And the theoretical principles that the Communist
League had inscribed on its banner in the *Communist Manifesto* of 1847
constitute today the strongest international bond of the entire
proletarian movement of both Europe and America.

Up to now there has been only one source for a coherent history of that
movement. This is the so-called Black Book, *The Communist Conspiracies
of the Nineteenth Century*, by Wermuth and Stieber, Erline, two parts,
1853 and 1854. This crude compilation, which bristles with deliberate
falsifications, fabricated by two of the most contemptible police
scoundrels of our century, today still serves as the final source for
all non-communist writings about that period.

What I am able to give here is only a sketch, and even this only in so
far as the League itself is concerned; only what is absolutely necessary
to understand the *Revelations*. I hope that some day I shall have the
opportunity to work up the rich material collected by Marx and myself on
the history of that glorious period of the youth of the international
workers' movement.

\* In 1836 the most extreme, chiefly proletarian elements of the secret
democratic-republican Outlaws' League, which was founded by German
refugees in Paris in 1834, split off and formed the new secret League of
the Just. The parent League, in which only sleepy-headed elements *à la*
Jakobus Venedey were left, soon fell asleep altogether; when in 1840 the
police scented out a few sections in Germany, it was hardly even a
shadow of its former self. The new League, on the contrary, developed
comparatively rapidly. Originally it was a German outlier of the French
worker-Communism, reminiscent of Babouvism and taking shape in Paris at
about this time; community of goods was demanded as the necessary
consequence of "equality". The aims were those of the Parisian secret
societies of the time: half propaganda association, half conspiracy,
Paris, however, being always regarded as the central point of
revolutionary action, although the preparation of occassional *putsches*
in Germany was by no means excluded. But as Paris remained the decisive
battleground, the League was at that time actually not much more than
the German branch of the French secret societies, especially the Societe
des saisons led by Blanqui and Barbes, with which a close connections
was maintained. The French went into action on May 12, 1839; the
sections of the League marched with them and thus were involved in the
common defeat.

Among the Germans arrested were Karl Schapper and Heinrich Bauer; Louis
Philippe's government contented itself with deporting them after a
fairly long imprisonment. Both went to London. Schapper came from
Weilburg in Nassau and while a student of forestry at Giessen in 1832
was a member of the conspiracy organized by Georg Buchner; he took part
in the storming of the Frankfort constable station on April 3, 1833,
escaped abroad and in February 1834 joined Mazzini's march on Savoy. Of
gigantic stature, resolute and energetic, always ready to risk civil
existence and life, he was a model of the professional revolutionist
that played an important role in the thirties. In spite of a certain
sluggishness of thought, he was by no means incapable of profound
theoretical understanding, as is proved by his development from
"demagogue" to Communist, and he held then all the more rigidly to what
he had once come to recognize. Precisely on that account his
revolutionary passion sometimes got the better of understanding, but he
always afterwards realized his mistake and openly acknowledged it. He
was fully a man and what he did for the founding of the German workers'
movement will not be forgotten.

Heinrich Bauer, from Franconia, was a shoemaker; a lively, alert, witty
little fellow, whose little body, however, also contained much
shrewdness and determination.

Arrived in London, where Schapper, who had been a compositor in Paris,
now tried to earn his living as a teacher of languages, they both set to
work gathering up the broken threads and made London the centre of the
League. They were joined over here, if not already earlier in Paris, by
Joseph Moll, a watchmaker from Cologne, a medium-sized Hercules --- how
often did Schapper and he victoriously defend the entrance to a hall
against hundreds of onrushing opponents! --- a man who was at least the
equal of his two comrades in energy and determination, and
intellectually superior to both of them. Not only was he a born
diplomat, as the success of his numerous trips on various mission
proved; he was also more capable of theoretical insight. I came to know
all three of them in London in 1843. There were the first revolutionary
proletarians whom I met, and however far apart our views were at that
time --- for I still owned, as against their narrow-minded equalitarian
Communism \[by equalitarian Communism I understand, as stated, only that
Communism which bases itself exclusively or predominantly on the demand
for equality\], a goodly does of just as narrow-minded philosophical
arrogance --- I shall never forget the deep impression that these three
real men made upon me, who was then still only wanting to become a man.

In London, as in a lesser degree in Switzerland, they had the benefit of
freedoms of association and assembly. As early as February 7, 1840, the
legally functioning German Workers' Educational Association, which still
exists, was founded. This Association served the League as a recruiting
ground for new members, and since, as always, the Communists were the
most active and intelligent members of the Association, it was a matter
of course that its leadership lay entirely in the hands of the League.
The League soon had several communities, or, as they were then still
called, "lodges", in London. The same obvious tactics were followed in
Switzerland and elsewhere. Where workers' associations could be founded,
they were utilized in like manner. Where this was forbidden by law, one
joined choral societies, athletic clubs, and the like. Connections were
to a large extent maintained by members who were continually travelling
back and forth; they also, when required, served as emissaries. In both
respects the League obtained lively support through the wisdom of the
governments which, by resorting to deportation, converted any
objectionable worker --- and in nine cases our of ten he was a member of
the League --- into an emissary.

The extent to which the restored League was spread was considerable.
Notably in Switzerland, Weitling, August Becker (a highly gifted man
who, however, like so many Germans, came to grief because of innate
instability of character) and others created a strong organization more
or less pledged to Weitling's communist system. This is not the place to
criticize the Communism of Weitling. But as regards its significance as
the first independent theoretical stirring of the German proletariat, I
still today subscribe to Marx's words in the Paris *Vorwarts* of 1844:

"Where could the (German) bourgeoisie --- including its philosophers and
learned scribes --- point to a work relating to the emancipation of the
bourgeoisie --- its political emancipation --- comparable to Weitlings'
*Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom*? If one compares the drab
mealy-mouthed mediocrity of German political literature with this
immeasurable and brilliant debut of the German workers, if one compares
these gigantic children's shoes of the proletariat with the dwarf
proportions of the worn-out political shows of the bourgeoisie, one must
prophesy an athlete's figure for this Cinderella."

This athlete's figure confronts us today, although still far from being
fully grown.

Numerous sections existed also in Germany; in the nature of things they
were of a transient character, but those coming into existence more than
made up for those passing away. Only after seven years, at the end of
1846, did the police discover traces of the League in Berlin (Mentel)
and Magdeburg (Beck), without being in a position to follow them
further.

In Paris, Weitling, who was still there in 1840, likewise gathered the
scattered elements together again before he left for Switzerland.

The tailors formed the central force of the League. German tailors were
everywhere: in Switzerland, in London, in Paris. In the last-named city,
German was so much the prevailing tongue in this trade that I was
acquainted there in 1846 with a Norwegian tailor who had travelled
directly by sea from Trondhjem to France and in the space of eighteen
months had learned hardly a word of French but had acquired an excellent
knowledge of German. Two of the Paris communities in 1847 consisted
predominantly of tailors, one of cabinetmakers.

After the centre of gravity had shifted from Paris to London, a new
feature grew conspicuous: from being German, the League gradually became
*international*. In the workers' society there were to be found, besides
German and Swiss, also members of all those nationalities for whom
German served as the chief means of communication with foreigners,
notably, therefore, Scandinavians, Dutch, Hungarians, Czechs, Southern
Slavs, and also Russians and Alsatians. In 1847 the regular frequenters
included a British grenadier of the Guards in uniform. The society soon
called itself the *Communist* Workers' Educational Association, and the
membership cards bore the inscription "All Men Are Brothers", in at
least twenty languages, even if not without mistakes here and there.
Like the open Association, so also the secret League soon took on a more
international character; at first in a restricted sense, practically
through the varied nationalities of its members, theoretically through
the realization that any revolution to be victorious must be a European
one. One did not go any further as yet; but the foundations were there.

Close connections were maintained with the French revolutionists through
t he London refugees, comrades-in-arms of May 12, 1839. Similarly with
the more radical Poles. The official Polish emigres, as also Mazzini,
were, of course, opponents rather than allies. The English Chartists, on
account of the specific English character of their movement, were
disregarded as not revolutionary. The London leaders of the League came
in touch with them only later, through me.

In other ways, too, the character of the League had altered with events.
Although Paris was still --- and at that time quite rightly --- looked
upon as the mother city of the revolution, one had nevertheless emerged
from the state of dependence on the Paris conspirators. The spread of
the League raised its self-consciousness. It was felt that roots were
being struck more and more in the German working class and that these
German workers were historically called upon to be the standard-bearers
of the workers of the North and East of Europe. In Weitling was to be
found a communist theoretician who could be boldly placed at the side of
his contemporary French rivals. Finally, the experience of May 12th had
taught us that for the time being there was nothing to be gained by
attempts at *putsches*. And if one still continued to explain every
event as a sign of the approaching storm, if one still preserved intact
the old, semi-conspiratorial rules, that was mainly the fault of the old
revolutionary defiance, which had already begun to collide with the
sounder views that were gaining headway.

However, the social doctrine of the League, indefinite as it was,
contained a very great defect, but one that had its roots in the
conditions themselves. The members, in so far as they were workers at
all, were almost exclusively artisans. Even in the big metropolises, the
man who exploited them was usually only a small master. The exploitation
of tailoring on a large scale, what is now called the manufacture of
ready-made clothes, by the conversion of handicraft tailoring into a
domestic industry working for a big capitalist, was at that time even in
London only just making it appearance. On the one hand, the exploiters
of these artisans was a small master; on the other hand, they all hoped
ultimately to become small masters themselves. In addition, a mass of
inherited guild notions still clung to the German artisan at that time.
The greatest honor is due to them, in that they, who were themselves not
yet full proletarians but only an appendage of the petty bourgeoisie, an
appendage which was passing into the modern proletariat and which did
not yet stand in direct opposition to the bourgeoisie, that is, to big
capital --- in that these artisans were capable of instinctively
anticipating their future development and of constituting themselves,
even if not yet with full consciousness, the party of the proletariat.
But it was also inevitable that their old handicraft prejudices should
be a stumbling block to them at every moment, whenever it was a question
of criticizing existing society in detail, that is, of investigating
economic facts. And I do not believe there was a single man in the whole
League at that time who had ever read a book on political economy. But
that mattered little; for the time being "equality", "brotherhood" and
"justice" helped them to surmount every theoretical obstacle.

Meanwhile a second, essentially different Communism was developed
alongside that of the League and of Weitling. While I was in Manchester,
it was tangibly brought home to me that the economic facts, which have
so far played no role or only a contemptible one in the writing of
history, are, at least in the modern world, a decisive historical force;
that they form the basis of the origination of the present-day class
antagonisms; that these class antagonisms, in the countries where they
have become fully developed, thanks to large-scale industry, hence
especially in England, are in their turn the basis of the formation of
political parties and of party struggles, and thus of all political
history. Marx had not only arrived at the same view, but had already, in
the *Deutsche-Französische Jahrbücher* (1844), generalized it to the
effect that, speaking generally, it is not the state which conditions
and regulates the civil society at all, but civil society which
conditions and regulates the state, and, consequently, that policy and
its history are to be explained from the economic relations and their
development, and not vice versa. When I visited Marx in Paris in the
summer of 1844, our complete agreement in all theoretical fields became
evident and our joint work dates from that time. When, in the spring of
1845, we met again in Brussels, Marx had already fully developed his
materialist theory of history in its main features form the
above-mentioned basis and we now applied ourselves to the detailed
elaboration of the newly-won mode of outlook in the most varied
directions.

This discovery, which revolutionized the science of history and, as we
have seen, is essentially the work of Marx --- a discovery in which I
can claim for myself only a very insignificant share --- was, however,
of immediate importance for the contemporary workers' movement.
Communism among the French and Germans, Chartism among the English, now
no longer appeared as something accidental which could just as well not
have occurred. These movements now presented themselves as a movement of
the modern oppressed class, the proletariat, as the more or less
developed forms of its historically necessary struggle against the
ruling class, the bourgeoisie; as forms of the class struggle, but
distinguished from all earlier class struggles by this one thing, that
the present-day oppressed class the proletariat, cannot achieve its
emancipation without at the same time emancipating society as a whole
from division into classes and, therefore, from class struggles. And
Communism now no longer meant the concoction, by means of the
imagination, of an ideal society as perfect as possible, but insight
into the nature, the conditions and the consequent general aims of the
struggle waged by the proletariat.

Now, we were by no means of the opinion that the new scientific results
should be confided in large tomes exclusively to the "learned" world.
Quite the contrary. We were both of us already deeply involved in the
political movement, and possessed a certain following in the educated
world, especially of Western Germany, and abundant contact with the
organized proletariat. It was our duty to provide a scientific
foundation for our view, but it was equally important for us to win over
the European and in the first place the German proletariat to our
conviction. As soon as we had become clear in our own minds, we set
about the task. We founded a German workers' society in Brussels and
took over the *Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung*, which served us as an organ
up to the February Revolution. We kept in touch with the revolutionary
section of the English Chartists through Julian Harney, the editor of
the central organ of the movement, *The Northern Star*, to which I was a
contributor. We entered likewise into a sort of cartel with the Brussels
democrats (Marx was vice-president of the Democratic Society) and with
the French social-democrats of the *Réforme*, which I furnished with
news of the English and German movements. In short, our connections with
the radical and proletarian organizations and press organs were quite
what one could wish.

Our relations with the League of the Just were as follows: The existence
of the League was, of course, known to us; in 1843 Schapper had
suggested that I join it, which I at that time naturally refused to do.
But we not only kept up our continuous correspondence with the Londoners
but remained on still closer terms with Dr Ewerbeck, then the leader of
the Paris communities. Without going into the League's internal affairs,
we learnt of every important happening. On the other hand, we influenced
the theoretical views of the most important members of the League by
word of mouth, by letter and through the press. For this purpose we also
made us of various lithographed circulars, which we dispatched to our
friends and correspondents throughout the world on particular occasions,
when it was a question of the internal affairs of the Communist Party in
process of formation. In these, the League itself sometimes came to be
dealt with. Thus, a young Westphalian student, Hermann Kriege, who went
to America, came forward there as an emissary of the League and
associated himself with the crazy Harro Harring for the purpose of using
the League to turn South America upside down. He founded a paper in
which, in the name of the League, he preached an extravagant Communism
of love dreaming, based on "love" and overflowing with love. Against
this we let fly with a circular that did not fail of its effect. Kriege
vanished from the League scene.

Later, Weitling came to Brussels. But he was no loner the naive young
journeyman-tailor who, astonished at his own talents, was trying to
clarify in his own mind just what a communist society would look like.
He was now the great man, persecuted by the environs on account of his
superiority, who scented rivals, secret enemies and traps everywhere ---
the prophet, driven from country to country, who carried a recipe for
the realization of heaven on earth ready-made in his pocket, and who was
was possessed with the idea that everybody intended to steal it from
him. He had already fallen out with the members of the League in London;
and in Brussels, where Marx and his wife welcomed him with almost
superhuman forbearance, he also could not get along with anyone. So he
soon afterwards went to America to try out his role of prophet there.

All these circumstance contributed to the quiet revolution that was
taking place in the League, and especially among the leaders in London.
The inadequacy of the previous conception of Communism, both the simple
French equalitarian Communism and that of Weitling, became more and more
clear to them. The tracing of Communism back to primitive Christianity
introduced by Weitling --- no matter how brilliant certain passages to
be found in his *Gospel of Poor Sinners* --- had resulted in delivering
the movement in Switzerland to a large extent into the hands, first of
fools like Albrecht, and then of exploiting fake prophets like Kuhlmann.
The "true Socialism" dealt in by a few literary writers --- a
translation of French socialist phraseology into corrupt Hegelian
German, and sentimental love dreaming (see the section on German of
"True" Socialism in the *Communist Manifesto* --- that Kriege and the
study of the corresponding literature introduced in the League was found
soon to disgust the old revolutionaries of the league, if only because
of its slobbering feebleness. As against the untenability of the
previous theoretical views, and as against the practical aberrations
resulting therefrom, it was realized more and more in London that Marx
and I were right in our new theory. This understanding was undoubtedly
promoted by the fact that among the London leaders there were now two
men who were considerably superior to those previously mentioned in
capacity for theoretical knowledge: the miniature painter Karl Pfander
from Heilbronn and the tailor Georg Eccarius from Thuringia.

\[Engels footnote: Pfander died about eight years ago in London. he was
a man of peculiarly fine intelligence, witty, ironical and dialectical.
Eccarius, as we know, was later for many years Secretary of the General
Council of the International Working Men's Association, in the General
Council of which the following old League members were to be found,
among others: Eccarius, Pfander, Lessner, Lochner, Marx and myself.
Eccarius subsequently devoted himself exclusively to the English trade
union movement.\]

It suffices to say that in the spring of 1847 Moll visited Marx in
Brussels and immediately afterwards me in Paris, and invited us
repeatedly, in the name of his comrades, to enter the League. He
reported that they were as much convinced of the general correctness of
our mode of outlook as of the necessity of freeing the League from the
old conspiratorial traditions and forms. Should we enter, we would be
given an opportunity of expounding our critical Communism before a
congress of the League in a manifesto, which would then be published as
the manifesto of the League; we would likewise be able to contribute our
quota towards the replacement of the obsolete League organization by one
in keeping with the new times and aims.

We entertained no doubt that an organization within the German working
class was necessary, if only for propaganda purposes, and that this
organization, in so far as it would not be merely local in character,
could only be a secret one, even outside Germany. Now, there already
existed exactly such an organization in the shape of the League. What we
previously objected to in this League was now relinquished as erroneous
by the representatives of the League themselves; we were even invited to
co-operate in the work of reorganization. Could we say no? Certainly
not. Therefore, we entered the League; Marx founded a League community
in Brussels from among our close friends, while I attended the three
Paris communities.

In the summer of 1847, the first league Congress took place in London,
at which W. Wolff represented the Brussels and I the Paris communities.
At this congress the reorganization of the League was carried through
first of all. Whatever remained of the old mystical names dating back to
the conspiratorial period was now abolished; the League now consisted of
communities, circles, leading circles, a Central Committee and a
Congress, and henceforth called itself the "Communist League".

"The aim of the League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of
the proletariat, the abolition of the old, bourgeois society based on
class antagonisms and the foundation of a new society without classes
and without private property"

--- thus ran the first article. The organization itself was thoroughly
democratic, with elective and always removable boards. This alone barred
all hankering after conspiracy, which requires dictatorship, and the
League was converted --- for ordinary peace times at least --- into a
pure propaganda society. These new Rules were submitted to the
communities for discussion --- so democratic was the procedure now
followed --- then once again debated at the Second Congress and finally
adopted by the latter on December 8, 1847. They are to be found
reprinted in Wermuth and Stieber, vol.I, p.239, Appendix X.

The Second Congress took place during the end of November and beginning
of December of the same year. Marx also attended this time and expounded
the new theory in a fairly long debate --- the congress lasted at least
ten days. All contradiction and doubt were finally set at rest, the new
basic principles were unanimously adopted, and Marx and I were
commissioned to draw up the Manifesto. This was done immediately
afterwards. A few weeks before the February Revolution it was sent to
London to be printed. Since then it has travelled round the world, has
been translated into almost all languages and today still serves in
numerous countries as a guide for the proletarian movement. In place of
the old League motto, "All Men Are Brothers", appeared the new battle
cry, "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" which openly proclaimed the
international character of the struggle. Seventeen years later this
battle cry resounded throughout the world as the watchword of the
International Working Men's Association, and today the militant
proletariat of all countries has inscribed it in its banner.

The February Revolution broke out. The London Central Committee
functioning hitherto immediately transferred its powers to the Brussels
leading circle. But this decision came at a time when an actual state of
siege already existed in Brussels, and the Germans in particular could
no longer assemble anywhere. We were all of us just on the point of
going to Paris, and so the new Central Committee decided likewise to
dissolve, to hand over all its powers to Marx and to empower him
immediately to constitute a new Central Committee in Paris. Hardly had
the five persons who adopted this decision (March 3, 1848) separated,
before police forced their way into Marx's house, arrested him and
compelled him to leave for France the following day, which was just
where he was wanting to go.

In Paris we all soon came together again. There the following document
was drawn up and signed by all the members of the new Central Committee.
It was distributed throughout Germany and many a one can still learn
something from it even today:

### Demands of the Communist Party in Germany

1.  The whole of Germany shall be declared a single indivisible
    republic.
2.  Representatives of the people shall be paid so that workers also can
    sit in the parliament of the German people.
3.  Universal arming of the people.
4.  The estates of the princes and other feudal estates, all mines,
    pits, etc., shall be transformed into state property. On these
    estates, agriculture is to be conducted on a very large scale and
    with the most modern scientific means for the benefit of all
    society.
5.  Mortgages on peasant holdings shall be declared state property;
    interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants to the
    state.
6.  In the districts where tenant farming is developed, land rent or
    farming dues shall be paid to the state as a tax.
7.  All means of transport: railway, canals, steamships, roads, post,
    etc., shall be taken over by the state. They are to be converted
    into state property and put at the disposal of the non-possessing
    class free of charge.
8.  Limitation of the right of inheritance.
9.  Introduction of a steeply graded progressive taxation and abolition
    of taxes on consumer goods.
10. Establishment of national workshops. The state shall guarantee a
    living to all workers and provide for those unable to work.
11. Universal free elementary education.

It is in the interest of the German proletariat, of the petite
Bourgeoisie and peasantry, to work with all possible energy to put the
above measures through. For only by their education can the millions in
Germany, who up to now have been exploited by a small number of people
and whom it will be attempted to keep in further subjection, get their
rights and the power that are their due as the producers of all wealth.

[The Committee]{.term}: Karl Marx, Karl Schapper, H. Bauer, F. Engels,
J. Moll, W. Wolff

At that time the craze for revolutionary legions prevailed in Paris.
Spaniards, Italians, Belgians, Dutch, Poles and Germans flocked together
in crowds to liberate their respective fatherlands. The German legion
was led by Herwegh, Bornsted, Bornstein. Since immediately after the
revolution all foreign workers not only lost their jobs but in addition
were harassed by the public, the influx into these legions was very
great. the new government saw in them a means of getting rid of foreign
workers and granted them *l\'etape du soldat*, that is, quarters along
their line of march and a marching allowance of 50 centimes per day up
to the frontier, whereafter the eloquent Lamartine, the Foreign Minister
who was so readily moved to tears, quickly found an opportunity of
betraying them to their respective governments.

We opposed this playing with revolution in the most decisive fashion. To
carry an invasion, which was to import the revolution forcibly from
outside, into the midst of the ferment then going on in Germany, meant
to undermine the revolution in Germany itself, to strengthen the
governments and to deliver the legionnaires --- Lamartine guaranteed for
that --- defenceless into the hands of the German troops. When
subsequently the revolution was victorious in Vienna and Berlin, the
legion became all the more purposeless; but once begun, the game was
continued.

We founded a German communist club, in which we advised the workers to
keep away from the legion and to return instead to their homes singly
and work there for the movement. Our old friend Flocon, who had a seat
in the Provisional Government, obtained for the workers sent by us the
same travel facilities as had been granted to the legionnaires. In this
way we returned three or four hundred workers to Germany, including the
great majority of the League members.

As could easily be foreseen, the League proved to be much too weak a
lever as against the popular mass movement that had now broken out.
Three-quarters of the League members who had previously lived abroad had
changed their domicile by returning to their homeland; their previous
communities were thus to a great extent dissolved and they lost all
contact with the League. One part, the more ambitious among them, did
not even try to resume this contact, but each one began a small separate
movement on his own account in his own locality. Finally, the conditions
in each separate petty state, each province and each town were so
different that the League would have been incapable of giving more than
the most general directives; such directives were, however, much better
disseminated through the press. In short, from the moment when the
causes which had made the secret League necessary ceased to exist, the
secret League as such ceased to mean anything. But this could least of
all surprise the persons who had just stripped this same secret League
of the last vestige of its conspiratorial character.

That, however, the League had been an excellent school for revolutionary
activity was now demonstrated. On the Rhine, where *the Neue Rheinische
Zeitung* provided a firm centre, in Nassau, in Rhenish Hesse, etc.,
everywhere members of the League stood at the head of the extreme
democratic movement. The same was the case in Hamburg. In South Germany
the predominance of petty-bourgeois democracy stood in the way. In
Breslau, Wilhelm Wolff was active with great success until the summer of
1848; in addition he received a Silesian mandate as an alternate
representative in the Frankfort parliament. Finally, the compositor
Stephan Born, who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active member
of the League, founded a Workers' Brotherhood in Berlin which became
fairly widespread and existed until 1850. Born, a very talented young
man, who, however, was a bit too much in a hurry to become a political
figure, "fraternized" with the most miscellaneous ragtag and bobtail in
order to get a crowd together, and was not at all the man who could
bring unity into the conflicting tendencies, light into the chaos.
Consequently, in the official publications of the association the views
represented in the *Communist Manifesto* were mingled hodge-podge with
guild recollections and guild aspirations, fragments of Louis Blanc and
Proudhon, protectionism, etc.; in short, they wanted to please everybody
\[allen alles sein\]. In particular, strikes, trade unions and
producers' co-operatives were set going and it was forgotten that above
all it was a question of first conquering, by means of political
victories, the field in which alone such things could be realized on a
lasting basis. When, afterwards, the victories of the reaction made the
leaders of the Brotherhood realize the necessity of taking a direct part
in the revolutionary struggle, they were naturally left in the lurch by
the confused mass which they had grouped around themselves. Born took
part in the Dresden uprising in May, 1849 and had a lucky escape. But,
in contrast to the great political movement of the proletariat, the
Workers' Brotherhood proved to be a pure *Sonderbund* \[separate
league\], which to a large extent existed only on paper and played such
a subordinate role that the reaction did not find it necessary to
suppress it until 1850, and its surviving branches until several years
later. Born, whose real name was Buttermilch, has not become a big
political figure but a petty Swiss professor, who no longer translates
Marx into guild language but the meek Renan into his own fulsome German.

With June 13, 1849, the defeat of the May insurrections in Germany and
the suppression of the Hungarian revolution by the Russians, a great
period of the 1848 Revolution came to a close. But the victory of the
reaction was as yet by no means final. A reorganziation of the scattered
revolutionary forces was required, and hence also of the League. The
situation again forbade, as in 1848, any open organization of the
proletariat; hence one had to organize again in secret.

In the autumn of 1849, most of the member of the previous central
committees and congresses gathered again in London. The only ones still
missing were Schapper, who was jailed in Wiesbaden but came after his
acquittal, in the spring of 1850, and Moll, who, after he had
accomplished a series of most dangerous missions and agitational
journeys --- in the end he recruited mounted gunners for the Palatinate
artillery right in the midst of the Prussian army in the Rhine Province
--- joined the Besancon workers' company of Willich's corps and was
killed by a shot in the head during the encounter at the Murg in front
of the Rotenfels Bridge. On the other hand, Willich now entered upon the
scene. Willich was one of those sentimental Communists so common in
Western Germany since 1845, who on that account alone was instinctively,
furtively antagonistic to our critical tendency. More than that, he was
entirely the prophet, convinced of his personal mission as the
predestined liberator of the German proletariat and as such a direct
claimant as much to political as to military dictatorship. Thus, to the
primitive Christian Communism previously preached by Weitling was added
a kind of communist Islam. However, the propaganda of this new religion
was for the first time being restricted to the refugee barracks under
Willich's command.

Hence, the League was organized afresh; the Address of march 1850 was
issued and Heinrich bauer sent as an emissary to Germany. The Address,
composed by Marx and myself, is still of interest today, because
petite-bourgeois democracy is even now the party which must certainly be
the first to come to power in Germany as the savior of society from the
communist workers on the occasion of the next European upheaval now soon
due (the European revolutions, 1815, 1830, 1848-52, 1870, have occurred
at intervals of 15 to 18 years in our century). Much of what is said
there is, therefore, still applicable today. Heinrich Bauer's mission
was crowned with complete success. The trusty little shoemaker was a
born diplomat. He brought the former members of the League, who had
partly become laggards and partly were acting on their own account, back
into the active organization, and particularly also the then leaders of
the Workers' Brotherhood. The League began to play the dominant role in
the workers', peasants' and athletic associations to a far greater
extent than before 1848, so that the next quarterly address to the
communities, in June 1850, could already report that the student Schurz
from Bonn (later on American ex-minister), who was touring Germany in
the interest of petty-bourgeois democracy, "had found all fit forces
already in the hands of the League". The League was undoutbedly the only
revolutionary organization that had any significance in Germany.

But what purpose this organization should serve depended very
substantially on whether the prospects of a renewed upsurge of the
revolution were realized. And in the course of the year 1850 this became
more and more improbable, indeed impossible. The industrial crisis of
1847, which had paved the way for the Revolution of 1848, had been
overcome; a new, unprecedented period of industrial prosperity had set
in; whoever had eyes to see and used them must have clearly realized
that the revolutionary storm of 1848 was gradually spending itself.

"With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of
bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within
bourgeois relationships, *there can be no talk of a real revolution*.
Such a revolution is only possible in the periods when both these
factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois productive
forms, come in collision with each other. The various quarrels in which
the representatives of the industrial factions of the continental party
of order now indulge and mutually compromise themselves, far from
providing the occassion for new revolutions are, on the contrary,
possible only because the basis of the relationships is momentarily so
secure and, what the reaction does not know, so *bourgeois*. From it all
attempts of the reaction to hold up bourgeois development *will rebound
just as certainly as all moral indignation and all enthusiastic
proclamations of the democrats*".

Thus Marx and I wrote in the "Revue of May to October 1850" in the *Neue
Rheinische Zeitung*, *Politisch-okonomische Revue*, Nos.V and VI,
Hamburg, 1850, p.153.

This cool estimation of the situation, however, was regarded as heresy
among many persons, at a time when Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Mazzini,
Kossuth and, among the lesser German lights, Ruge, Kinkel, Gogg and the
rest of them crowded in London to form provisional governments of the
future not only for their respective fatherlands but for the whole of
Europe, and when the only still still necessary was to obtain the
requisite money from America as a loan for the revolution to realize at
a moment's notice the European revolution and the various republics
which went with it was a matter of course. Can anyone be surprised that
a man like Willich was taken in by this, that Schapper, acting on his
old revolutionary impulse, also allowed himself to be fooled, and that
the majority of the London workers, to a large extent refugees
themselves, followed them into the camp of the bourgeois-democratic
artificers of revolution? Suffice it to say that the reserve maintained
by us was not to the mind of these people; one was to enter into the
game of making revolutions. We most decidedly refused to do so. A split
ensued; more about this is to be read in the *Revelations*. Then came
the arrest of Nothjung, followed by that of Haupt, in Hamburg. The
latter turned traitor by divulging the names of the Cologne Central
Committee and being slated as the chief witness in the trial; but his
relatives had no desires to be thus disgraced and bundled him off to Rio
de Janerio, where he later established himself as a businessman and in
recognition of his services was appointed first Prussian and then German
Consul General. He is now again in Europe.

\[Engels footnote: Schapper in London at the end of the sixties. Willich
took part in the American Civil War with distinction; he became
Brigadier-General and was shot in the chest during the battle of
Murfreesboro (Tennessee) but recovered and died about ten years ago in
America. Of the other persons mentioned above, I will only remark that
Heinrich Bauer was lost track of in Australia, and that Weitling and
Ewerbeck died in America.\]

For a better understanding of the *Revelations*, I give the list of the
Cologne accused:

\(1\) P. G. Roser, cigarmaker; (2) Heinrich Burgers, who later died a
progressive deputy to the Landtag; (3) Peter Nothjung, tailor, who died
a few years ago a photographer in Breslau; (4) W. J. Reiff; (5) Dr.
Hermann Becker, now chief burgomaster of Cologne and member of the Upper
House; (6) Dr. Roland Daniels, physician, who died a few years after the
trial as a result of tuberculosis contracted in prison; (7) Karl Otto,
chemist; (8) Dr. Abraham Jacoby, now physician in New York; (9) Dr. I.
J. Klein, now physician and town councillor in Cologne; (10) Ferdinand
Freiligrath, who, however, was at that time already in London; (11) I.
L. Ehrhard, clerk; (12) Friedrich Lessner, tailor, now in London.

After a public trail before a jury lasting from October 4 to November
12, 1852, the following were sentenced for attempted high treason:
Roser, Burgers and Nothjung to six, Reiff, Otto and Becker to five, and
Lessner to three years' confinement in a fortress; Daniels, Klein,
Jacoby and Ehrhard were acquitted.

With the Cologne trial the first period of the German communist workers'
movement comes to an end. Immediately after the sentence we dissolved
our League; a few months later the Willich-Schapper separate league was
also laid to eternal rest.

\* A whole generation lies between then and now. At that time Germany
was a country of handicraft and of domestic industry based on hand
labor; now it is a big industrial country still undergoing continual
industrial transformation. At that time one had to seek out one by one
the workers who had an understanding of their position as workers and of
their historico-economic antagonism to capital, because this antagonism
itself was only just beginning to develop. Today the entire German
proletariat has to be placed under exceptional laws, merely in order to
slow down a little the process of its development to full consciousness
of its position as an oppressed class. At that time the few persons
whose minds had penetrated to the realization of the historical role of
the proletariat had to forgather in secret, to assemble clandestinely in
small communities of 3 to 20 persons. Today the German proletariat no
longer needs any official organization, either public or secret. The
simple self-evident interconnection of like-minded class comrades
suffices, without any rules, boards, resolutions or other tangible
forms, to shake the whole German Empire to its foundations. Bismarck is
the arbiter of Europe beyond the frontiers of Germany, but within them
there grows daily more threatening the athletic figure of the German
proletariat that Marx foresaw already in 1844, the giant for whom the
cramped imperial edifice designed to fit the philistine is even now
becoming inadequate and whose mighty stature and broad shoulder are
growing until the moment comes when by merely rising from his seat he
will shatter the whole structure of the imperial constitution into
fragments. And still more. The international movement of the European
and American proletariat has become so much strengthened that not merely
its first narrow form --- the secret League --- but even its second,
infinitely wider form --- the open International Working Men's
Association --- has become a fetter for it, and that the simple feeling
of solidarity based on the understanding of the identity of class
position suffices to create and to hold together one and the same great
party of the proletariat among the workers of all countries and tongues.
The doctrine which the League represented from 1847 to 1852, and which
at that time could be treated by the wise philistines with a shrug of
the shoulders as the hallucinations of utter madcaps, as the secret
doctrine of a few scattered sectarians, has now innumerable adherents in
all civilized countries of the world, among those condemned to the
Siberian mines as much as among the gold diggers of California; and the
founder of this doctrine, the most hated, most slandered man of his
time, Karl Marx, was, when he died, the ever-sought-for and ever-willing
counsellor of the proletariat of both the old and the new world.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Communist League Index](index.htm) [Marx/Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
