Marx/Engels Internet Archive

# The Communist League ![London 1847](cl1.gif){height="201" width="300" hspace="12" vspace="20"}

A congress of the League of the Just opened in London on June 2, 1847.
Engels was in attendence as delegate for the League\'s Paris
communities. (Marx couldn\'t attend for financial reasons.)

Engels had a significant impact throughout the congress \-- which, as it
turned out, was really the \"inaugural Congress\" of what became known
as the Communist League. This organization stands as the first
international proletarian organization. With the influence of Marx and
Engels anti-utopian socialism, the League\'s motto changed from \"All
Men are Brothers\" to \"Working Men of All Countries, Unite!\"

*Engels:* \"In the summer of 1847, the first league congress took place
in London, at which W. Wolff represented the Brussels and I the Paris
communities. At this congress the reorganisation of the League was
carried through first of all. \...the League now consisted of
communities, circles, leading circles, a central committee and a
congress, and henceforth called itself the \'Communist League\'.\"

The Rules were drawn up with the participation of Marx and Engels,
examined at the First Congress of the Communist League, and approved at
the League\'s Second Congress in December 1847.

Article 1 of the *Rules of the Communist League*: \"The aim of the
league is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of the proletariat,
the abolition of the old bourgeois society which rests on the antagonism
of classes, and the foundation of a new society without classes and
without private property.\"

The first draft of the Communist League Programme was styled as a
catechism \-- in the form of questions and answers. Essentially, the
draft was authored by Engels. The original manuscript is in Engels\'s
hand.

![facsimile of the original rules](cl2.gif){hspace="10" vspace="10"
border="2" height="362" width="250" align="LEFT"} The League\'s official
paper was to be the *Kommunistische Zeitschrift*, but the only issue
produced was in September 1847 by a resolution of the League\'s First
Congress. It was First Congress prepared by the Central Authority of the
Communist League based in London. Karl Schapper was its editor.

The Second Congress of the Communist League was held at the end of
November 1847 at London\'s Red Lion Hotel. Marx attended as delegate of
the Brussels Circle. He went to London in the company of Victor Tedesco,
member of the Communist League and also a delegate to the Second
Congress. Engels again represented the Paris communities. Schapper was
elected chairman of the congress, and Engels its secretary.

*[Friedrich
Lessner](../../../../../glossary/people/l/e.htm#lessner-fredrick)*: \"I
was working in London then and was a member of the communist Workers\'
Educational Society at 191 Drury Lane. There, at the end of November and
the beginning of December 1847, members of the Central Committee of the
Communist League held a congress. ![Red Lion Hotel Great Windmill
Street](cl3.gif){hspace="10" vspace="10" height="348" width="200"
align="RIGHT"} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels came there from Brussels
to present their views on modern communism and to speak about the
Communists\' attitude to the political and workers\' movement. The
meetings, which, naturally, were held in the evenings, were attended by
delegates only\... Soon we learned that after long debates, the congress
had unanimously backed the principles of Marx and Engels\...\"

The Rules were officially adopted December 8, 1847.

*Engels:* \"All contradiction and doubt were finally set at rest, the
new basic principles were unanimously adopted, and Marx and I were
commissioned to draw up the Manifesto.\" This would, of course, become
the Communist Manifesto.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

March 31 1846: [Weitling letter](1846let1.htm)\
May 5 1846: [Letter: Marx asks Proudhon to
join](../../1846/letters/46_05_05.htm), Marx\
June 1847: [Rules of the Communist League](rules_draft.htm), First
Draft\
June 1847: [Circular to Members](circular.htm), First Congress of
Communist League\
June 1847: [Communist Confession of Faith](../../1847/06/09.htm),
Engels\
September 1847: [Report by Central Authority](report.htm), to the
Communist League\
November 1847: [Principles of Communism](../../1847/11/prin-com.htm),
Engels\
December 1847: [Rules of the Communist League](rules.htm)\
January 1848: [Letter from Engels to
Marx](../../1848/letters/48_01_14.htm), 14th January\
February 1848: [Communist
Manifesto](../../1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm), Marx & Engels\
March 1850: [Address to the Communist League](1850-ad1.htm), Marx &
Engels\
June 1850: [Address to the Communist League](1850-ad2.htm), Marx &
Engels\
October 1885: [History of the Communist League](1885hist.htm), Engels\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Marx/Engels Internet Archive](../../../index.htm) \|
[Letters](../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx & Engels on
Organisation](../../subject/organisation/index.htm) \| [Works by
date](../../date/index.htm)
