---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Difficulties of Socialism

### (3 June 1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 3 June 1900.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In every discussion on the aims and objects of a Socialist Party some
one is sure to bring up the objection that even if the Socialist Party
were to conquer their opponents, and make an effort to establish their
ideal as a political and social edifice, the difficulties which would
arise out of the inability of the common people to understand the
complexity of the social system they were called upon to administer,
would infallibly produce the downfall of the new order. This objection
is, it seems to us, rather far fetched in view of the circumstance that
the majority of those who at the present day are entrusted with the work
of organizing and administering the capitalist system are completely
ignorant of every development of the system outside of their own
particular sphere of employment.

It is not at all necessary that everyone, or even a very large number,
of those engaged in labour should be able to give an intelligent account
of the multifarious processes of production, nor yet that they should be
qualified even to trace the passage of the commodities upon which they
are employed through all their stages from the crudity of the raw
material up to the perfection of the finished product as it eventually
reaches the hands of the purchaser. It is only necessary that each
worker should perform with due skill and scrupulosity his own allotted
task; to the few required as organisers of industry may be left the work
of adjusting and interlocking the parts. Even this latter function --
formidable as it may look when thus baldly stated -- may be reduced to a
mere automatic function to be executed as a part of the routine work of
a clerical staff.

Any person reflecting upon the mechanism of the capitalist system can
readily perceive how little its most important arteries of commerce are
dependent upon international organization, and how much upon the
reciprocal action of the economic interests involved at first hand.
Where the international organization of Socialism will indeed come into
play it will come to smooth over and simplify many of the difficulties
which are constantly arising under capitalism as a result of the
clashing of personal interests. Hence the Socialist organization of
industry will preserve the effectiveness due to the development of
capitalism whilst entirely obviating the friction and disputes
capitalist competition entails.

It is well also to remember the multitude of things which in civilised
society we are all compelled to take upon trust at the word of others.
It is safe to say that what is called 'progress', or civilisation, would
be impossible were each individual in the community, or even a majority,
to insist upon acquiring a complete theoretical and technical mastery
of, say, each new application of Science to the needs of life before
consenting to allow its use. There are few persons nowadays who would
shrink from trusting themselves to railway trains, even although in all
but complete ignorance of the mechanism of the steam engine,
signal-boxes, points, and brakes; we have had gas in our houses, shops,
and public buildings for several generations, but to this day the number
of those who really understand the processes of gas production, storage,
and distribution are extraordinarily few, yet that does not prevent us
using it despite its well known poisonous and explosive nature. And so
we might go on enumerating many things in daily use -- the use of which
involves risk to life -- which are accepted and freely utilised by
people at large without stopping to acquire a perfect knowledge of their
active principle.

Much the same might be said of the pretended wonderful and mysterious
results to be attained under Socialism -- results too wonderful to be
realised. In Socialism there is nothing so abnormal that its realization
could exceed in strangeness things we see around us every day, and
composedly accept with the greatest equanimity. In the proposition that
the community can so arrange the work of production and distribution
that plenty can be provided for every human being, there is nothing, in
view of present day machinery, half so extraordinary as the fact that if
a gentleman sitting down to dinner in Dublin sends a telegram to a
friend in Australia that friend will have received said telegram before
his Dublin correspondent could have finished the final course of his
repast. The fact that people in Ireland were reading accounts of battles
in South Africa, 7,000 miles off, while those battles were still in
progress, is far more intrinsically wonderful than a system of society
in which labour enjoys the product of its toil, and neither hereditary
tyrants nor capitalist exploiters are tolerated.

If these stranger developments have been accepted whilst Socialism is
still rejected, it is because the personal economic interests of the
classes controlling the educative and governing forces of the world are
in line with such developments, while the same personal economic
interests of those classes are as directly opposed to Socialism. But the
workers are in the majority, and their interests are in line with
Socialism, which may, therefore, be realised as soon as they desire, and
are resolute enough to put their desires into practice.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 23 July 2018
