---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (3 June 1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 3 June 1900.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh for **Red Banner**, No.20.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Irish Trades' Union Congress.

What have the working class of Ireland a right to expect from that
gathering?

We know what we have received in the past -- much talk, and many schemes
whereby we might through combination better our lot as slaves, but never
a suggestion on the point of how we might proceed to abolish our status
as slaves, and elevate ourselves instead to the dignity of freemen.

For what, after all, are the various nostrums of Technical Education,
Fair Wages Clause in Public Contracts, Amendments to Employers'
Liability Acts, etc., what are they in essence but devices to modify the
severity of the slave driver's lash, whilst still expressly recognising
his right to apply the lash?

Take Technical Education. It is a scheme to provide the workers with
increased knowledge of how to handle the tools with which they make a
profit for their masters; it will not increase the wages of labour, but
it will increase the number of really efficient workers seeking for
employment, and competing against each other for wages.

If thorough Technical Education were made universal it would make
skilled labour as plentiful as unskilled, and wages would be adjusted
accordingly.

That is in any event the tendency introduced into modern industry by
machinery; it is the inevitable result of the division of labour in the
workshop, consequent upon the use of steam and electricity; but why
trade unionists should imagine that it is their duty to spend valuable
time in advocating reforms (?) which will destroy the distinction
between skilled and unskilled labour, not by uplifting the latter but by
degrading the former, we fail to understand.

It may be pleaded that as Technical Education would enable us to compete
better with other nations it is a beneficent measure to that extent.
Granted. But what is most urgently needed in Ireland is a frank
discussion by organised labour of the basis and principles of the vile
capitalist system which compels you to compete or die; to snatch the
bread out of your neighbour's mouth, or starve yourself.

Technical Education will come. Of that be assured. The master class will
introduce it in their own interests, my friends, so please use your time
at your annual palaver at something a little more useful to yourselves
and your class.

The Fair Wages Clause is somewhat more sensible, but does not deserve
all the enconiums passed upon it. What is it at most? If carried out in
its entirety it would ensure that the rate of wages paid in Government
or Municipal service or contracts would be as high as the terms your
trade unionists are able to force upon private employers. That is all!

Not a great lot to talk about, is it?

Especially in view of the fact that were you wise enough to think for
yourselves, instead of blindly following the interested advice of the
middle class on the one hand, or the muddle-headed traditions of English
trade unionism on the other, you could carry your trade unionism into
politics, and elect sufficient men of your own class to all public
bodies, parliament included, to make these bodies the mouthpieces of
your own interest, and their conditions of employment the ideal
standard.

But that would be Socialism, you say. Oh no it wouldn't, not by a long
shot. But if you had a majority of your representatives in the
legislative chamber, and that majority proceeded to make capitalist
property illegal, and to vote that all the land, mines, railways,
canals, factories, shops, docks, and shipping belonged to the people of
Ireland, and would in future be worked by them on a co-operative,
democratic basis, that would be Socialism -- and that would be freedom.

But as long as you recognise capitalist property, as long as you yield
up to the master class the private property you of right possess in the
product of your labour, and accept instead a fraction thereof in the
shape of wages, then no matter how you may strive to limit the power of
the master, he is master still -- and you are but his slave.

Probably you won't talk about Socialism at the Congress. You will rather
orate about the "dignity of labour," although well aware that the
majority of delegates have to ask their masters' permission before they
dare venture to attend the Congress.

Last year you resolved against the Overtaxation of Ireland, which only
concerns our Irish upper class, who wanted your help against the English
upper class. That was the result of your leaders being more anxious to
get a word of praise from the Home Rule press than to know what they
were talking about.

Last year your president said there was no antagonism between employers
and employed. This year the same individual is in Dublin, busy
organising the men of his trade who have been shamefully locked out by
their masters. Does he still think there is no antagonism?

Consider, my trade unionist friends. We Irish are today the only working
class in Europe who are not in revolt against the slavery of the
capitalist system; we are the only people with whom the highest ambition
in life is to get a good wage from their masters; we are the only people
who have not risen intellectually to a conception of what life might be
without masters; we are the only people, outside of England, who are
trade unionists only in the shop, but become the veriest lackeys of our
masters at the political ballot box; and we would all die for the
freedom of our country, yet would continue that country in the hands of
employers and landlords, who could at their will refuse us the right to
live upon it.

Are there amongst the delegates to the Congress sufficient MEN to
retrieve our name in the eyes of the world?

Then let them stand up for the only hope of the disinherited working
class -- the Socialist Republic.

Spailpín

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 27.3.2005
