---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Resolution of Sympathy with the Boer Republics

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 30 June, 1900.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### Resolution Drafted by James Connolly and Adopted at a Public Meeting to Express Sympathy with the Boer Republics, Held in Foster Place, Dublin on August 27th, 1899 {#resolution-drafted-by-james-connolly-and-adopted-at-a-public-meeting-to-express-sympathy-with-the-boer-republics-held-in-foster-place-dublin-on-august-27th-1899 .cr}

WHEREAS the government of this country is maintained upon the bayonets
of an occupying army against the will of the people;

WHEREAS there were in India, Egypt and other portions of the British
Empire other and much larger populations also kept down in forced
subjection;

WHEREAS a country that thus keeps down subject populations by the use of
the hangman, the bullet or the sword, has no right to preach to another
about its duties towards its population; THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that
this meeting denounces the interference of the British capitalist
government in the internal affairs of the Transvaal Republic as an act
of criminal aggression, wishes long life to the Republic, and trusts
that our fellow-countrymen will, if need be, take up arms in defence of
their adopted country.

This meeting was held by the Irish Socialist Republican Party, and was
their first public meeting held in Ireland to express sympathy with the
Boers.

 

### A GREAT OPPORTUNITY

The British Army is getting its hands full in South Africa. The
defeated, demoralised, disheartened, subjugated, routed, dispersed,
conquered, disarmed and humiliated Boers are still toppling over British
battalions, capturing British convoys, cutting British lines of
communication, and keeping Lord Roberts and all his generals in a state
of almighty panic and unrest, and not a single soldier can be spared
from South Africa for a long time to come.

The Boxers in China have developed a sudden aptitude for war, are
prowling around on the hunt for foreign devils, and with a smile that is
child-like and bland are offering to box all Europe, with Japan and
America thrown in as appetisers. Great Britain is in want of soldiers
there also.

Now it only wants a native rising in India, and then would come our
Irish opportunity.

With war in Africa, war in China, war in India, we of the unconquered
Celtic race would rise up in our millions from Malin Head to Cape Clear,
from Dublin to Galway, and -- and well, pass 'strong' resolutions, and
then go home and pray that somebody else may beat the Sasanach.

The Boers are invulnerable on kopjes, the Boxers are death on
missionaries, but we are irresistible on 'resolutions'.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
