---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1902

### Preface to the Third Edition of Engels' *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3, Progress Publishers (Moscow, 1976), pp.31-55;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

According to the Soviet editors: 'The preface was published in Geneva in
1902. In 1906, it was published in Russia in the Odessa Burevestnik
edition, together with E Bernstein's article "Wie ist wissenschaftlicher
Sozialismus möglich?" ("Is Scientific Socialism Possible?"), to which it
was in fact an answer. It was headed "G Plekhanov's Answer."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Russian translation of Engels' brochure *Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific* is now appearing in its third edition. The second edition
was published in 1892. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ At that time, opinion that
socialist theory in general could not be described as *scientific* did
not yet find expression in international socialist literature. Today
such opinions are being proclaimed very loudly and are not remaining
without influence among some readers. Therefore, we consider it timely
to examine the question: *what is scientific socialism and in what does
it differ from utopian socialism?*

But to begin with, let us listen to one of the 'critics'.

In a paper read on 17 May 1901 to the Berlin Student Union for the Study
of Social Science (Sozialwissenschaftlicher Studentenverein zu Berlin),
Mr Bernstein posed the selfsame question, although he formulated it
differently: 'How is scientific socialism possible?' ('Wie ist
wissenschaftlicher Sozialismus möglich?') His investigations brought him
to a negative reply. To use his own words, *no 'ism*' can *'be
scientific*':

'Ism' designates system of outlooks, tendencies, systems of ideas or
demands, but not science. The basis of every true science is experience.
Science builds its edifice on accumulated knowledge. Socialism, however,
is the teaching on a future social system and for that reason its most
characteristic feature cannot be established scientifically.
^[\[2\]](#n2)^

Is that right? We shall see.

First of all, let us discuss the relationship between '*isms*' and
*science*. If Mr Bernstein were right in saying that no 'ism' can be a
science, then it is clear, for instance, that Darwin*ism* too is not a
'science'. Let us accept that for the moment. But, what is Darwin*ism*?
If we are to go on accepting Mr Bernstein's theory as correct we must
include Darwinism in the '*systems of ideas*'. But cannot a system of
ideas be a science, or is not a science a system of ideas? Mr Bernstein
evidently thinks *not* but he is labouring under a misapprehension and
all because there is an astonishing and dreadful confusion in his own
'system of ideas'.

Every intelligent schoolchild now knows that science builds upon the
basis of experience. But that is not the question. The question is:
*what exactly does science build on the basis of experience?* And there
is only one answer to this question: science builds on the basis of
experience certain *generalisations* ('systems of ideas') which, in
turn, underlie certain *previsions* of phenomena. But this refers to
*the future*. Therefore, not every consideration regarding the future is
devoid of scientific basis.

What kind of conclusion is it that says socialism is a world-outlook and
is therefore unscientific? Evidently Mr Bernstein seems to think this is
indisputable. But before it could indeed be indisputable, it would be
necessary to prove from the beginning that *no and nobody's
world-outlook can be scientific*. Mr Bernstein has not done and will
never do so; therefore, we take exception to him and say: *parlez pour
vous, cher monsieur!*

Further. A *trend* is not a *science*. *But science can discover and
daily does discover trends* peculiar to phenomena under investigation.
*Scientific* socialism, in particular, establishes a certain *trend*
(the trend to social revolution) *prevailing in the present capitalist
society*: socialism was a teaching on the *future social order* even
before it emerged from the *utopian* stage.

One would have to be a Bernstein in order to imagine that science is not
a 'system of ideas'. It is a truly monstrous suggestion. Science is
precisely knowledge worked up into a system. Bernstein, as usual,
confuses matters. He heard about the appearance in contemporary natural
science of a 'trend' to free science completely from *hypotheses*, and
decided that science had nothing in common with any 'systems of ideas'.
In fact, this same scientific 'trend' which led Mr Bernstein to his
monstrous thesis, is groundless. Haeckel was quite right when, in
criticising this mistaken 'trend', he said: 'ohne Hypothese ist
Erkenntnis nicht möglich' (*Die Lebenswunder* (Stuttgart, 1904), p.97).

If the proposition is true that the present is pregnant with the future,
a scientific study of the present must give us the opportunity of
foreseeing some phenomena -- in this case, socialisation of the means of
production -- of the future, not on the basis of some kind of mysterious
prophecies or arbitrary and abstract reasoning, but precisely on the
basis of 'experience', on the basis of knowledge accumulated by science.

If Mr Bernstein wished seriously to ponder over the question he himself
posed about the possibility of scientific socialism, he should first of
all have decided whether the proposition we have indicated above was
true or untrue in application to *social phenomena.* Even a moment's
thought would have shown him that in this case it was no less true than
in all others. Being then sure of this, he ought to have considered
whether contemporary social science possessed such a store of
information about present-day social relations as, when put to use,
would enable science to foresee an impending replacement of these social
relations by others -- the capitalist mode of production by the
socialist. If he had observed that there was not and never could be such
a store of information, the question of the possibility of scientific
socialism would have solved itself *negatively*. But if he had been
convinced that this information already existed, or could be accumulated
with time, he would then have come inevitably to a *positive* decision
on the question. But no matter how he resolved this question, one thing
would have become perfectly clear to him, that which -- because of his
erroneous method of investigation -- still remains for him wrapped in
the mist of an ill-balanced and ill-considered 'system of ideas'. He
would have seen that the impossibility of the existence of scientific
socialism could be proved only if it became obvious that prevision of
social phenomena was impossible, in other words, that before resolving
the question of the possibility of scientific socialism it was essential
to resolve the question of the *possibility of any social science at
all.* If Mr Bernstein had perceived all this, he might perhaps have
observed also that the subject he had selected for his paper was 'of
enormous dimensions', ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ and that he who has no other means
of analysis than the muddleheaded contrasting of science and 'isms', of
experience and a ' system of ideas' can do very little to elucidate such
a subject.

Incidentally, we are being unjust to our author. The means of analysis
at his disposal were not really restricted to such contrasts. Here, for
instance, on pages 33-34 of his paper we also come across the idea that
science has no other aim than knowledge, whereas 'political and social
doctrines' strive to resolve certain practical tasks. During the
discussion which followed the reading of Mr Bernstein's paper, a member
of the audience pointed out to him in connection with this idea that
medicine had the practical aim of *healing*, and yet it must be regarded
as a science. But our lecturer replied to this by saying that healing
was the task of medical *art*, which, in any case, presupposed a basic
knowledge of medical *science*; but that medical science itself aims not
at healing, but at the study of the means and conditions of healing. To
this Mr Bernstein added: 'If we take this distinguishing of conceptions
as a typical example \[*als typisches Muster*\], we shall have no
trouble in defining, in the most complex cases, where science ends and
where art or doctrine begins.' ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

We take as our 'example' the 'distinguishing of conceptions' recommended
by Mr Bernstein and argue thus: in socialism, as in medicine, we have to
distinguish two sides: the *science* and the *art*. Socialism as a
*science* studies the means and conditions of the socialist revolution,
while socialism as a '*doctrine*', or as a *political art*, tries to
bring about this revolution with the help of acquired knowledge. And we
add that if Mr Bernstein takes as a '*typical example*' the distinction
we have made in accordance with his own example, he will readily
understand exactly where in the socialist system science ends and
doctrine or art begins.

Robert Owen, addressing the 'British public' in one of his appeals
serving as a preface to his book *A New View of Society, or Essays on
the Principle of the Formation of the Human Character*, wrote:

Friends and Countrymen,

I address myself to you, because your primary and most essential
interests are deeply involved in the subjects treated in the following
Essays.

You will find existing evils described and remedies proposed\...
Beneficial changes can only take place by well-digested and
well-arranged plans\...

It is, however, an important step gained when the cause of evil is
ascertained. The next step is to devise a remedy\... To discover that
remedy, and try its efficacy in practice, have been the employments of
my life; and having found a remedy which experience proves to be safe in
its application, and certain in its effects, I am now anxious that you
should all partake of its benefits.

But be satisfied, fully and completely satisfied, that the principles on
which the New View of Society is founded are true; that no specious
error lurks within them, and that no sinister motive gives rise to their
publicity. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

We are now in a position to follow this great British socialist's train
of thought from the angle of Mr Bernstein's 'distinguishing of
conceptions'; it is clear that Robert Owen began with a study of the
prevailing evils and the revelation of their causes. This part of his
work corresponds to what is known in medicine as *aetiology*. Then he
went on to study the means and conditions of the treatment of the social
diseases in which he was interested. Having found the remedy, which
seemed to him to be quite effective, he proceeded to put it to a
practical test. We might call this his *therapeutics*. Only after his
experiments had given entirely satisfactory results did he decide to
offer his treatment to the 'British public', in other words to begin
*medical practice*. Previously he had been engaged in medical *science*,
now he had to begin practising medical *art*. Here is a complete
parallel: once Mr Bernstein admits that it is possible to have a
*science of medicine*, it is obvious he must admit that it is possible
to have a *science of socialism*, if he wishes to be true to his own
'distinguishing of conceptions'. Those same lines of investigation which
we discerned in Robert Owen according to his own words may be just as
easily noted among the French socialists, his contemporaries. As an
example, we shall take Fourier. He said that he had brought to the
people the *art of being rich and happy*. This part of his teaching
corresponds to *medical art*. On what did he base this practical part of
his teaching? *On the laws of moral attraction*, which he said had
remained unknown until he finally discovered them after long and
intensive research. Here we are no longer dealing with *art*, but with
*theory*, with 'knowledge worked up into a system', that is to say, with
*science*. And Fourier insistently repeated that his *art* was based on
his *scientific discoveries*. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ It goes without saying that
Mr Bernstein is in no way bound to attach to these discoveries the same
great significance that Fourier and his school did. This, however, does
not affect the point at issue. Of course, Mr Bernstein did not consider
himself obliged to believe in the infallibility of all the medical
theories of our time. But that did not prevent him from coming to the
conviction that medical art is one thing and medical science is another,
and that the existence of medical art, far from precluding the existence
of medical science, presumes it as a necessary condition of its own
existence. Why, then, is such a correlation between art and science not
possible also in socialism? Why should the existence of socialism as a
socio-political 'doctrine' preclude the existence of socialism as a
science?

Mr Bernstein does not reply to these questions. Until he does his
proposed 'distinguishing of conceptions' will not corroborate but refute
his contention that scientific socialism is impossible. And he cannot
reply to these questions for the very simple reason that he has nothing
to answer. Of course, there can and must be doubts about the theoretical
justification of comparing medical art to socialism. But precisely on
this matter our author had no doubts, and could not have had any, since
*his* point of view on social life in no way precludes such comparisons.

Thus, Mr Bernstein's 'distinguishing of conceptions' not only leaves us
unconvinced about the impossibility of scientific socialism, but, on the
contrary, encourages us to believe that even the socialism of Robert
Owen, Fourier and other *utopians* was, at least partly, *scientific
socialism*. As a consequence of this, we have begun to see less clearly
that 'distinguishing of conceptions', in virtue of which, until now, we
had considered that the socialist theory of Marx and Engels had marked
an epoch in the history of socialism. Indeed, this 'distinguishing' is
unclear not to us alone. With Mr Bernstein it also turns out that,
although the teaching of Marx and Engels has a *great deal more* of the
scientific element than the teachings of Fourier, Owen and Saint-Simon,
yet, like these, though to a lesser degree, it contains elements of
utopianism alongside elements of science and therefore the difference
between them has more of a *quantitative* than a *qualitative*
character. ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

This opinion fitted naturally in the context of Mr Bernstein's paper: if
*scientific* socialism generally is impossible, *Marxism* is obviously
one of the unscientific 'isms' that contain some admixture of
utopianism. Mr Bernstein's belief in the impossibility of scientific
socialism is based on premises which, when correctly interpreted, lead
to diametrically opposite conclusions, that is to say, oblige us to
acknowledge that scientific socialism, like scientific medicine, is
*fully possible*. Since this is the case and as we have no desire to
entangle ourselves forever in the logical contradictions of Mr 'Critic',
we shall break the thread of this argument and instead ask ourselves the
question: how, ultimately, is *scientific* socialism distinguished from
*utopian* socialism?

In order to answer this question, we shall have to define the
distinguishing features of both types of socialism.

On page 14 of the pamphlet in question, Engels says:

The Utopians' mode of thought has for a long time governed the socialist
ideas of the nineteenth century, and still governs some of them. Until
very recently all French and English socialists did homage to it. The
earlier German communism, including that of Weitling, was of the same
school. To all these socialism is the expression of absolute truth,
reason and justice, and has only to be discovered to conquer all the
world by virtue of its own power. And as absolute truth is independent
of time, space and of the historical development of man, it is a mere
accident when and where it is discovered. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

Mr Bernstein reproaches Engels with having exaggerated in this passage.
He says:

I cannot agree with him when he says that they \[the utopian
socialists\] regarded as a matter of chance, independent of historical
development, in terms of place and time, the truths revealed by them to
the world. This generalisation misrepresents their views on history.
^[\[9\]](#n9)^

If Mr Bernstein had only taken the trouble to get better acquainted with
the literature of utopian socialism and to ponder more deeply over the
fundamental historical views of the utopian socialists, he would have
seen that there is not the least shade of exaggeration in Engels'
statement.

Fourier was firmly convinced that he had succeeded in discovering the
laws of moral attraction, but he was never able at any time to see his
theory as *the fruit of France's social development*. He had often
wondered why hundreds, even thousands of years ago people had not made
the discoveries which he had finally made. And he could answer this only
by referring to man's lack of vision as well as the *force of chance*.
He even wrote a very characteristic dissertation on the '*tyranny of
chance*', in which he argued 'that this colossal and despicable force
presides almost alone all discoveries'. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ He said that he
paid it tribute in his 'discovery of the calculus of attraction' ('*dans
la découverte du calcul de l'attraction*'). As with Newton, the idea was
suggested to him by an apple:

A fellow traveller who dined with me in Février's restaurant in Paris
paid 14 sous for this famous apple. I had just come in from a part of
the country where apples equal or even superior in quality were selling
at half a liard each, or less than 14 sous per hundred. I was so struck
by the difference in the price of apples in two places with the same
climate that I began to suspect a basic defect in the industrial
mechanism; out of this came those investigations which after four years
led me to discover the theory of series of industrial groups and then
the laws of general movement which Newton had missed\... Since then I
found that one could count four famous apples, two of them noted for the
trouble they caused (Adam's apple and the apple of Paris) and two for
the services they rendered to science. Do not these four apples deserve
a special page in history? ^[\[11\]](#n11)^

This would seem to be sufficiently expressive; but it is not yet all. In
Fourier's theory, chance plays a much greater role than might appear
from his ingenuous reflections on the four apples. In this theory, the
whole historical development of man's views, the whole destiny of human
prejudice are determined by chance.

If people have persisted so long in their admiration for civilisation
\[said Fourier\], this was because none of them took Bacon's advice and
made a critical analysis of the flaws and shortcomings of each
profession. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^

Why did no one take Bacon's advice? Very simply, because the chance that
might have inspired them to follow his advice did not occur. The present
order of things, which itself is only an exception to the general rule,
only a digression from the true destiny of mankind, proved to be more
prolonged than it need have been, thanks to 'the thoughtlessness of the
sophists, who forgot that they ought to enquire into the universal aims
of Providence ('*oublièrent de spéculer sur l'universalité de la
Providence*') and discover that code of laws which it had to compile for
human relations'. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^

Now the reader may judge for himself whether there is even the slightest
exaggeration in Engels' statement which we quoted above.

Faith in the historical omnipotence of chance was not so clearly
expressed and was perhaps not so great among other eminent utopians as
it was with Fourier. But to what extent it affected even the most sober
of them, Robert Owen, may be seen from the simple fact that he addressed
his socialist appeals to the *potentates of the earth*, to those who had
a substantial interest in maintaining the exploitation of man by man.
Such appeals were sadly out of tune with all Robert Owen's teaching on
the formation of the human character. In the literal and clear meaning
of this teaching, the potentates of the earth were wholly incapable of
initiating the elimination of that same social order which influenced
the formation of their own views and the existence of which was so
closely connected with their own vital interests. Nevertheless, Robert
Owen, ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ tirelessly and solicitously, with the help of
detailed calculations, exact plans and excellent drawings, explained to
the monarchs of Europe what constituted a '*rational*' social system. In
this respect, Owen, like all the other utopian socialists, was closely
akin to the great French Enlighteners from whom (mainly Helvétius) he
borrowed almost all of his teaching on the formation of the human
character, and who, like him, and with a persistence fully deserving a
better fate, explained to the crowned 'legislators' how and in what
manner human happiness could be assured. They fulminated eloquently
against the 'despots' and just as tenaciously placed their hopes in
*enlightened despotism.* This was an obvious contradiction and, of
course, it could not escape their own notice. They all realised it, some
more clearly than others, but all of them consoled themselves *precisely
with a trust in chance*. Suppose you have a large urn in which there are
very many black balls and two or three white ones and that you take one
ball after the other. It need hardly be said that in each separate
instance you have less chance of removing a white ball than a black one.
But if you continue taking out the balls you will inevitably pull out a
white one at last. The same applies to crowned 'legislators'. In each
separate instance there is a much greater chance of finding a *bad
'*legislator' on the throne than a *good* one. But a good one will
eventually appear. He will do everything prescribed by '*philosophy*'
and then reason will triumph.

This was how the French Enlighteners saw matters and this essentially
deeply pessimistic view, *tantamount to the admission of the utter
helplessness of their 'philosophy*', had a close causal connection with
their general historical outlook. It is known that even those of the
eighteenth-century French Enlighteners who were convinced *materialists*
held *idealist views on history*. They believed that the development of
knowledge, and man's mental development generally, was the basic cause
of historical progress. In this regard, the utopian socialists were
completely at one with them. Thus, for example, Robert Owen said that

\... these false notions have ever produced evil and misery in the
world, and that they still disseminate them in every direction. That the
soled cause of their existence hitherto has been *man's ignorance of
human nature*. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

In accordance with this, the elimination of social evil, too, was to be
expected solely from the dissemination among the people of a correct
understanding of their own nature. Robert Owen was firmly convinced that
such understanding would spread inevitably among the people. Only a few
months before his death he wrote that man was 'created to acquire
knowledge by experience, and happiness by obeying the laws of his
nature'. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ But experience is knowledge. What determines
its more or less rapid accumulation? Why is it that in the course of one
historical epoch mankind acquires an enormous treasure-house of
knowledge, and during another, often incomparably longer period, adds
only completely insignificant crumbs of knowledge to its previous stores
and sometimes loses even the stores themselves? Owen did not and could
not answer this question, an extremely important one for a scientific
explanation of historical phenomena. *In general people who hold
idealist views on history do not and cannot answer this question.* And
that is understandable. To be able to answer it, they would have to
explain what it is that determines man's mental development, that is to
say, they would have to perceive this development *not as the basic
cause of the historical process, but as the outcome of another, more
deep-seated cause.* And this would be tantamount to *acknowledging the
bankruptcy of the idealist conception* of history. He who does not yet
acknowledge this must inevitably give chance a very large place in his
interpretation of historical events and in his consideration of the
future. *Chance* furnishes him with an explanation of all that he cannot
explain by the *conscious activity* of historical persons. *Reference to
chance is the first unconscious and involuntary step towards recognising
that the development of man's consciousness is conditioned by causes
that are independent of him.* That is why the Enlighteners of the
eighteenth century and the utopian socialists alluded so often to the
element of chance. Fourier's '*four apples*' are as absurd now as the
French Enlighteners' 'urn' full of balls. But both the 'urn' and the
'apples' had their adequate basis in the deep-seated qualities of the
idealist conception of history; and the political and social reformers
and revolutionaries who held such views had to appeal, more often than
other philistines, to the 'urn', the 'apples' and much more of the
unexpected. Indeed, if the historical process of *accumulation* of
knowledge is determined in the last analysis by a series of chance
phenomena which have no necessary connection with the course of social
life and the development of social relations, then each individual
contribution to the general treasure-house of knowledge, every discovery
made by this or that thinker, including the author of this or that plan
of social reconstruction, must inevitably be a gift of chance. And if
the *discovery* of truth is dependent upon chance, then the
*dissemination* of this truth and its embodiment, more or less rapidly,
in social life, must also be subordinated to that same 'colossal and
despicable force'. Hence that coquetting of the French Enlighteners and
the utopian socialists with the potentates of the earth which excites so
much wonder today. With them, *practice* corresponded to *theory*, 'art'
to 'science'.

True, at times there was a marked *dissatisfaction* among the utopian
socialists *with the theory they had inherited from the Enlighteners*,
an endeavour to escape from the narrow circle of *idealism* and stand on
more *real ground. They were striving to create a social science.* Hence
all their '*discoveries*'. Some of these were remarkable, in the full
sense of the word. They threw a vivid light on many paramount aspects of
the historical process, for instance, the role of the class struggle in
the modern history of West European societies, ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ and thus
prepared the way for the scientific explanation of social phenomena. But
they only *prepared the way* for it. Historical *idealism*, which was
the standpoint of all socialists in the first half of the nineteenth
century, made much more difficult the final elaboration of a scientific
view of social life. Only phenomena which *conform to objective laws*
can be subjected to scientific explanation. This conformity to laws
presupposes the *subordination of phenomena* to the law of *necessity*,
whereas historical idealism considers historical progress almost
exclusively as the product of the *conscious* and consequently the
*free* activity of men. So long as this contradiction existed, a
scientific explanation of social life was impossible. Not only were the
socialists of that time unable to resolve this contradiction; they could
not even formulate it with the necessary precision, although it had
already been clearly grasped and precisely formulated by German
philosophy in the person of Schelling.

Schelling demonstrated that the *freedom* of human activity not only
*did not preclude necessity*, but, on the contrary, *presupposed*
necessity as its own condition. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ Schilling's profound
thought was developed fundamentally and in detail by Hegel. To put it
into everyday language, it means that man's activity may be considered
*from two sides*. First, man appears before us as the *cause* of some or
other social phenomena. In so far as man realises that he himself is
such a cause, he believes that the question of whether these social
phenomena should or should not be produced *depends on him*. And to that
extent he believes that his activity is *conscious and free.* But the
man who acts as the cause of a given social phenomenon can and must also
be seen as the *effect* of those social phenomena which fashioned his
personality and the trend of his volition. When considered *as an
effect*, social man cannot be regarded as a *free* agent, since *the
circumstances that determine the trend of his volition are independent
of him*. Thus, his activity appears to us as *subject to the law of
necessity*, that is to say, as activity *conforming to law*. We may
conclude from this that *freedom* does not in any way preclude
*necessity*. It is very important to know this truth because it -- and
it alone -- opens the way to a *scientific explanation* of social life.
We already know that only those phenomena which are subject to the law
of necessity are open to scientific explanation. If we knew social man
only as the *cause* of social phenomena, we would understand his
activity only from the point of view of *freedom*, and therefore it
would always be inaccessible to scientific explanation. The Enlighteners
of the eighteenth century, and the utopian socialists of the nineteenth
century, in their judgements on history, saw social man only as the
*cause* of social phenomena. This was because of their idealist view of
history: whoever considers mental development to be the most basic cause
of historical progress will take account only of the *conscious*
activity of men, and *conscious* activity is precisely that activity
which we call free. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

Necessity does not preclude freedom. Moreover, the conscious and, in
this sense, the free activity of men is possible only because their
actions are necessary. This may seem paradoxical, but it is an
irrefutable truth. If men's actions were not *necessary*, it would be
impossible to *foresee* them, and where that is impossible, there is no
place for free activity in the sense of conscious influence on
surrounding life. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^ Thus, *necessity* proves to be the
*guarantee of freedom.*

This was all very well elucidated already by the German idealists, and
in so far as they held to this standpoint in their opinions of social
life, they were on the firm ground of *science*. But just because they
were *idealists*, they could not put their own brilliant ideas to proper
use. True, their philosophical idealism was not necessarily connected
*with the idealist view of history.* Hegel remarks in his *Lectures on
the Philosophy of History* that although, of course, reason governs the
world, it does so in the same sense as it governs the motion of the
celestial bodies, that is, *in the sense of conformity to law.* The
motion of the celestial bodies conforms to definite laws, but their
motion is *unconscious* motion. According to Hegel, the historical
progress of mankind is accomplished in the same way; human progress is
subject to certain laws, but men are not conscious of these laws and one
may say, therefore, that historical progress is *unconscious*. Men err
when they think that their ideas are the principal factors in historical
progress. The ideas of any given epoch are themselves determined by the
character of that epoch. Moreover, the owl of Minerva flies out only at
night.

When men begin to study their own social relations, it may be said with
certainty that these relations have outlived their day and are preparing
to yield place to a new social order, the true character of which will
again become clear to mankind only when its turn, too, has come to leave
the historical scene. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^

These arguments of Hegel's are very far removed from the naive notion,
representing the essence of the idealist explanation of history, that
historical progress is determined, in the final analysis, by the
development of ideas, or, as the French Enlighteners sometimes expressed
it, that '*opinion*' governs the world. Hegel did, at least, point out
correctly *how historical progress cannot be explained.* But his
arguments likewise contain nothing to indicate the true cause. And it
could not be otherwise. If Hegel was far from the naive historical
idealism of the French Enlighteners and the utopian socialists, this did
not in the least disturb the idealist foundation of his own system, but
this foundation could not but hinder the elaboration of an entirely
scientific explanation of the social and historical process. According
to Hegel, the basis of all world development is the development of the
*Absolute Idea.* With him it is the development of this idea which, in
the final analysis, explains all human history. But what is this
Absolute Idea? It is -- as Feuerbach ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ explained very
well -- only the *personification of the process of thinking.* Thus,
world development generally and historical development in particular are
to be explained by the laws of human thought, or, in other words,
*history* is explained by *logic*. Just how unsatisfactory this
explanation is may be seen from many of Hegel's own works. With him
historical progress is comprehensible only when it is interpreted not by
logic but by the development of social -- and predominantly economic --
relations. When he says, for instance, that Lacedaemon fell mainly as a
consequence of *economic inequality*, this is quite understandable in
itself and is fully in accord with the conclusions of modern historical
science. But the Absolute Idea has definitely nothing to do with this,
and when Hegel turns to it for a final elucidation of the fate of Greece
and Lacedaemon, he has literally nothing to add to what he has already
explained by referring to economics. ^[\[23\]](#n23)^

Hegel was fond of repeating that *idealism reveals itself as the truth
of materialism.* But his *Philosophy of History* proves the exact
opposite. It makes clear that in application to history *materialism
must be acknowledged as the truth of idealism.* In order finally to find
the straight and true road to a scientific explanation of the
social-historical process, investigators had to lay aside all varieties
of idealism and adopt the materialist standpoint. This was done by Marx
and Engels. Their materialist conception of history is characterised as
follows in the present pamphlet:

The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition that
the production of the means to support human life and, next to
production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all social
structure; that in every society that has appeared in history, the
manner in which wealth is distributed and society divided into classes
or orders is dependent upon what is produced, how it is produced, and
how the products are exchanged. From this point of view the final causes
of all social changes and political revolutions are to be sought, not in
men's brains, not in men's better insight into eternal truth and
justice, but in changes in the modes of production and exchange. They
are to be sought not in the *philosophy*, but in the *economics* of each
particular epoch. The growing perception that existing social
institutions are unreasonable and unjust, that reason has become
unreason and right wrong (*Vernunft Unsinn, Wohlthat Plage geworden*),
is only proof that in the modes of production and exchange changes have
silently taken place with which the social order, adapted to earlier
economic conditions, is no longer in keeping. From this it also follows
that the means of getting rid of the incongruities that have been
brought to light must also be present, in a more or less developed
condition, within the changed modes of production themselves. These
means are not to be invented by deduction from fundamental principle,
but are to be discovered in the stubborn facts of the existing system of
production. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^

If the growing perception that existing social institutions are
unreasonable and unjust is itself a consequence of socio-economic
development it is clear that a certain *conformity to law* may also be
found in the conscious activity of men, which is conditioned by their
conceptions of reason and justice. Since this activity is determined, in
the last analysis, by the development of economic relations, now, having
ascertained the trend of the economic development of society, we thereby
acquire the possibility to foresee in which direction the conscious
activity of its members must proceed. Thus, here as with Schelling,
*freedom* flows from *necessity* and necessity is transformed into
freedom. But whereas Schelling, because of the idealist nature of his
philosophy, could not get beyond general -- though extremely profound --
considerations in this respect, the materialist conception of history
allows us to use these general considerations for the investigation of
'living' life, for the scientific explanation of all the activity of
social man.

In providing the possibility to observe the *conscious* activity of
social man from the point of view of its *necessity*, the materialist
conception of history thus paves the way for socialism on a scientific
basis. In the passage we quoted from Engels, he says that the means of
getting rid of the social incongruities cannot be invented, that is to
say, *devised* by some brilliant thinker, but must be *discovered* in
the changed economic relations of the particular epoch. *And to the
extent that such discoveries are possible, so also is scientific
socialism possible.* We now have, therefore, a very definite answer to
the question raised by Mr Bernstein regarding the possibility of
scientific socialism. True, it looks as though Mr Bernstein himself does
not suspect that such an answer exists. But that only goes to show that
he has understood nothing at all of the basic teaching of the people he
has professed to follow for the last twenty years.

One may *devise* something that is completely non-existent; a
*discovery* applies only to that which *already exists in reality.* What
is, therefore, to *discover* in economic reality the means of getting
rid of social incongruities? *It is to demonstrate that the very
development of this reality has already created and continues to create
the economic basis of the future social order.*

Utopian socialism proceeded from *abstract principles*; scientific
socialism takes as its starting point the objective course of economic
development of bourgeois society.

*Utopian* socialism readily worked out plans for the future social
structure. *Scientific* socialism, notwithstanding Mr Bernstein's
assertion quoted earlier, occupies itself not with the future society,
but with defining that tendency which is peculiar to the present social
order. It *does not paint the future in glowing colours*: it studies the
*present*. A vivid example: on the one side, Fourier's image of the
*future* life of mankind in the Phalansteries; on the other side, Marx's
analysis of the present capitalist mode of production.

If the means of getting rid of the present social incongruities cannot
be *devised* on the basis of general considerations about human nature,
but must be discovered in the economic conditions of our time, it is
patent that their discovery likewise cannot be a *matter of chance*,
independent of these conditions. No, the discovery itself is a *process
conforming to law and accessible to scientific study.*

The basic principle of the materialist explanation of history is that
men's *thinking* is conditioned by their *being*, or that in the
historical process, the course of the development of *ideas* is
determined, in the final analysis, by the course of development of
*economic relations.* If this is the case, it is plain that the
formation of new economic relations must necessarily bring with it the
appearance of new ideas corresponding to the changed conditions of life.
And should a new socio-political idea enter the head of some brilliant
man and should he *realise*, for example, that the *old* social order
cannot last, but must be replaced by a *new* one, then this happens not
'*by chance*', as the utopian socialists believed, but by the force of
quite comprehensible historical necessity. Similarly, the
*dissemination* of this new socio-political idea, its *assimilation* by
the brilliant man's supporters, cannot be attributed to chance; it gains
ground precisely because it corresponds to the new economic conditions,
and pervades precisely that class or strata of the population which more
than any other feels the disadvantages of the obsolete social system.
The process of the dissemination of the new idea also turns out to be in
conformity to law. And since the *dissemination* of the idea
corresponding to the new economic relations must sooner or later be
followed by its *realisation*, that is to say, the elimination of the
old and the triumph of the new social order, it follows that the whole
course of social development, all social *evolution* -- with its various
aspects and the *revolutionary* features peculiar to it -- is now
perceived from the *point of view of necessity.* Here, then, we have in
full view the main feature which distinguishes *scientific* socialism
from *utopian*. The scientific socialist envisages the realisation of
his ideal as a matter of historical *necessity*, whereas the utopian
socialist pins his hopes on *chance*. This brings a corresponding change
in methods of propaganda for socialism. The utopians worked *at random*,
today addressing themselves to enlightened monarchs, tomorrow to
enterprising and profit-hungry capitalists and on the following day to
disinterested friends of humanity and so on. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ The
scientific socialists, on the other hand, have a well-balanced and
consistent programme based on the materialist understanding of history.
They do not expect all classes of society to sympathise with socialism,
being aware that the ability of a given class to be amenable to a given
revolutionary idea is determined by the economic position of that class,
and that of all classes in contemporary society only the proletariat
finds itself in an economic position inevitably pushing it into
revolutionary struggle against the prevailing social order. Here, too,
as everywhere, the scientific socialists are not content to view the
activity of social man as the *cause* of social phenomena; they look
more deeply and perceive this cause itself as the *consequence* of
economic development. Here as everywhere they examine the *conscious*
activity of men from the point of view of its *necessity*:

If for the impending overthrow of the present mode of distribution of
the products of labour, with its crying contrasts of want and luxury,
starvation and surfeit, we had no better guarantee than the
consciousness that this mode of distribution is unjust, and that justice
must eventually triumph, we should be in a pretty bad way, and we might
have a long time to wait. The mystics of the Middle Ages who dreamed of
the coming millennium were already conscious of the injustice of class
antagonisms. On the threshold of modern history, 350 years ago, Thomas
Münzer proclaimed it to the world. In the English and French bourgeois
revolutions the same call resounded -- and died away. And if today the
same call for the abolition of class antagonisms and class distinctions,
which up to 1830 had left the working and suffering classes cold, if
today this call is re-echoed a million-fold, if it takes hold of one
country after another in the same order and in the same degree of
intensity that modern industry develops in each country, if in one
generation it has gained a strength that enables it to defy all the
forces combined against it and to be confident of victory in the near
future -- what is the reason for this? The reason is that modern
large-scale industry has called into being on the one hand a
proletariat, a class which for the first time in history can demand the
abolition, not of this or that particular class organisation, or of this
or that particular class privilege, but of classes themselves, and which
is in such a position that it must carry through this demand on pain of
sinking to the level of the Chinese coolie. On the other hand this same
large-scale industry has brought into being, in the bourgeoisie, a class
which has the monopoly of all the instruments of production and means of
subsistence, but which in each speculative boom period and in each crash
that follows it proves that it has become incapable of any longer
controlling the productive forces, which have grown beyond its power; a
class under whose leadership society is racing to ruin like a locomotive
whose jammed safety-valve the driver is too weak to open. In other
words, the reason is that both the productive forces created by the
modern capitalist mode of production and the system of distribution of
goods established by it have come into crying contradiction with that
mode of production itself, and in fact to such a degree that, if the
whole of modern society is not to perish, a revolution in the mode of
production and distribution must take place, a revolution which will put
an end to all class distinctions. On this tangible, material fact, which
is impressing itself in a more or less clear form, but with insuperable
necessity, on the minds of the exploited proletarians -- on this fact,
and not on the conceptions of justice and injustice held by any armchair
philosopher, is modern socialism's confidence in victory founded.
^[\[26\]](#n26)^

That is what Engels said in his dispute with Dühring, and his words
portray in full clarity the distinguishing features of scientific
socialism with which we are now familiar: the view that the emancipation
movement of the proletariat is a law-regulated social process; the
conviction that only *necessity* can ensure the triumph of *freedom*.
^[\[27\]](#n27)^

Taine says somewhere that perfect science reproduces with great accuracy
*in ideas* the nature and consistency of *phenomena. Such* a science can
make accurate forecasts about each separate phenomenon. And there is
nothing easier than to show that social science does not and cannot have
*such* accuracy. But neither has scientific socialism ever claimed such
accuracy. When its opponents object that *sociological prediction is
impossible*, they confuse two quite distinct concepts; the concept of
the direction and general outcome of a particular social process, and
the concept of separate phenomena (events) out of which the process is
composed. Sociological prediction is distinguished, and always will be
distinguished, by its having very little accuracy in everything that
concerns the forecast of separate events, whereas it possesses quite
considerable accuracy where it has to define the general character and
trend of social processes. Let us take an example. Statistics prove that
the mortality rate fluctuates according to the time of the year. Knowing
how it fluctuates in a particular country or locality, it is easy to
forecast to what extent the number of deaths will go up or down from one
period of the year to another. Here we are speaking about the general
character and trend of a particular social process, so it is possible to
make a very exact forecast. But if we should wish to know the particular
phenomena in which will be expressed, say, the increase in mortality
with the coming of autumn, or if we should wish to ask ourselves *which
particular* persons will not survive the autumn and *what will be the
concrete circumstances* which will bring about their demise, we should
not expect an answer from social science; and if we still hoped to get
one we should have to resort to the services of a magician or a
fortune-teller. Another example. Suppose that in the parliament of a
given country there are representatives of the big landowners whose
income is being seriously reduced by competition from neighbouring
countries; of the industrial employers who market their products in the
same neighbouring countries; and lastly of the proletarians who exist
solely by selling their labour power. A bill to impose a high tariff on
grain imports has been brought before this parliament. What do you
think? Will the sociologist be able to *foretell* how the parliamentary
representatives of the various social classes will react to this bill?
We think that in this case the sociologist (and not only the
sociologist, the man of science, but anyone who has any political
experience and common sense) has every possibility to make an *accurate
forecast.*

The representatives of the landowners \[he will say\] will support the
proposal with all their energy; the representatives of the proletariat
will just as energetically reject it, and in this respect the employers'
representatives will not lag behind them in opposition, unless the
landowners' representatives have bought their agreement not to oppose
the bill by making some kind of really important economic concession to
them in some other field.

This forecast will be made on the basis of analysing the economic
interests of the different social classes and it will have the
definiteness and accuracy of a mathematical deduction, at least as far
as the landowners and the proletariat are concerned. Further, knowing
the voting strength of the representatives of each of these classes in
parliament, our sociologist will be able easily and accurately to
forecast the fate of the bill. Here again his forecast can have a very
large measure of accuracy and reliability. But since you may not be
satisfied with having a general forecast of the nature and trend of this
particular social process -- the process of struggle over the bill --
and wish to know in advance who exactly will speak on the bill, and
exactly what kind of scenes their speeches will give rise to in the
parliament, the sociologist will reply to such questions, not by
*scientific prediction*, but with more or less witty conjectures; and if
you are still dissatisfied, your only remaining hope is again the
fortune-teller. A third example: if you take the works of the great
French Enlighteners of the eighteenth century -- say, for instance,
Holbach -- you will find in them *the whole social programme of the
Great French Revolution.* But what you will not find in them is one
single forecast about the historical events which later constituted the
process by which the demands advanced by the French Enlighteners on
behalf of the entire third estate were put into effect. Whence this
difference? It is clear where it comes from. The nature and trend of a
given social process is one thing; the separate events which go to make
up the whole process are quite another matter. If I understand the
nature and trend of the process, I can foretell its *outcome*. But no
matter how profound my comprehension of this process may be, it will not
enable me to foretell separate events and their particular features.
When people say that sociological prediction is impossible, or, at
least, extremely difficult, they almost always have in mind the
impossibility of foretelling particular events, completely forgetting
that this is not the business of sociology. Sociological prediction has
as its object, not isolated events, *but the general results of that
social process which* -- as, for example, the process of development of
bourgeois society -- *is already being accomplished at the given time.*
That these general results can be determined beforehand is well
illustrated by the above-mentioned example of the French Revolution, the
entire social programme of which was formulated, as we have said, by the
advanced literary representatives of the bourgeoisie. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

Scientific socialism says, *first of all*, that the victory of socialist
ideals presupposes *as its essential condition*, a certain course of
economic development of bourgeois society, taking place independently of
the will of the socialists; *secondly*, that this essential condition
*is already at hand*, determined by the nature and development of the
relations of production peculiar to that society; *thirdly*, that the
very dissemination of socialist ideals among the working class of the
contemporary capitalist countries is caused by the economic structure
and development of these countries. Such is the general idea of
scientific socialism. And this general idea is not invalidated in any
way by the completely correct proposition that sociology will never be a
perfect science in the sense meant by *Taine*. Well, and what of it?
Although sociology is not a perfect science, the general conception of
scientific socialism is nonetheless indisputable, rendering all doubts
of the *possibility* of such socialism groundless.

The bourgeois theoreticians and the 'critics' of Marx often advance also
the following argument in discussions on the possibility of scientific
socialism.

If scientific *socialism* is possible \[they say\], then *bourgeois*
social science is also possible, which is self-contradictory nonsense,
since science can be neither socialist nor bourgeois. Science is
integral. *Bourgeois* political economy is as unthinkable as socialist
mathematics.

This argument, too, is based on a confusion of ideas. Mathematics can be
neither socialist nor bourgeois -- that is true. But what is true in
application to mathematics is untrue when applied to social science.

What is the sum of the squares of the shorter sides of a right-angled
triangle equal to? To the square of the hypotenuse. Is that right? It
is. Is it always right? Always. The relation of the square of the
hypotenuse to the sum of the squares of the other two sides *cannot
vary, since the properties of mathematical figures are invariable.* And
what do we find in sociology? Does the subject of *its* investigation
remain invariable? It does not. The subject of sociological
investigation is *society* and society *develops* and, consequently,
*changes*. It is just this *change*, this *development*, that provides
the possibility of *bourgeois* social science and, in like manner, of
scientific *socialism*. In its development, society passes through
*certain phases to which the phases of development of social science
correspond*; for example, that which we call *bourgeois* economics is
one phase in the development of economic science, and that which we call
*socialist* economics is another phase, following directly after the
first. What is surprising about this? Where is the self-contradictory
nonsense here?

It would be wrong to think that bourgeois economics consists of errors
alone. Nothing of the kind. In so far as bourgeois economics
*corresponds* to a definite phase of social development it will contain
irrefutable *scientific truth*. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ But this truth is
*relative* precisely because it corresponds *only to a certain phase of
social development.* However, the bourgeois theoreticians, who imagine
that society must always remain at the bourgeois phase, attribute
*absolute significance* to their relative truths. This is their basic
error, one that is being set right by scientific socialism which has
come into being owing to the fact that the bourgeois epoch of social
development is drawing to a close. Scientific socialism may by likened
to the same Minerva's owl which Hegel spoke about and which, he said,
flies out only when the sun of the prevailing social order -- in this
case, the capitalist -- is selling. Once again: where is the
contradiction here? Where is the nonsense? Here there is neither
contradiction nor nonsense; here, on the contrary, we have the
opportunity *to glance at the very process of the development of science
as a process conforming to law*.

Be that as it may, the main distinguishing feature of scientific
socialism is now quite clear to us. Its adherents are not satisfied with
the *hope* that socialist ideals, because of their lofty nature, will
attract general sympathy and will therefore triumph. No, they require
the *assurance* that this very attraction of general sympathy to
socialist ideals is a *necessary social process*, and they derive this
assurance from the analysis of contemporary economic relations and the
course of their development. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ The apologists of the
existing social order feel well enough, although they do not always
clearly realise it, that this main distinguishing feature is just what
constitutes the main strength of socialist theory. Therefore, their
'criticism' is directed at this point. They usually begin with the
argument that economics cannot be regarded as the mainspring of social
development, since man is not fashioned of stomach alone, but has also a
soul, a heart and other imperishable treasures. However, these
sentimental arguments, which are evidence of the utter inability of
present-day bourgeois theoreticians to understand what is the most
important, fundamental task of social science, play only a secondary
role with them. The main force of their arguments is concentrated on the
question of the trend of contemporary economic development. Here they
try to refute, one by one, every tenet of scientific socialism.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^ Even though their attempts come to nothing, they
constantly renew them and cannot help doing so since the question at
issue is the very existence of a social order so dear to their hearts.
They realise that, if economic development actually proceeds along the
lines indicated by the scientific socialists, the social revolution is
*inevitable*. And this *is equivalent to admitting that scientific
socialism is possible*.

We have indicated one distinguishing feature of scientific socialism;
Engels indicates another in his controversy with Dühring when he says
that this socialism dates only from the discovery of the nature and
origin of *surplus value*, and that all of it has been '*built up*'
around this discovery. (The reader will understand in what sense this is
said.) As the aim of the socialist movement is the abolition of
exploitation of one social class by another -- the proletariat by the
bourgeoisie -- *scientific* socialism became possible only from the time
when science succeeded in defining the nature of class exploitation
generally and, in particular, that form which it assumes in present-day
society. Prior to this, socialism could not go beyond more or less vague
strivings, and in its criticism of the prevailing system lacked the most
important ingredient: an understanding of where lay the economic kernel
of this system. The discovery of surplus value gave it this
understanding. How great is the importance of this discovery is
evidenced by the mere fact that the defenders of the existing order of
things try with all their might to disprove its truth. The theory of
marginal utility ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ is now meeting with a very cordial
welcome from the bourgeois economists precisely because it envelops in a
dense cloud the question of the exploitation of the worker by the
capitalist and even throws doubt upon the very fact of this
exploitation. ^[\[33\]](#n33)^ (Therein lies the whole 'scientific'
meaning of this theory, the uselessness of which is far from marginal.)

But no matter how important the discovery of surplus value was in the
history of socialism, scientific socialism would, nevertheless, have
remained impossible if the abolition of the bourgeois relations of
production and, consequently, the abolition of the exploitation of the
proletariat by the bourgeoisie, had not been conceived as an historical
necessity, conditioned by the whole process of contemporary economic
development.

A few words more. Three chapters of the celebrated book, *Herrn Eugen
Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft* \[*Anti-Dühring*\], devoted to a
criticism of the Dühring 'force theory' are, as in previous editions of
this hook, published as an appendix to the present edition. These
chapters contain, by the way, an outline of history of the art of war in
the civilised states of modern times as well as an analysis of the
causal connection of the development of this art with the economic
development of society. These chapters may appear 'one-sided' to people
inclined to eclecticism. Such people will retort: 'Not everything can be
explained by economy.' We consider it useful, therefore, to draw their
attention to one book which owes its origin to *experts in military
affairs.* It is entitled *Les maîtres de la guerre. Frédéric II* --
*Napoléon -- Moltke (Essai critique d'après des travaux inédits de M le
général Bonnal par le Lt-Colonel Rousset, professeur à l'Ecole
supérieure de Guerre)*. This interesting book deals with the same
subject as that examined by Engels in the chapters mentioned above and
it draws almost exactly the same conclusions:

The social conditions obtaining in each epoch of history \[we read on
page four\] exert a preponderant influence, not only on the military
organisation of a nation but also on the character, the abilities, and
the trends of the military men. Generals of the ordinary stamp make use
of the familiar and accepted methods, and march on towards successes or
reverses according to whether attendant circumstances are more or less
favourable to them\... As for the great captains, these subordinate to
their genius the means and procedures of warfare, or, to be more exact,
guided by a kind of divinatory instinct, they transform the means and
procedures in accordance with the parallel laws of a social evolution,
whose decisive effect (and repercussion) on the technique of their art
they alone understand in their day.

This is by no means far from the materialist explanation of history,
although the author has probably not got the slightest notion what that
is. Surely if the development of the art of war is determined by social
development and social development by economic development, it must
follow that military technique, and not technique alone, but also the
'character, the abilities and the aspirations of military men' are
determined, in the last analysis, by economic development. This
conclusion, which has astonished so many, many 'intellectuals' of every
nationality by its 'one-sidedness', would scarcely have frightened our
military author, who, recognising that the development of military
technique is determined by social development, also recognises at the
same time that this development, in turn, is conditioned by 'the
progress of science, arts and industry' (page 2). If he is not lacking
in the ability to think consistently, and evidently he is not, it would
be easy for him to understand the historical theory according to which
*social* development is accomplished on the basis of *economic*
development and economic development is determined *by the course of
development of the productive forces*.

The historical essay on the art of war written by the same author from
the unpublished materials of General Bonnal is extremely reminiscent of
the essay on the same subject which Engels wrote in *Anti-Dühring*. Here
and there the resemblance is so great, indeed, that one could presume
that it had been borrowed, were this not precluded by the simple
chronological fact that Engels' *Anti-Dühring* was published
twenty-three years before Lt-Colonel Rousset's book. It is just as
unthinkable to imagine that Rousset (or General Bonnal) had borrowed
from Engels. We may be sure that the works of the great German socialist
were completely unknown to these learned French officers. The matter is
very simply explained by the fact that Engels was an expert on military
matters and a consistent thinker, able to apply the fundamental
principles of his historical theory to the study of the most varied
aspects of social life. Guided by these fundamental principles, he
discerned that which, to quote Rousset, was discerned only by the
greatest generals: the decisive impact of social evolution on the
technique of war. This particular case proves convincingly that the
materialist explanation of history, when correctly understood, does not
lead to '*one-sidedness*', but broadens and sharpens the investigator's
vision as nothing else could.

We should have liked to say something, too, about *dialectics and its
relation to formal logic.* But lack of space compels us to put this off
to another, more favourable, occasion. (That it would be useful to carry
out this intention may be seen from those extremely vague conceptions of
dialectics with which far too often even orthodox Marxists are
satisfied. It must be admitted that in the polemics aroused by the
'critical' efforts of Mr Bernstein and Co, the majority of the orthodox
Marxists proved to be weakest precisely in the defence of *dialectics*.
This weakness must be eliminated; we are in duty bound to repulse
decisively all the attacks of our enemies on our logical stronghold.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} The first Russian edition of Engels' pamphlet
*Socialism: Utopian and Scientific* appeared in Geneva in 1884 --
Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} E Bernstein, *Wie ist wissenschaftlicher Sozialismus
möglich?* (Berlin, 1901), p.35.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} These are the words of Skalozub, a character from
Griboyedov's *Wit Works Woe --* Editor.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Bernstein, p.34, note.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} Not having the English original at hand I quote from
the German edition, translated by Professor Oswald Kollmann and
published in Leipzig in 1900, entitled: *Eine neue Auffassung der
Gesellschaft. Vier Aufsätze über die Bildung des menschlichen
Charakters, als Einleitung zu der Entwicklung eines Planes, die Lage der
Menschheit allmählich zu verbessern.* The extract cited is on page 6.
\[We are quoting from the original (London, 1817), pp.11-12 -- Editor.\]

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} See, for example, *Manuscrits de Fourier* (Paris,
1851), p.4, where he compares himself with Kepler and Newton. Cf also
any of the expositions of his teaching made by his followers. In each of
them, the practical plans of social reconstruction are founded on
Fourier's *theoretical discoveries*.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} On this point read especially pages 21, 22, 28, 29
and 30.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p.126 -- Editor.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} Bernstein, p.30, note.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} *Les Manuscrits de Fourier*, p.14. Cf also *Oeuvres
complètes*, Volume 4 (Paris, 1841), pp.3, 4, 5.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} *Les Manuscrits de Fourier*, p.17.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} *Oeuvres complètes*, Volume 4, p.121.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} *Manuscrits de Fourier*, p.78.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} See, for example, his work *A Development of the
Principles and Plans on Which to Establish Self-Supporting
Home-Colonies*, etc (London, 1841), and especially the introduction to
his autobiography, The Life of Robert Owen Written by Himself, Volume 1
(London, 1857).

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} See *Neue Auffassung*, etc, pp.65 -- 66.
Incidentally, this thought is repeated in all his works. \[We are
quoting from Robert Owen, op cit, pp.114 -- 15 -- Editor.\]

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} See his extremely interesting article, headed: 'On
the absolute necessity, in the nature of things, for the attainment of
Happiness, that the system of Falsehood and Evil should precede the
system of Truth and Good', in the appendix to the first volume of his
autobiography, issued as a separate book; pp.xxx-xxxiii.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} See my Preface to the Russian edition of the
*Manifesto of the Communist Party*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp.427 -- 73 -- Editor.\]

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} *System des Transcendentalen Idealismus* (Tübingen,
1800), p.422. Cf N Beltov's *The Development of the Monist View of
History*, pp.105 et seq. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical
Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp.565ff -- Editor.\]

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} 'Necessity in opposition to freedom, is nothing
else than the unconscious', Schelling rightly observes (op cit, p.424).

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} 'I might hope to foresee them \[the acts of my
fellow-citizens\] only on the condition that I could examine them as I
examine all other phenomena of the world surrounding me, that is, as the
*necessary* consequences of *definite causes* which are already known,
or may become known, to me. In other words, my freedom would not be an
empty phrase only if *consciousness* of it could be accompanied by
*understanding the reasons* which give rise to the *free* acts of my
neighbours, that is, if I could examine them from the aspect of their
*necessity*. Exactly the same can my neighbours say about *my own* acts.
But what does this mean? This means that the *possibility of the free
(conscious) historical activity of any particular person is reduced to
zero, if at the very foundation of free human actions there does not lie
necessity which is accessible to the understanding of the doer*.' (N
Beltov, *The Development of the Monist View of History*, p.106). \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow,
1974), p.566 -- Editor.\]

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} See N Beltov, op cit, p.101. \[See Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974),
p.562 -- Editor.\]

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} See his Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft,
p.23.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} For more detail see my article 'Zu Hegel's
sechzigstem Todestag' in *Neue Zeit*, November 1891. \[See Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974),
pp.401-26 -- Editor.\]

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), pp.133-34 -- Editor.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} 'Le seul baume à notre servitude, c'est, de temps
en temps, un prince vertueux et éclairé; alors les malheureux oublient
pour un moment leurs calamités.' \['the sole consolation in our
servitude is the appearance from time to time of a virtuous and
enlightened sovereign; then the unfortunate forget their misfortunes for
a moment.'\] So said the well-known Grimm in the eighteenth century
(quoted from L Ducros, *Les Encyclopédistes* (Paris, 1900), p.160). It
is plain to anyone that the hopes of Grimm and his followers were really
adjusted to chance. We know by now that the utopian socialists differed
very little in this respect from the Enlighteners of the eighteenth
century. True, the Enlighteners put their trust only in *monarchs*,
while the utopian socialists also expected miracles from the goodwill of
simple mortals among the propertied classes. This difference is to be
explained by changed social relations, but it does not erase the
fundamental resemblance resulting from identical views on history.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} *Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft*,
third edition, pp.161 -- 62. \[Frederick Engels, *Anti-Dühring* (Moscow,
1975), pp.180-81 -- Editor.\]

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} When our Belinsky -- on his being first attracted
to Hegel -- resolutely abandoned for a time his aspirations to freedom,
he gave a striking and incontestable proof of the depth of his
theoretical understanding. His renunciation of freedom-loving
aspirations was inspired precisely by the consciousness that the triumph
of freedom could be assured only by objective necessity. But since he
saw nothing in Russian reality to indicate the objective necessity of
such a triumph he gave up all hope of it as being *theoretically
unsound.* Later he said of himself that he had been unable to '*develop
the idea of negation*'. This concept, in its application to bourgeois
society, was developed by the founders of scientific socialism.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} In his recently published book, *Les classes
sociales, analyse de la vie sociale*, the Paris Professor Bauer
expresses a similar view regarding sociological prediction. His book is
interesting in many respects. It is a pity that the learned Professor is
very badly informed on the history of the views he is developing.
Evidently it does not enter his head that among his 'predecessors' he
should have included the philosophers Schelling and Hegel, and the
socialists Marx and Engels.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} This is why the class bourgeois point of view *in
its time* not only did not impede the progress of science, *but was its
essential condition.* In my preface to the *Manifesto of the Communist
Party* I have shown this by the example of the French bourgeois
historians at the time of the Restoration.

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} Some writers, for example Stammler, contend that if
the triumph of socialism is an historical necessity, the practical
activity of Social-Democracy is *completely superfluous.* Why promote
the occurrence of something which is certain to happen? That is, of
course, a pitiful and ridiculous sophism. Social-Democracy, in analysing
historical development from the point of view of necessity, looks on its
own activity as an *essential link* in the chain of those *necessary
conditions*, the totality of which makes the victory of socialism
inevitable. An *essential* link cannot be *superfluous*: its elimination
would break the whole chain of events. The logical weakness of this
sophism is clear to anybody who understands what we have said above
about freedom and necessity.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} See my article 'A Critique of Our Critics',
published in the second and third issues of *Zarya*. \[Georgi Plekhanov,
*Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp.513 -- 66.
*Zarya* (*Dawn*) -- a Marxist scientific and political journal published
legally in Stuttgart in 1901 -- 02 with Lenin, Plekhanov and Zasulich as
its contributors. The journal criticised international and Russian
revisionism and came out in defence of the theoretical principles of
Marxism -- Editor.\]

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} The *theory of 'marginal utility*' was a vulgar
economic theory which came to the fore in the 1870s in opposition to
Marx's labour theory of value. According to the theory of 'marginal
utility', the source of value is not socially-necessary labour, but the
so-called marginal utility of a commodity, reflecting the subjective
estimation of the utility of a commodity which satisfies the least
pressing demand -- Editor.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} When the English translation of Böhm-Bawerk's
*Positive Theorie des Kapitals* was issued, the biggest of the British
bourgeois newspapers, *The Times*, welcomed it as 'the best antidote to
the exploitation theories of the Marxist school'. The bourgeois social
system is in a state of decay. Parallel with this there is a decline in
bourgeois science. In defending bourgeois social relations, the
bourgeois theoreticians degrade themselves to the level of lower-grade
sophists. (We may note the following in passing: when Engels said that
Marx *discovered* surplus value he did not mean that, in his opinion, no
economist *before Marx* had had any idea on the subject. Not at all.
Marx himself remarked in his *Zur Kritik der Politischen Ökonomie* that
even the physiocrats had tried to determine in which particular sphere
of production surplus value was created. \[*Physiocrats --*
representatives of a trend in bourgeois classical political economy
which arose in France in the 1750s. They proclaimed unrestricted rule of
private ownership, rejected protectionism and demanded freedom of trade
and competition. They advocated a '*Laissez faire, laissez passer*'
economic policy -- Editor.\] Marx collected much extremely valuable
material for a history of the theories of surplus value. Part of this
material has only just been published by Kautsky in a special book.
\[This reference is to Volume 4 of *Capital* (*Theories of
Surplus-Value*), published by Karl Kautsky from 1905 to 1910 --
Editor.\] Marx *discovered* surplus value *in the sense that the long
history of the theories of this value was finally completed* *in his
economic theory*, freed from all unclarity and contradictions.)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)

1
