---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# A Plea for the Children

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 2 December 1899\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.2 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcription: Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We wonder how many of our readers fully appreciated the significance of
that plank in our municipal programme [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} which demands
the free maintenance of children at School. In no item of the Socialist
programme are the economic and humanitarian aspects of the movement so
closely blended, and none are so much required in the interest of future
generations. For the misery and oppression under which the adults of
this generation suffer, they have themselves largely to blame as much of
it is immediately removable, and all of it could be abolished by a
concerted effort on the part of its victims. But the children who suffer
most from this inhuman social system; who are stunted in growth,
physically and intellectually; who are dragged up, for the most part, in
tenement houses which ever tend to become veritable cesspools of crime
and degradation; who are shut out by the poverty of their parents from
every avenue of enlightenment, and who find their whole lives warped and
distorted by the evil conditions surrounding their infancy; their claim
for consideration is superior to all political exigencies, and ought to
be pressed forward with all the energy we possess.

It may be urged against such a demand that it introduces the public
power of the community into a sphere from which it ought to be excluded
-- the home. But this is an argument which cannot be seriously
entertained when we consider the many and varied inroads upon private
life which the power of the State has already made, and in which such
public intervention has proven to be in the highest degree beneficent.
The individual can no longer use his property as he pleases, even when
that property is in inanimate things, but when property takes the form
of human beings, as children, the 'rights' of the individual are
circumscribed and limited in the most thorough manner. And what sane man
to-day would venture to assert that the right of parents to do as they
like with their children -- a right which all too often took the form of
brutal maltreatment and systematic starvation -- was more compatible
with public welfare, or private morality, than the supervision enforced
by the State at present. And as the right of the individual to maltreat
his children has been suppressed in the interest of the children, should
not the social maltreatment of the children which follows as a result of
the enforced poverty of the parents also be suppressed? If it is right
that parents should not be allowed to sentence their children to
corporal punishment of a severe character, or to curtail their supply of
food below what is necessary for their subsistence, is it not also right
that Society which, through its faulty economic organisation, sentences
the parents themselves to a lifetime of drudgery and ill-requited toil,
should use its power to provide the children of the poor it has created
with sufficient of the necessaries of life to allow of their proper
development into capable, self-respecting men and women? It is said this
would encourage drunkards and loafers to neglect their children. But the
children of such people are neglected now, and the maintenance of their
children out of public funds could not increase such neglect, but would
only save the helpless little ones from its consequences. Why should
children suffer, even if the parents are criminal and indolent?

Society owes a duty to these children -- they are the citizens of the
future; as their childhood is made happy and healthful, and therefore
truly susceptible of receiving education, so will their manhood and
womanhood tend to become; so will the civilization they mould be worthy
of an enlightened people. Therefore, we repeat, the Free Maintenance of
the Children is a most important item to be fought for, and we look to
see the revolutionary working class making this demand a prominent
feature in its future agitation -- resolved that capitalist society,
which starved and stunted our childhood, and debases and exploits our
manhood, shall, at least, be compelled to take its clutches off the
lives of our children and leave the rising generation physically and
mentally capable of accomplishing the glorious task of social
reconstruction now awaiting it.

 

### Note

[1.](#f1){#n1} The programme put forward by the ISRP in local elections.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
