---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Dogma and Food

### (December 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 9 December 1899.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.18.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At a meeting of the Sacred Heart Home in Dublin the other day a most
powerful and impassioned appeal was made by the Archbishop of Dublin for
funds to provide proper care and training for the Catholic children who,
from the poverty and carelessness of their parents, frequently fall into
the clutches of "proselytisers" who make their misery a weapon of
warfare against their religion. We do not propose now, nor at any other
time, to enter into the disputes of rival religions, but we do think
that the occasion merits at least a passing notice on our part, helping
as it does to illustrate the truth of our contention that the social
question, or the bread and butter question, is the root question of all,
and until it is settled no other question of fundamental importance can
be grappled with in any but an incomplete and unsatisfactory manner.

For what is the position upon which the appeal for funds to carry on the
charitable work of the Sacred Heart Home was based? That owing to the
poverty-stricken condition of large masses of the people the Catholic
faith of the children was at the mercy of those missionaries and other
Protestant agencies who come with charitable contributions to the
parents and make of their charity a means for obtaining control of the
education and bodily person of the child. Here then we have the
statement clearly made that the manifold dangers against which we are so
solemnly warned spring from POVERTY. Reasoning on this matter from the
standpoint of a mere layman we would be inclined to say that the first
line of attack along which the Archbishop should direct the forces of
his eloquence, and the attention of the world in general, is that of
poverty and the institutions which create it. If you destroy the social
institutions which create poverty, if you lift the working class from
their present position of economic dependence, and in so doing assure to
all men and women a sufficiency of the good things in life in return for
a moderate amount of labour, then the insidious work of the "souper" is
ended and all religious denominations will require to stand or progress
by their inherent truths alone.

But nowhere in all the passionate exhortations of our clerical leaders
do we find this point ever noted; instead we are to have appeals for
funds to be applied for the purpose of saving Catholic children from the
temptations of "proselytisers;" and as said temptations usually take the
form of food and raiment, to supply food, raiment, and if necessary,
shelter through Catholic sources. In all this there is no question of
whether it would be a subject worthy of consideration to consider what
means should be taken to abolish the poverty which degrades the workers
so much that they are ready to traffic in their children in such a
manner.

Yet until this question is dealt with all the efforts of the Sacred
Heart Home, and such-like institutions, will be of practically no avail
in combatting such degradation. The place of the children rescued today
will be filled tomorrow by the children of other parents hurled into the
abyss of slum life and misery by the ceaseless working of our unjust
social system. We on this journal, or in this party, are not allied, nor
opposed to, any particular creed or Church -- seeking the emancipation
of the working class from the unholy trinity of Rent, Interest and
Profit we require the aid of men of all religions and of none -- but we
consider it our duty to point out that if the speakers at the Sacred
Heart Home at Drumcondra were really in earnest in their desire to save
the children, they would find in the Municipal Programme of the
Socialist Republican Party a plank, that of the Free Maintenance of
Children, which, if applied in practice, would prevent effectually all
that hopeless misery out of which such degrading incidents as those
complained of spring.

But it is at all times more congenial to a certain class of minds to
nibble at consequences rather than to strike boldly at the root of the
evil; that, and the unpopularity sure to be the reward of the political
party which, despising cheap methods of gaining sympathy, instead of
whining over the sufferings of the poor, calls upon them to rebel
against the oppressive institutions which cause it, explains why our
public men in general are chary about touching a reform, be it ever so
practical, which appeals to manhood rather than to wealth.

But all such admissions of timidity coupled with an admission of the
degrading nature of capitalist society, such as that the assembled
clerics treated us to on Monday last, only tend to confirm the faith of
the Socialist Republican in that uncompromising course of action which
rests all its hopes in the right arms and clear brains of the
disinherited -- the working class.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 6.7.2004
