---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Dublin and the War

### Diary of the "Troubles"

#### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 30 December 1899.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

December 8. -- Announced in London and Dublin newspapers that the Right
Hon Joseph Chamberlain, MP, Colonial Secretary, would visit Dublin on
the 17th and 18th December to receive a degree from Trinity College.

English newspapers eulogise Chamberlain's "courage".

December 11. -- Special meeting of Dublin Corporation to consider a vote
of sympathy with the Boers is rendered abortive by the Home Rule members
treacherously absenting themselves.

December 12. -- Public meeting called by the Irish Socialist Republican
Party "to celebrate the British defeat at Stormberg."

Date of meeting 19th December, same date as Chamberlain's triumphal
entry; place of meeting, College Green, beside Trinity.

December 13. -- Reliable natives report the jingo enemy to be very
wrathful at Socialist audacity.

December 14. -- Irish Transvaal Committee summon public meeting to be
held in Beresford Place on Sunday 17th, to denounce the action of the
Dublin Corporation -- and salute Chamberlain.

British garrison go into laager.

December 15. -- London **Pall Mall Gazette** declares that there is
trouble brewing in Dublin in connection with Mr Chamberlain's visit and
expresses the belief that the parties responsible for all the trouble
are "the Irish Socialist Republican Party which is composed of a number
of the most extreme and least reputable representatives of the
nationalists of Dublin".

London **St James' Gazette** hopes "that the police will see to it".

**Irish Daily Independent** reminds us of the "rights of hospitality".

December 16. -- Reported at British Headquarters that both wings of the
Irish Revolutionary forces were gathering behind the kopjes.

British draw in all their outposts, from Kingstown and all outlying
camps.

One hundred rounds of ammunition per man served out to the military.

Proportionate quantity of porter served out to the police.

Some swearing done before Mr Wall, Police Magistrate.

Government Proclamation issued forbidding the meeting on Sunday. Copies
served on the Transvaal Committee: John O'Leary, Michael Davitt, Pat
O'Brien, MP, Willie Redmond, MP and James Connolly.

Meeting of Transvaal Committee. Willie Redmond, as chairman, advises the
people to defy the police, and hold the meeting in Beresford Place.

Native runners out all night summoning the bludgeonmen of the
Government.

December 17. -- All the tactical positions in and about and streets
debouching on Beresford Place occupied by masses of police. Military
confined to barracks and in readiness to turn out. Thousands of people
thronging to the place of meeting. Dublin wild with excitement.

Home Rulers Funk. Leave the people to face the police as they had
advised them to, but take their own miserable carcasses to the seclusion
of a back room.

Miss Maud Gonne, Mr Griffith of the **United Irishman**, Mr Lyons of the
Oliver Bond '98 Club, comrades Stewart and Connolly of the Irish
Socialist Republican Party step into the breach and drive down to
Beresford Place to hold the meeting.

Baton charges by police. Hired driver of brake seized by police, reins
assumed by Connolly who had been moved to the chair by Griffith,
procession organised through the principal streets, two meetings held,
charges by mounted police, unsuccessful, but desperate, efforts of the
mounted police -- to keep their seats, triumphal conclusion of the
procession, arrest of Connolly.

Fake meeting held by Home Rulers. Audience composed of five reporters
and two ladies.

At the close of the meeting W. Redmond MP gets himself interviewed (?)
and declares:

> I have never seen anything like the enthusiasm manifested when I (I,
> I, Willie Redmond, to wit) stept out of the rooms of the Celtic
> Literary Society.

Saith Pat O'Brien: "*We* have demonstrated to England that she cannot go
to war unless she has first conciliated Ireland."

Quoth the man in the street: "Rats."

December 18. -- Connolly fined £2, or one month imprisonment, and to
find bail in the sum of £10 or go to prison for another month.

Fine paid, and security for bail found.

Socialist Republican meeting prohibited, the attempt at holding meeting
frustrated by hundreds of policemen, vicious police charges upon the
people.

Police raid on Socialist premises. One Red Flag, one Green Flag, two
Boer Flags, and the Historic Black Flag which led the anti-Jubilee
procession of 1897 captured by the police.

Several members maltreated. After a gallant struggle six stalwart
policemen succeed in throwing one small boy, brother of one of the
members, downstairs. Said policemen to be mentioned in despatches for
"distinguished conduct".

After the retirement of the police meeting held in Socialist club-room,
comrade Stewart in the chair. A resolution denouncing the Dublin
Corporation, and protesting against the ruffianly conduct of the police,
was put to the meeting, spoken to by Messrs Griffith and Quinn of the
Transvaal Committee, and carried.

Chamberlain in his speech at Trinity apparently loses heart, for,
instead of the expected war-whoop, he winds up by asking those present
to believe "he was not so black as he was painted".

A "Reconnaissance in force" of the Trinity College loyalists checked by
an old woman in Dawson Street, and finally repulsed by a flying column
of Catholic University boys. Loyalists retreat in two divisions, one
towards Trinity, the other towards Mercer's Hospital -- for surgical
treatment.

**Workers' Republic** suspended for one week owing to disorganisation
caused by above events.

December 19. -- All quiet on the Potomac.

#### Moral

Although a body aiming primarily at economic change, at Social
Revolution, yet wherever a blow is to be struck for freedom -- national
or social, political or economic -- there you will find the Socialist
Republicans, ready and willing to fight.

Our warfare against the domestic exploiter does not diminish our hatred
of the foreign tyrant.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
