---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (9 December 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 9 December 1899.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.18.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### A Close Season

During the Boer war the English Jingo press will observe a close season
for the sport of making game of the German Emperor.

He is a great man, is the Kaiser. When Dr Jameson raided the Transvaal,
and Kruger defeated his little game, the Kaiser sent a telegram of
congratulation to Paul. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} Then all the Jingo press of
England went for the "mad Emperor," and called him all the pet (?) names
they could think of.

There was peace at that time. But now there is war, and as the mad
Emperor, if he chose to take a hand in the game, could successfully
humiliate the British Lion, that animal is now down kissing the ground
at his feet, and all the Jingo crowd who a few months ago were howling
for his blood are now prowling around on the hunt for his photograph.

His photograph. Yes, for he wouldn't condescend to gratify them with a
look at his imperial person.

Now observe, ye workers, that this crowd of swashbucklers are our
masters. And if you have any contempt for the crowd who spit upon a man
one day, and crawl for a smile from him the next, what sort of feeling
must you have for yourselves, who are lorded over by such a pitiful
crew?

And don't make the mistake of lauding the Kaiser, either, as our
so-called nationalist journals do.

He has always proven himself to be a most determined enemy of the
working class, and longs for the day when he may drown in blood their
hopes for freedom.

He, only the other day, introduced to his Parliament a bill which would
have made it a penal offence to ask a workman to go on strike, had it
not been defeated by the determined opposition of the Social Democrats.

He is continually rallying all the conservative classes in Germany
against the demands of the workers, and striving by his speeches to his
soldiery to familiarise them with the idea of firing upon their own
countrymen.

He is your enemy, as the English governing class is your enemy, as the
Irish propertied class is your enemy, as all the classes who live upon
your labour in all the nations of the world are your enemy.

And the same law of self-preservation which makes the propertied classes
stand together throughout the world, ought also to make you realise the
necessity of studying the position and prospects of the revolutionary
working class opposed to those classes.

That is part of the aim and purpose of this paper. To present to our
readers a brief resume of the important advances made by the Socialist
forces along the lines of the Class War.

You meet this Class War everywhere, but do not always recognise it. It
is our duty to label its every manifestation, in order that you may
recognise it.

This you have been told by most of your public speakers on the Transvaal
War, that it is a capitalist's war. So it is. It is one manifestation of
the Class War.

So is the war in the Philippines. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} So are all modern
wars; all manifestations of the struggle of Capital to enlarge its
domain of exploitation.

And in like manner all efforts to beat back those forces of capitalism
are of a kin to the efforts of the working class to rid themselves of
the burden of capitalism.

In fact the capitalist has so far extended his powers that every
political movement of the present bears a direct relation to the class
war, and desires to be keenly watched for that very reason.

The effort of the British Governing Class to impose its rule upon the
Transvaal is simply an exemplification of capitalism fully grown and
developed; the efforts of the Irish master class to retain its hold upon
public power in our corporations and other boards is an exemplification
of the same unclean animal's attitude when too weak to dare show all its
teeth.

As soon as the Irish master class attains the strength of its British
brother it will develop all his brutal traits; at present it can only
exercise his sneaking proclivities.

The English master class bullied the Boer, and grovelled before the
Emperor; the Irish master class in Ireland denounces the Englishman, and
in England grovels before every English politician who winks his eye in
the direction of Home Rule.

#### Brothers both

Spailpín

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} At the end of 1895 L. Storr Jameson, an official of the
British South Africa Company, led an unsuccessful armed assault against
the Boer government of the Transvaal, led by Paulus Kruger. Kruger also
led the Boers in the war with Britain that had broken out in October
1899.

[2.](#f2){#n2} Having taken the Philippines from Spain in the war of
1898, the United States were now attempting to suppress a guerrilla
movement for independence.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 6.7.2004
