---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Our Mad Rulers

### (30 December 1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 30 December 1899.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh for **Red Banner**, No.20.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is said that those whom the gods wish to destroy they first drive
mad. To judge by the events accompanying the visit of the Colonial
Secretary to Dublin [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} we might conclude that the
governing classes of these countries have indeed come under this
sentence of the gods. For, except as the acts of madmen, the conduct of
the authorities of the city of Dublin during that visit is entirely
inexplicable to the ordinary mind. The visit of Mr Chamberlain was, of
course, primarily intended as a political demonstration having for its
purpose to annul the effect which the anti-war demonstrations in Ireland
might have had upon the mind of the world. To the Irish people,
certainly, the idea of regarding Trinity as a focus of national thought
would seem in the last degree preposterous, but the information on Irish
affairs possessed by other nations is not so precise as to preclude the
possibility of an honour conferred by a university in our capital city
being confounded with a welcome by the city itself.

That there was such a danger, we believe; that the holding of two large,
but possibly unreported, meetings of protest would not completely
obviate the danger we also believe; that such a danger was averted, and
due emphasis given to the fact that the people of Dublin are not willing
slaves to the British governing class, or pliant accomplices in the
infamies of the pirate Empire, we owe to the madness which seized upon
our rulers and led them to suppress the right of public meeting in
Dublin, and let loose their uniformed bullies upon a defenceless people.

At a time when the British flag has been stricken down in Africa, when
its drilled and disciplined soldiery are flying before the conquering
hosts of a nation of farmers, when its ablest generals are foiled in
strategy by men they had affected to despise, when all over the world
the enemies of the British Empire are speculating as to the weakest
point at which it may be attacked, then, in her hour of greatest danger,
the powers that be in Ireland hasten to show to the world that here,
within a few hours sail of the shores of England, is a nation bitterly
hostile to her rule, and only kept down by superior force.

This, we repeat, was the act of madmen. It accentuated the weakness of
England and the hypocrisy of her rulers. When the same men who go to war
on the pretext of securing political freedom for the populations of
other states ruthlessly suppress the most elementary rights of
citizenship in a country under their own rule, the last shred of
justification for their war policy is torn to atoms, and the war itself
stands revealed in its proper colours as a criminal aggression upon a
free people. So much has the government performed, so much let the
people note. All the elaborate machinery of the British Constitution,
all its pretended political freedom and rights of citizenship, are ever
at the mercy of the governing class of England, who, with the force of
the military and the police at their backs, respect nothing -- except
force. It is an awkward lesson to teach the Irish working class today.
The Irish working class, we say, because in every popular tumult of late
years the propertied class have, by their silence, acquiesced beforehand
in the actions of the government.

When the government proceeds to stifle political freedom let it consider
well its action and what may result therefrom. There are at present but
few soldiers in Ireland; the militia and the last of the reserves are
about to be called out and sent to the front. Now, if those Irish
working men were of a reflective turn of mind, and were to consider that
the British soldiers are not nearly such good shots as the Boers, that
therefore there is not nearly so much danger of death in fighting the
British Army as in fighting the Boer Army and finally were they to come
to the conclusion that it would be a safer, more judicious, and
altogether more honourable course to stay in Ireland and fight their
tyrants at home instead of risking life and losing honour by fighting
for their tyrants abroad, and were they to be encouraged in their
resolve by observing from the proceedings which accompanied Mr
Chamberlain's visit that peaceful means of agitation have no effect; if,
we repeat, those Irish working men were to follow that chain of
reasoning then that force which tyrants do heed -- the last resort of
people as well as kings -- might suddenly appear in Ireland.

And who knows?

 

### Note

[1.](#f1){#n1} Joseph Chamberlain visited the city on 17-18 December to
accept an honorary degree from Trinity College. Police baton-charged
protestors against the Boer war, arrested Connolly, and smashed **The
Workers' Republic**'s printing press, forcing the paper to miss an
issue.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 27.3.2005
