Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875

# Marx to W. Bracke In Brunswick

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} May 5, 1875;\
[Source:]{.info} Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three, p. 11 - 12;\
[Publisher:]{.info} Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970;\
[First Published:]{.info} *Die Neue Zeit*, Bd. 1, No. 18, 1890-91;\
[Online Version:]{.info} marxists.org 1999;\
[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} [Brian
Baggins](../../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm#emeritus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, 5 May 1875

Dear Bracke,

When you have read the following critical marginal notes on the Unity
Programme, would you be so good as to send them on to Geib and Auer,
Bebel and Liebknecht for examination. I am exceedingly busy and have to
overstep by far the limit of work allowed me by the doctors. Hence it
was anything but a "pleasure" to write such a lengthy screed. It was,
however, necessary so that the steps to be taken by me later on would
not be misinterpreted by our friends in the Party for whom this
communication is intended.

After the Unity Congress has been held, Engels and I will publish a
short statement to the effect that our position is altogether remote
from the said programme of principle and that we have nothing to do with
it.

[]{#1b}

This is indispensable because the opinion -- the entirely erroneous
opinion -- is held abroad and assiduously nurtured by enemies of the
Party that we secretly guide from here the movement of the so-called
[Eisenach Party](../../../../../glossary/orgs/g/e.htm#gsdwp). In a
Russian book [\[*Statism and Anarchy*\]]{.inote} that has recently
appeared, Bakunin still makes me responsible, for example, not only for
all the programmes, etc., of that party but even for every step taken by
Liebknecht from the day of his cooperation with the [People\'s
Party](../../../../../glossary/orgs/p/e.htm#peoples-party).

Apart from this, it is my duty not to give recognition, even by
diplomatic silence, to what in my opinion is a thoroughly objectionable
programme that demoralises the Party.

*Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen programmes*.
If, therefore, it was not possible -- and the conditions of the item did
not permit it -- to go *beyond* the Eisenach programme, one should
simply have concluded an agreement for action against the common enemy.
But by drawing up a programme of principles (instead of postponing this
until it has been prepared for by a considerable period of common
activity) one sets up before the whole world landmarks by which it
measures the level of the Party movement.

The Lassallean leaders came because circumstances forced them to. If
they had been told in advance that there would be haggling about
principles, they would *have had* to be content with a programme of
action or a plan of organisation for common action. Instead of this, one
permits them to arrive armed with mandates, recognises these mandates on
one\'s part as binding, and thus surrenders unconditionally to those who
are themselves in need of help. To crown the whole business, they are
holding a congress *before the Congress of Compromise*, while one\'s own
party is holding its congress *post festum*. One had obviously had a
desire to stifle all criticism and to give one\'s own party no
opportunity for reflection. One knows that the mere fact of unification
is satisfying to the workers, but it is a mistake to believe that this
momentary success is not bought too dearly.

For the rest, the programme is no good, even apart from its
sanctification of the Lassallean articles of faith.

I shall be sending you in the near future the last parts of the French
edition of *Capital*. The printing was held up for a considerable time
by a ban of the French Government. The thing will be ready this week or
the beginning of next week. Have you received the previous six parts?
Please let me have the address of Bernhard Becker, to whom I must also
send the final parts.

The bookshop of the
[Volksstaat](../../../../../glossary/periodicals/v/o.htm#volksstaat) has
peculiar ways of doing things. Up to this moment, for example, I have
not been sent a single copy of the *Cologne Communist Trial*.

With best regards,

Yours,

Karl Marx

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](../../1875/gotha/index.htm)\
[1873 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
