Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875

# Engels to August Bebel In Zwickau

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} London, March 18-28, 1875;\
[First Published:]{.info} A. Bebel, *Aus meinem Leben*, Part 2,
Stuttgart, 1911;\
[Translated:]{.info} Peter and Betty Ross;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} Zodiac;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} [S.
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) and [B.
Baggins](../../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm#emeritus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, March 18-28, 1875

Dear Bebel,

I have received your letter of February 23 and am glad to hear that you
are in such good bodily health.

You ask me what we think of the unification affair. We are,
unfortunately, in exactly the same boat as yourself. Neither Liebknecht
nor anyone else has let us have any kind of information, and hence we
too know only what is in the papers --- not that there was anything in
them until a week or so ago, when the draft programme appeared. That
astonished us not a little, I must say.

Our party had so often held out a conciliatory hand to the Lassalleans,
or at least proffered co-operation, only to be rebuffed so often and so
contemptuously by the Hasenclevers, Hasselmanns and Tolckes as to lead
any child to the conclusion that, should these gentlemen now come and
themselves proffer conciliation, they must be in a hell of a dilemma.
Knowing full well what these people are like, however, it behoves us to
make the most of that dilemma and insist on every conceivable guarantee
that might prevent these people from restoring, at our party's expense,
their shattered reputation in general working-class opinion. They should
be given an exceedingly cool and cautious reception, and union be made
dependent on the degree of their readiness to abandon their sectarian
slogans and their state aid, ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ and to accept in its
essentials the Eisenach Programme of 1869 ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ or an improved
edition of it adapted to the present day. Our party has *absolutely
nothing to learn* from the Lassalleans in the theoretical sphere, i.e.
the crux of the matter where the programme is concerned, but the
Lassalleans doubtless have something to learn from the party; the first
prerequisite for union was that they cease to be sectarians,
Lassalleans, i.e. that, first and foremost, they should, if not wholly
relinquish the universal panacea of state aid, at least admit it to be a
secondary provisional measure alongside and amongst many others
recognised as possible. The draft programme shows that our people, while
infinitely superior to the Lassallean leaders in matters of theory, are
far from being a match for them where political guile is concerned; once
again the "honest men" ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ have been cruelly done in the eye
by the dishonest.

To begin with, they adopt the high-sounding but historically false
Lassallean dictum: in relation to the working class all other classes
are only one reactionary mass. This proposition is true only in certain
exceptional instances, for example in the case of a revolution by the
proletariat, e.g. the Commune, or in a country in which not only has the
bourgeoisie constructed state and society after its own image but the
democratic petty bourgeoisie, in its wake, has already carried that
reconstruction to its logical conclusion. If, for instance, in Germany,
the democratic petty bourgeoisie were part of this reactionary mass,
then how could the Social-Democratic Workers' Party have gone hand in
hand with it, with the People's Party, ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ for years on end?
How could the *Volksstaat* derive virtually all its political content
from the petty-bourgeois democratic *Frankfurter Zeitung*? And how can
one explain the adoption in this same programme of no less than seven
demands that coincide exactly and word for word with the programme of
the People's Party and of petty-bourgeois democracy? I mean the seven
political demands, 1 to 5 and 1 to 2, of which there is not one that is
not bourgeois-democratic. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

Secondly, the principle that the workers' movement is an international
one is, to all intents and purposes, utterly denied in respect of the
present, and this by men who, for the space of five years and under the
most difficult conditions, upheld that principle in the most laudable
manner. The German workers' position in the van of the European movement
rests *essentially* on their genuinely international attitude during the
war ^[\[7\]](#n7)^; no other proletariat would have behaved so well. And
now this principle is to be denied by them at a moment when, everywhere
abroad, workers are stressing it all the more by reason of the efforts
made by governments to suppress every attempt at its practical
application in an organisation! And what is left of the internationalism
of the workers' movement? The dim prospect --- not even of subsequent
co-operation among European workers with a view to their liberation ---
nay, but of a future "international brotherhood of peoples" --- of your
Peace League bourgeois "United States of Europe\"! ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

There was, of course, no need whatever to mention the International as
such. But at the very least there should have been no going back on the
programme of 1869, and some sort of statement to the effect that,
*though first of all* the German workers' party is acting within the
limits set by its political frontiers (it has no right to speak in the
name of the European proletariat, especially when what it says is
wrong), it is nevertheless conscious of its solidarity with the workers
of all other countries and will, as before, always be ready to meet the
obligations that solidarity entails. Such obligations, even if one does
not definitely proclaim or regard oneself as part of the
"International," consist for example in aid, abstention from
blacklegging during strikes, making sure that the party organs keep
German workers informed of the movement abroad, agitation against
impending or incipient dynastic wars and, during such wars, an attitude
such as was exemplarily maintained in 1870 and 1871, etc.

Thirdly, our people have allowed themselves to be saddled with the
Lassallean "iron law of wages" which is based on a completely outmoded
economic view, namely that on average the workers receive only the
minimum wage because, according to the Malthusian theory of population,
there are always too many workers (such was Lassalle's reasoning). Now
in *Capital* Marx has amply demonstrated that the laws governing wages
are very complex, that, according to circumstances, now this law, now
that, holds sway, that they are therefore by no means iron but are, on
the contrary, exceedingly elastic, and that the subject really cannot be
dismissed in a few words, as Lassalle imagined. Malthus' argument, upon
which the law Lassalle derived from him and Ricardo (whom he
misinterpreted) is based, as that argument appears, for instance, on p.
5 of the *Arbeiterlesebuch*, where it is quoted from another pamphlet of
Lassalle's, ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ is exhaustively refuted by Marx in the
section on "Accumulation of Capital." Thus, by adopting the Lassallean
"iron law" one commits oneself to a false proposition and false
reasoning in support of the same.

Fourthly, as its *one and only social* demand, the programme puts
forward --- Lassallean state aid in its starkest form, as stolen by
Lassalle from Buchez. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ And this, after Bracke has so
ably demonstrated the sheer futility of that demand; after almost all if
not all, of our party speakers have, in their struggle against the
Lassalleans, been compelled to make a stand against this "state aid\"!
Our party could hardly demean itself further. Internationalism sunk to
the level of Amand Goegg, socialism to that of the bourgeois republican
Buchez, who *confronted the socialists* with this demand in order to
supplant them!

But "state aid" in the Lassallean sense of the word is, after all, at
most only *one* measure among many others for the attainment of an end
here lamely described as "paving the way for the solution of the social
question," as though in our case there were still a social *question*
that remained *unsolved* in theory! Thus, if you were to say: The German
workers' party strives to abolish wage labour and hence class
distinctions by introducing co-operative production into industry and
agriculture, and on a national scale; it is in favour of any measure
calculated to attain that end! --- then no Lassallean could possibly
object.

[Fifthly]{#unions}, there is absolutely no mention of the organisation
of the working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And
that is a point of the utmost importance, this being the proletariat's
true class organisation in which it fights its daily battles with
capital, in which it trains itself and which nowadays can no longer
simply be smashed, even with reaction at its worst (as presently in
Paris). Considering the importance this organisation is likewise
assuming in Germany, it would in our view be indispensable to accord it
some mention in the programme and, possibly, to leave some room for it
in the organisation of the party.

All these things have been done by our people to oblige the Lassalleans.
And what have the others conceded? That a host of somewhat muddled and
*purely democratic demands* should figure in the programme, some of them
being of a purely fashionable nature --- for instance "legislation by
the people" such as exists in Switzerland and does more harm than good,
if it can be said to do anything at all. *Administration* by the people
--- that would at least be something. Similarly omitted is the first
prerequisite of all liberty --- that all officials be responsible for
all their official actions to every citizen before the ordinary courts
and in accordance with common law. That demands such as freedom of
science and freedom of conscience figure in every liberal bourgeois
programme and seem a trifle out of place here is something I shall not
enlarge upon.

[]{#staterev}

The free people's state is transformed into the free state.
Grammatically speaking, a free state is one in which the state is free
vis-à-vis its citizens, a state, that is, with a despotic government.
All the palaver about the state ought to be dropped, especially after
the Commune, which had ceased to be a state in the true sense of the
term. The *people's state* has been flung in our teeth *ad nauseam* by
the anarchists, although Marx's anti-Proudhon piece and after it the
*Communist Manifesto* declare outright that, with the introduction of
the socialist order of society, the state will dissolve of itself and
disappear. Now, since the state is merely a transitional institution of
which use is made in the struggle, in the revolution, to keep down one's
enemies by force, it is utter nonsense to speak of a free people's
state; so long as the proletariat still *makes use* of the state, it
makes use of it, not for the purpose of freedom, but of keeping down its
enemies and, as soon as there can be any question of freedom, the state
as such ceases to exist. We would therefore suggest that *Gemeinwesen*
\[\"commonalty\"\] be universally substituted for *state;* it is a good
old German word that can very well do service for the French "Commune."

\"The elimination of all social and political inequality," rather than
"the abolition of all class distinctions," is similarly a most dubious
expression. As between one country, one province and even one place and
another, living conditions will always evince a *certain* inequality
which may be reduced to a minimum but never wholly eliminated. The
living conditions of Alpine dwellers will always be different from those
of the plainsmen. The concept of a socialist society as a realm of
*equality is* a one-sided French concept deriving from the old "liberty,
equality, fraternity," a concept which was justified in that, in its own
time and place, it signified a *phase of development*, but which, like
all the one-sided ideas of earlier socialist schools, ought now to be
superseded, since they produce nothing but mental confusion, and more
accurate ways of presenting the matter have been discovered.

I shall desist, although almost every word in this programme, a
programme which is, moreover, insipidly written, lays itself open to
criticism. It is such that, should it be adopted, Marx and I could
*never* recognise a *new* party set up on that basis and shall have to
consider most seriously what attitude --- public as well as private ---
we should adopt towards it. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ Remember that abroad *we*
are held responsible for any and every statement and action of the
German Social-Democratic Workers' Party. E.g. by Bakunin in his work
*Statehood and Anarchy*, in which we are made to answer for every
injudicious word spoken or written by Liebknecht since the inception of
the *Demokratisches Wochenblatt.* People imagine that we run the whole
show from here, whereas you know as well as I do that we have hardly
ever interfered in the least with internal party affairs, and then only
in an attempt to make good, as far as possible, what we considered to
have been blunders --- and *only theoretical* blunders at that. But, as
you yourself will realise, this programme marks a turning-point which
may very well force us to renounce any kind of responsibility in regard
to the party that adopts it.

Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official programme
of a party than to what it does. But a *new* programme is after all a
banner planted in public, and the outside world judges the party by it.
Hence, whatever happens there should be no going-back, as there is here,
on the Eisenach programme. It should further be considered what the
workers of other countries will think of this programme; what impression
will be created by this genuflection on the part of the entire German
socialist proletariat before Lassalleanism.

I am, moreover, convinced that a union on *this* basis would not last a
year. Are the best minds of our party to descend to repeating,
parrot-fashion, Lassallean maxims concerning the iron law of wages and
state aid? I'd like to see you, for one, thus employed! And were they to
do so, their audiences would hiss them off the stage. And I feel sure
that it is precisely on *these* bits of the programme that the
Lassalleans are insisting, like Shylock the Jew on his pound of flesh.
The split will come; but we shall have "made honest men" again of
Hasselmann, Hasenclever and Tolcke and Co.; we shall emerge from the
split weaker and the Lassalleans stronger; our party will have lost its
political virginity and will never again be able to come out
whole-heartedly against the Lassallean maxims which for a time it
inscribed on its own banner; and then, should the Lassalleans again
declare themselves to be the sole and most genuine workers' party and
our people to be bourgeois, the programme would be there to prove it.
All the socialist measures in it are *theirs*, and *our* party has
introduced nothing save the demands of that petty-bourgeois democracy
which it has *itself* described in that same programme as part of the
"reactionary mass\"!

I had held this letter back in view of the fact that you would only be
released on April 1, in honour of Bismarck's birthday, ^[\[12\]](#n12)^
not wanting to expose it to the risk of interception in the course of an
attempt to smuggle it in. Well, I have just had a letter from Bracke,
who has also felt grave doubts about the programme and asks for our
opinion. I shall therefore send this letter to him for forwarding, so
that he can read it without my having to write the whole thing over
again. I have, by the way, also spoken my mind to Ramm; to Liebknecht I
wrote but briefly. I cannot forgive his not having told us a *single
word* about the whole business (whereas Ramm and others believed he had
given us exact information) until it was, in a manner of speaking, too
late. True, this has always been his wont --- hence the large amount of
disagreeable correspondence which we, both Marx and myself, have had
with him, but this time it really is too bad, and *we definitely shan't
act in concert with him.*

Do see that you manage to come here in the summer; you would, of course,
stay with me and, if the weather is fine, we might spend a day or two
taking sea baths, which would really do you good after your long spell
in jail.

Ever your friend,

F. E.

Marx has just moved house. He is living at 41 Maitland Park Crescent, NW
London.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[]{#n1}**1.** Engels' letter to August Bebel written between March 18
and 28, 1875 is closely connected with Marx's *Critique of the Gotha
Programme* and is traditionally published together with the latter work.
It conveyed the joint opinion of Marx and Engels concerning the fusion
of two German workers' parties, the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans,
scheduled for early 1875. The immediate reason for the letter was the
publication of the draft programme of the future united
Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany *(Programm der deutschen
Arbeiterpartei)* in *Der Volksstaat* (the organ of the Eisenachers) and
the *Neuer Social-Demokrat* (the organ of the Lassalleans) on March 7,
1875. The draft programme was approved with slight changes by the unity
congress at Gotha on May 22-27, 1875, and came to be known as the Gotha
Programme.

This letter was first published by Bebel, after the lapse of 36 years,
in his *Aus meinem Leben*, Zweiter Teil, Stuttgart, 1911. In the present
edition the letter is printed according to this book.

It was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, *Critique of
the Gotha Programme*, Lawrence, London \[1933\], pp. 51-62.

[]{#n2}**2.** A reference to one of Lassalle's programme theses on the
establishment of workers' producer associations with the aid of the
state. Lassalle and his followers repeatedly emphasised that what they
had in mind was a state in which power would pass into the hands of the
working people through universal suffrage.

[]{#n3}**3.** Engels is referring to the *Programm und Statuten der
sozial-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei*, adopted at the general German
workers' congress in Eisenach in August 1869 and published in the
*Demokratisches Wochenblatt* on August 14, 1869. The congress founded
the Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany. By and large the
programme complied with the principles of the International Working
Men's Association.

[]{#n4}**4.** The *\"honest men" ---* nickname of the members of the
Social-Democratic Workers' Party (the Eisenachers), as distinct from the
members of the General Association of German Workers (the Lassalleans),
the "dishonest men."

[]{#n5}**5.** The *German People's Party*, established in September
1868, embraced the democratic section of the bourgeoisie, mostly in the
South-German states. The party opposed the establishment of Prussian
hegemony in Germany and advocated the idea of a federative German state.

[]{#n6}**6.** A reference to the following articles of the draft Gotha
Programme:

\"The German workers' party demands as the free basis of the state:

\"1. Universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for all males
who have reached the age of 21, for all elections in the state and in
the community. 2. Direct legislation by the people with the right to
initiate and to reject bills. 3. Universal military training. A people's
militia in place of the standing army. Decisions regarding war and peace
to be taken by a representative assembly of the people. 4. Abolition of
all exceptional laws, in particular the laws on the press, associations
and assembly. 5. Jurisdiction by the people. Administration of justice
without fees.

\"The German workers' party demands as the intellectual and moral basis
of the state:

\"1. Universal and equal education of the people by the state.
Compulsory school attendance. Free instruction. 2. Freedom of science.
Freedom of conscience.\"

[]{#n7}**7.** The reference is to the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71.

[]{#n8}**8.** The *League of Peace and Freedom* --- A pacifist
organisation set up in Switzerland in 1867 with the active participation
of Victor Hugo, Giuseppe Garibaldi and other democrats. The League
asserted that it was possible to prevent wars by creating the "United
States of Europe." Its leaders did not disclose the social sources of
wars and often confined anti-militarist activity to mere declarations.
At the General Council meeting of August 13, 1867 Marx spoke against the
International's official participation in the League's Inaugural
Congress, since this would have meant solidarity with its bourgeois
programme, but recommended that some members of the International should
attend the Congress in their personal capacity in order to support
revolutionary-democratic decisions (see Marx's letter to Engels of
September 4, 1867).

[]{#n9}**9.** On page 5 of his *Arbeiterlesebuch* Lassalle quotes a
passage about the "iron law of wages" from his pamphlet *Offnes
Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comite zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen
Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig*, Zurich, 1863, pp. 15-16.

[]{#n10}**10.** Philippe Joseph Buchez, one of the first ideologists of
the so-called Christian socialism, advanced a plan for the establishment
of workers' producer associations with the aid of the state.

[]{#n11}**11.** On October 12, 1875 Engels wrote to Bebel concerning
this programme that, since both workers and their political opponents
"interpreted it communistically," "*it is this circumstance alone* which
has made it possible for Marx and myself not to disassociate ourselves
publicly from a programme such as this. So long as our opponents as well
as the workers continue to read our views into that programme, we are
justified in saying nothing about it."

[]{#n12}**12.** In March 1872 August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht were
sentenced to two years' confinement in a fortress for their adhesion to
the International Working Men's Association and their socialist views.
In April Bebel was sentenced, in addition, to nine months' imprisonment
and deprived of his mandate as a Reichstag member for "insulting His
Majesty." Liebknecht was released on April 15, 1874, while Bebel was
freed on April 1, 1875.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](../../1875/gotha/index.htm)\
[1875 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/date/index.htm) \| [Marx/Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)
