---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1906

### Materialism Yet Again

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 415-20. Scanned and
prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article was Plekhanov's reply to Conrad
Schmidt's "Was ist Materialismus?" ("What Is Materialism?") which
appeared in *Neue Zeit* in February 1899. The editorial board decided to
finish the polemic with this article, offering Schmidt the final say. In
this connection, Plekhanov asked Wilhelm Liebknecht to publish his reply
to Schmidt in the newspaper *Vorwärts!*. However, the *Vorwärts!*
editorial board also thought it better to refrain from criticising
Schmidt's "philosophical heresy," and forwarded the manuscript to the
journal *Sozialistische Monatshefte*. In 1906 the article was published
in Russian, in the collection of Plekhanov's works entitled *A Critique
of Our Critics*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

'll faut qu\'un professeur parle, parle, parle non pas pour dire quelque
chose, mais pour ne pas rester muet', ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ Proudhon has
written somewhere. Herr Doktor Conrad Schmidt firmly follows this rule,
though, to the best of my knowledge, he was merely a Dozent,
^[\[2\]](#n2)^ not a Professor, for a number of years. In a note
published in issue no 22 of *Neue Zeit* under the title of 'Was ist
Materialismus?' he asks me a question I have already replied to in my
article 'Materialism or Kantianism'. Being utterly loth to waste words
on the matter, I at first felt reluctant to repeat what I had already
stated in no uncertain terms. Some of my friends, however, drew my
attention to a footnote appended by the editorial board of *Neue Zeit*
to Conrad Schmidt's note, declaring that his concluding remarks 'raised
some new and important questions', and that their opinion might well be
shared by some readers. After some lengthy hesitation, I have therefore
decided again to reply to the 'new and important questions' raised by
Herr Doktor Conrad Schmidt.

My opponent says that I should ask myself whether such writers as La
Mettrie, Holbach, Diderot and Helvétius could be considered genuine
materialists. The Herr Doktor does not regard them as such, numbering
them among the *eclectics*. This, it must be admitted, is really
something *new* since until now it has never occurred to anybody to call
eclectic such works as *L*\'*homme machine*, *Le Rève d*\'*Alembert*
and, finally, *Système de la Nature*, the latter book being 'often
called the code or Bible of materialism', according to FA Lange's very
just remark. ^[\[3\]](#n3)^

Even if this view of the Herr Doktor is 'new', it is of not the least
'importance' because it lacks any serious foundation. The only reason
for his advancing it is his feeling that he is in a very awkward
situation.

If Herr Schmidt now assures us that La Mettrie and Holbach were not
materialists, it is for the sole reason that these two philosophers'
doctrine does not fit into the concept of materialism he has arrived at
*from hearsay*.

I say *from hearsay* because he does not seem to have gone to the
trouble of studying the works of writers he has passed such surprising
judgement on.

Indeed, why does Herr Schmidt consider the French eighteenth-century
materialists eclectics? It is because they were under the influence of
English philosophy in general, and of Locke in particular. In the first
place, however, the latter's influence is quite imperceptible in La
Mettrie's doctrine, which derived wholly and directly from the
materialist half of *Descartes*'s doctrine. In the second place, the
very nature of Locke's sensualism, far from precluding the materialist
conclusions drawn from it by Holbach and the 'Holbachians', simply
suggested those conclusions. Herr Schmidt calls Locke a *phenomenalist*.
Why? Can it be on the basis of his well-known 'essay' on the primary and
secondary qualities of things surrounding us? But this is a distinction
we can find as far back as in the *materialist* Democritus, as Herr
Schmidt can discover with ease, for instance, from Zeller, the
well-known historian of Greek philosophy. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ With the
materialist Thomas Hobbes, this distinction already played a very
important part, as Schmidt will clearly see from paragraph four in
Chapter 2 of his *On Human Nature*, or at least from *Geschichte des
Materialismus* by Lange, who is quite right in saying that according to
Hobbes, ' all the so-called sensual qualities, as such, do not belong to
things but arise in us ourselves'. True, Lange here ascribes to Hobbes
the seemingly 'purely materialist' thought that 'human sensations are
nothing more than movements of parts of the body caused by the external
movement of things'. That is not quite the case. The radical question
asked by Hobbes as far back as 1631 - 'What kind of movements can give
rise to sensations and the operation of the imagination in living
creatures?' - clearly shows that, *with Hobbes*, *sensation was not
movement*, *but an inner condition of a body in motion*. That is exactly
what we find in La Mettrie and Holbach; the latter translated into
French Hobbes' work mentioned above, on human nature. But perhaps Hobbes
too was an '*eclectic*\'? If that was so, I would like to learn who it
is that Herr Schmidt would consider a genuine and honest materialist. I
am very much afraid that the bill would be met only by Karl Vogt and his
fellow-thinkers, and also perhaps (and even then by stretching a point)
several representatives of the materialism of *antiquity*.

At all events, there can be no doubt that the *materialism of Marx and
Engels*, which has come in for '*criticism*' from Herr Schmidt, in no
way fits into the definition of materialism as given by that gentleman.

Marx says that 'the ideal is nothing else than the material world
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought'.
^[\[5\]](#n5)^ It is on such grounds that Herr Schmidt has numbered Marx
among those who think that man's spiritual nature can be explained only
by material qualities, only by 'matter and force'. This alone goes to
show how poorly the worthy Doctor has understood Marx. If I *translate*
(*übersetze*) something from Russian into French, for instance, does my
action signify that the language of Voltaire cannot be explained only
through the qualities of the language of Pushkin, and that, in general,
the latter is more '*real*' than the former? Not at all. It signifies
that there exist *two languages*, each with its own specific structure,
and that if I ignore the grammar of French I shall produce, not a
translation but simply a piece of confused jumble, neither
understandable nor readable. If, in Marx's words, the ideal is nothing
else than the material translated and transformed in the human mind,
then it is clear that, according to the same opinion, the 'material' is
not *identical* with the 'ideal', because, conversely, there would be no
need to transform and translate it. That is why there are absolutely no
grounds for the absurd *identicalness* which Schmidt is attempting to
impose upon Marx.

But if a given French sentence does not resemble the Russian sentence it
has been translated from, it does not follow therefrom that the
*meaning* of the former should differ from that of the latter. On the
contrary, given that the translation is a good one, *the meaning will be
one and the same* in both sentences, despite all dissimilarities.

In exactly the same way, while the 'ideal' that exists in my mind does
not resemble the 'material' it has been '*translated*' from, it does
have *the same meaning*, if the translation is a good one. *Experience*
is the yardstick of the correctness of the translation. If the meaning
of the 'ideal' in my mind did not correspond to the actual qualities of
the 'material', that is, the things external to and independent of my
mind, those things would teach me a more or less bitter lesson the very
first time I came up against them, a lesson that would more or less
rapidly remove the discrepancy between the ideal and the material, if
only, of course, I did not perish as a consequence of that discrepancy.
It is in that sense (and only in that sense) that one can and should
speak of the *identity* (*Identität*) of the ideal with the material;
the weapon of Schmidt's 'criticism' is quite powerless against that
identity.

Our doctor *irrefragabilis* reproaches me with my *eclecticism*; after
what has been said above, it will be seen that I am in excellent company
in being counted among the eclectics. That is why Herr Schmidt's rebuke
of me affects me not at all. However, we would be well advised to make a
closer examination of the arguments used to back it up with:

Because \[says the Herr Doktor\] if the operation of the law of
causality is to be taken *in earnest* in respect of
things-in-themselves, it is clear that in that case the *conditions* in
which alone causality is conceivable, viz, space, time, and matter (or
centres of forces), should be considered conditions *referring* to
things-in-themselves too. Thereby Plekhanov's materialism again turns,
into the old and familiar materialism of philosophical identity.

In the first place, I shall note the following: I said and proved, in my
article 'Materialism or Kantianism', ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ that if we do not
recognise the effect on us (according to the law of causality) of
things-in-themselves, then we of necessity arrive at *subjective
idealism*; if we do recognise that effect, we arrive, with the same
necessity, at *materialism*. Herr Conrad Schmidt does not consider
himself either a subjective idealist or a materialist. How does he deal
with the dilemma I have named? Though he has said nothing on that score,
he seems to do so as follows: he acknowledges that things-in-themselves
affect us, but does not do so 'in earnest'. This is a most artful
device, which shows the degree to which the learned doctor's
philosophical exercises are to be taken 'in earnest'.

As for myself, I do of course take fully 'in earnest' the effect
things-in-themselves have on us, as a result of which we learn some of
their qualities. But what 'old' and familiar materialism does that
admission lead to? That is something nobody knows, because materialism
in general - both the old and the new - has remained unknown to Herr
Schmidt.

To the irrefutable doctor it seems that in recognising that
things-in-themselves affect us, I should think of matter as a condition
that remains relevant in its application to the world of things by
themselves. Let anyone understand that who is able to: that is something
I do not understand, and I suspect that the Herr Doktor does not
understand it either. For my part, however, I shall try to explain in a
few words the notion I associate with the word *matter*.

As opposed to '*spirit*', we call '*matter*' that which, by *affecting
our sense organs*, *gives rise to some sensation in us*. But what is it
that affects our sense organs? To that I reply, together with, Kant:
*things-in-themselves*. Consequently, *matter is nothing but the
totality of things-in-themselves*, *inasmuch as the latter are the
sources of our sensations*.

Since I am fully 'in earnest' in recognising Herr Doktor Schmidt's
existence as something independent of my consciousness, I am obliged to
refer him to the number of those things-in-themselves that comprise the
*external world* about me. The thing-in-itself known as Doctor Schmidt
is able to affect my external senses: it is *matter*, but it is also
capable of writing a poor article on philosophy, so *it is matter that
feels and thinks*. Thus, consciousness is (in lesser or greater measure)
an attribute of the substance that affects my external senses, and which
I call *matter*. That this substance, 'of itself', does not resemble my
*representation* of matter was something known to Thomas Hobbes in his
time, but that does not provide the least grounds for any rejection of
materialism. On the contrary, it would be very strange for sensation and
the representation it brings about to *resemble* the thing that has
caused it and is, of course, *neither sensation nor representation*.
^[\[7\]](#n7)^ Who does not realise that being-in-oneself is not yet
either being-for-oneself or being-for-others?

Herr Schmidt also says that if I accept 'in earnest' the *effect* that
things-in-themselves have on me, I must also accept that time and space
are conditions (perhaps he wishes to say: definitions?) that are no less
and no more valid in respect of things-in-themselves.

He might say that if I accept 'in earnest' that things-in-themselves
exist, I must assume that they *exist in time and in space*. Before
engaging in any explanation of the matter, I would ask the reader to
note the following.

Since the assumption seems impossible to Herr Schmidt, it remains for
him only to deny acknowledgement to the existence of things
independently of our consciousness, that is, to adopt the standpoint of
Fichte or Berkeley. What absurdities that leads to we already know.

That space and time are forms of consciousness, and that therefore
*subjectivity* is their primary distinctive feature, was already known
to Thomas Hobbes, and would not be denied by any present-day
materialist. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ The whole question is whether certain forms
or relations of *things* correspond to these forms of consciousness. It
goes without saying that materialists can give only an affirmative
answer to this question, which, of course, does not mean that they
recognise the false (or rather absurd) identity, which the Kantians,
including Herr Schmidt, would impose upon them with obliging naivety.
No, the forms and relations of things-in-themselves cannot be what they
*seem* to us, that is, as they appear to us as 'translated' in our
minds. Our representations of the forms and relations of things are no
more than *hieroglyphics*; the latter designate exactly these forms and
relations, and this is enough for us to be able to study how the
things-in-themselves affect us, and in our turn, to exert an influence
on them. ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ I repeat: if no correct correspondence existed
between objective relations and their subjective representations
('translations') in our minds, *our very existence would become
impossible*.

Anyone who cannot accept the absurdities of subjective idealism must of
necessity recognise the correctness of these considerations. It is
self-understood that by '*anyone*' I mean all those who take philosophy
'in earnest' and do not speak merely out of an academic habit, that is,
so as not to remain dumb.

It will not occur to anyone who will give careful thought to what has
been said above to compare 'in earnest' my views with those of Herbart
or Lotz. However, there may be grounds for the objection that 'my'
*materialism* closely resembles *agnosticism*, for example, that of
Herbert Spencer. To that I shall reply in Engels's words: English
agnosticism is merely a *shamefaced materialism*.

But enough. My views are not clear to Herr Schmidt. Perhaps I *have* set
them forth poorly? But why is it that my opponent refutes them so
deplorably? Is it not because he *understands* them so badly? Is it not
because he has no other idea of materialism than that held by the German
philistines? I think *that* is the reason. If that is so, then the blame
for the misunderstandings that have arisen between us should be laid,
not on me but on that thing-in-itself that goes by the name of the
learned Doctor Conrad Schmidt.

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} 'A professor should speak, speak and yet again speak,
not in order to say something but just to avoid being silent.' - Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} A dozent is an assistant professor - MIA.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} *Geschichte des Materialismus*, Volume 1 (Iserlohn,
1873), p 361.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} See his *Philosophie der Griechen*, Part 1 (third
edition), p 705, note 1.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 29 -
Editor.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} See Georgi Plekhanov, 'Materialism or Kantianism',
*Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 398-414 -
Editor.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} Plekhanov is obviously mistaken here in stating that
sensations and representations do not resemble the things which have
engendered them. Sensations and representations are actually replicas,
images of objects of the real world - Editor.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Plekhanov is making a concession to agnosticism in
maintaining that subjectivity is the primary distinctive property of
space and time. In fact space and time are objectively real forms of the
existence of matter as reflected in human mind - Editor.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} In his exposition of the Marxist theory of reflection
Plekhanov was in error when he spoke of the so-called 'theory of
hieroglyphs', which consists in the assertion that human sensations,
representations and notions are not replicas of objects but merely
signs, hieroglyphs. For criticism of this theory see VI Lenin,
'Materialism and Empirio-Criticism', *Collected Works*, Volume 14
(Moscow), pp 232-38) - Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
