---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Michael Davitt

#### A Text for a Revolutionary Lecture {#a-text-for-a-revolutionary-lecture .cr}

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, August 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, (ed.
Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom), New York 1974.

Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have received at this office a copy of a book entitled the life of
**Michael Davitt, Revolutionary, Agitator, and Labor Leader**, by F.
Sheehy Skeffington. The book is published in London by Fisher Unwin, and
has already evoked a storm of criticism and protests from the various
reviewers of Ireland and England, a fact that will not seem in the least
extraordinary to those of our readers who will take the trouble to dip
into the book itself, as we would strongly advise them to do. For our
part we do not intend to place before our readers any mere formal review
of the production of Mr. Sheehy Skeffington, but rather to utilise the
incident to point the moral which may rightly be drawn from the facts of
that stormy period of Irish history during which Michael Davitt was a
central public figure. On one point of dissent from the author's
appreciation of his hero's qualities will be found centered all the
criticism which we would offer were we to devote space to a more
extended review. The point is this:

In dealing with the incident of the Parnell Commission Mr. Skeffington
says Davitt's conduct "revealed his possession in the highest degree of
great intellectual acuteness, resourcefulness, and knowledge of men."
Our own opinion of Davitt's character as revealed in his whole history
is far other. We conceive of him as an unselfish idealist, who in his
enthusiasm for a cause gave his name and his services freely at the beck
and call of men who despised his ideals and would willingly, but for
their need of him, have hung himself as high as Haman. He abhorred
clerical dictation in politics, yet when the psychological moment
arrived to give it a death blow, when it was grappling to destroy the
one leader who with himself could rally all the democracy of Ireland --
Parnell, Davitt, instead of taking full advantage of the event which
threw Parnell into the democratic ranks and uniting with him against
clerical interference in politics, foolishly threw away his opportunity,
misjudged the whole situation, and fought with all his force and
aggressiveness to establish the priesthood in full control of secular
affairs in Ireland.

He fought and campaigned for the Labor Cause in England, yet for the
sake of harmony in the ranks he also supported and campaigned for a
party -- the Home Rule party -- whose leaders were the bitterest enemies
of the newly enfranchised workers of the Irish cities.

Again and again have the industrial proletariat of Ireland closed in
grapples with the representatives of Irish capitalism, but never was the
voice of Davitt raised in such a fight on behalf of labor. We are
convinced that he was quite as sympathetic to the cause of Labor in
Ireland as in England, but he had surrendered himself into the control
of men who were quite willing to play upon Labor sentiments in England
where such Sentiments might be made a menace to British aristocracy, but
were determined to scotch and oppose such sentiments in Ireland where
they might become a menace to themselves. Thus in his later days Davitt
became the idol of the revolutionary English democracy, and disliked and
distrusted by the revolutionary working class democracy of Ireland. A
poor ending for such a career, and solely due to the fact that he did
not possess that knowledge of men of which his biographer gives him
credit. Honest himself he believed implicitly in the honesty of others,
and became the tool of political crooks and social reactionaries.

But it is as the Father of the Land League that Davitt will live in
history, and not in the light of the failure of his later career; and it
is with that phase of his activity we wish to deal today. We believe
profoundly that a close study of the events of that time would immensely
benefit the militant Socialists of all countries.

It would help to demonstrate how the union of the forces of social
discontent with the forces of political agitation converted the latter
from a mere sterile parliamentarianism, impotent for good, into a virile
force transforming the whole social system, and bringing a political
revolution within the grasp of the agitators. It would show how a
political majority so strong that it left the socially privileged class
absolutely without the political support of the socially subject class
yet left untouched the real causes of the social misery of the latter.
It would illustrate how a subject nation, kept by the bayonets of
foreign army beneath the heel of native tyranny, by transferring the
fight from the political battle ground of words to the social and
economic battle ground of acts, succeeded in almost conquering its
freedom, and in quite humbling the pride of a long dominant class, and
by thus demonstrating what could be done and was done by a subject
nation warring on the economic field against native and foreign tyrants
combined, it would also demonstrate what could be done by the working
class of any independent nation should it resolve to make its political
activity one instrument and expression of its economic struggles, and
its economic struggles in factory, workshop and mine the generating
force of its political passions and programs.

As we have again and again pointed out the Irish question is a social
question, the whole agelong fight of the Irish people against their
oppressors resolves itself in the last analysis into a fight for the
mastery of the means of life, the sources of production, in Ireland. Who
would own and control the land? The people or the invaders; and if the
invaders which set of them, the most recent swarm of land thieves, or
the sons of the thieves of a former generation. These were the bottom
questions of Irish politics, and all other questions were valued or
deprecated in the proportion to which they contributed to serve the
interests of some of the factions who had already taken their stand in
this fight around property interests. Without this key to the meaning of
events, this clue to unravel the actions of 'great men' Irish history is
but a welter of unrelated facts, a hopeless chaos of sporadic outbreaks,
treacheries, intrigues, massacres, murders and purposeless warfare. With
this key all things become understandable and traceable to their primary
origin; without this key the lost opportunities of Ireland seem such as
to bring a blush to the cheek of the Irish Worker; with this key Irish
history is as a lamp to his feet in the stormy paths of to-day.

Yet, plain as this is to the Irish Socialist, it is undeniable that for
100 years, or since the Act of Union of 1800, all Irish political
movements ignored this fact, and were conducted by men who did not look
below the political surface. These men to arouse the passions of the
people invoked the memory of social wrongs such as evictions and
famines, but for these wrongs proposed only political remedies such as
changes in taxation and transference of the seat of government from one
country to another. Hence they accomplished nothing, because the
political method of fighting was unrelated to the social subjection at
the root of the matter. Political agitators talked of sending men to
Westminster to complain of English tyranny, but conducted no campaign
against the rackrenting landlord on his estate, and as a result the
adhesion of an overwhelming majority of the tenants to the political
agitators lightened no economic burdens, stopped no evictions, and
accomplished nothing. The Land League stepped in to alter all this, and
transferred the real seat of war from the hustings to the estate, from
the 'floor of the House of Commons' to the rent office of the landlord
and the homestead of the tenant. It instructed the people to resist
eviction, to refuse to pay rackrents, to terrorise landgrabbers -- the
scabs of the agrarian struggle -- and to boycott and ostracise all
offenders against the welfare of the tenant.

It made adhesion to the cause of the tenants synonymous with the call of
Irish patriotism, and thus emphasised the point we have so often
labored, viz. -- that the Irish question is a social question. As a
result of this change of base it revolutionized Irish politics. The men
and women who had, with a grin on their faces, cheered the orators who
talked of a "Parliament on College Green" and after cheering went home
to scrape together the landlord\'s rent by denying themselves the
comfort and even necessaries of life now listened to the practical talk
of men who told them to resist their tyrants at once, and so listening
they straightened up mentally and morally and kept their rents in their
pockets, held their harvests, kept a grip on their homesteads, laughed
in the face of the landlord whom they had hitherto feared, and so broke
the back of Irish landlordism. And this great change was the result of
bringing the Irish fight down from the cloud land of sentiment on to the
hard basis of a fight, day by day, between the producers and the owners
for the control of the means of livelihood -- or to the basis of a class
struggle. That the Land League did not entirely succeed in its mission
was due chiefly to one flaw in the original theory of its campaign, viz.
-- that its promoters not being in agreement as to their ultimate ideal
were unable to educate their followers against the fallacy of accepting
concessions which divided and disorganised their forces when at the
flood tide of success.

That lesson -- the lesson of its failure, Socialists have already
learned and know how to profit by; the other lesson -- the lesson of its
strength, is not so widely realised. It is this -- the strength and
power of the political agitation of the Land League lay in the fact that
its representatives were the servants and mouthpieces of a class who
were already organised and holding the means of production with a
revolutionary intent. They were not asking government to give them
possession, they were already in defiant possession and demanding that
such possession be legalized. Their base of operation was secondarily at
the election booth, primarily on the farm; they thought the organization
of an estate against its landlord a thousand times more important than
the capture of a parliamentary seat. Rather they knew that the seat
would inevitably follow the fate of the estate.

In all this they showed their wisdom. And hence we claim that although
the Socialist agitators of to-day in their political activity fulfil
well the work of agitators as did the Irish agitators of the past, yet
if they would find and utilise to the fullest all the latent
revolutionary material and strength they require they must do as the
Land League did -- take hold of the daily fight in the workshop, and
organise it in a revolutionary manner, with a revolutionary purpose and
direction.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
