## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## *Marx, Karl*, was born\... {#marx-karl-was-born... title="ch01"}

<div>

![Marx, the student](granat1.gif){align="left" hspace="14" vspace="14"}

</div>

Marx, Karl, was born on May 5, 1818 (New Style), in the city of Trier
(Rhenish Prussia). His father was a lawyer, a Jew, who in 1824 adopted
Protestantism. The family was well-to-do, cultured, but not
revolutionary. After graduating from a *Gymnasium* in Trier, Marx
entered the university, first at Bonn and later in Berlin, where he read
law, majoring in history and philosophy. He concluded his university
course in 1841, submitting a doctoral thesis on the philosophy of
Epicurus. At the time Marx was a Hegelian idealist in his views. In
Berlin, he belonged to the circle of "Left Hegelians" (Bruno Bauer and
others) who sought to draw atheistic and revolutionary conclusion from
Hegel's philosophy.

After graduating, Marx moved to Bonn, hoping to become a professor.
However, the reactionary policy of the government, which deprived Ludwig
Feuerbach of his chair in 1832, refused to allow him to return to the
university in 1836, and in 1841 forbade young Professor Bruno Bauer to
lecture at Bonn, made Marx abandon the idea of an academic career. Left
Hegelian views were making rapid headway in Germany at the time.
Feuerbach began to criticize theology, particularly after 1836, and turn
to materialism, which in 1841 gained ascendancy in his philosophy (*The
Essence of Christianity*). The year 1843 saw the appearance of his
*Principles of the Philosophy of the Future*. "One must oneself have
experienced the liberating effect" of these books, Engels subsequently
wrote of these works of Feuerbach. "We \[i.e., the Left Hegelians,
including Marx\] all became at once Feuerbachians." At that time, some
radical bourgeois in the Rhineland, who were in touch with the Left
Hegelians, founded, in Cologne, an opposition paper called *Rheinische
Zeitung* (The first issue appeared on January 1, 1842). Marx and Bruno
Bauer were invited to be the chief contributors, and in October 1842
Marx became editor-in-chief and moved from Bonn to Cologne. The
newspaper's revolutionary-democratic trend became more and more
pronounced under Marx's editorship, and the government first imposed
double and triple censorship on the paper, and then on January 1 1843
decided to suppress it. Marx had to resign the editorship before that
date, but his resignation did not save the paper, which suspended
publication in March 1843. Of the major articles Marx contributed to
*Rheinische Zeitung*, Engels notes, in addition to those indicated below
(see *Bibliography*),^[\[1\]](#fwV21P047F01){#bkV21P047F01}^ an article
on the condition of peasant winegrowers in the Moselle
Valley.^[\[2\]](#fwV21P047F02){#bkV21P047F02}^ Marx's journalistic
activities convinced him that he was insufficiently acquainted with
political economy, and he zealously set out to study it.

In 1843, Marx married, at Kreuznach, a childhood friend he had become
engaged to while still a student. His wife came of a reactionary family
of the Prussian nobility, her elder brother being Prussia's Minister of
the Interior during a most reactionary period---1850-58. In the autumn
of 1843, Marx went to Paris in order to publish a radical journal
abroad, together with Arnold Ruge (1802-1880); Left Hegelian; in prison
in 1825-30; a political exile following 1848, and a Bismarckian after
1866-70). Only one issue of this journal, *Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher*, appeared;^[\[3\]](#fwV21P047F03){#bkV21P047F03}^
publication was discontinued owing to the difficulty of secretly
distributing it in Germany, and to disagreement with Ruge. Marx's
articles in this journal showed that he was already a revolutionary who
advocated "merciless criticism of everything existing", and in
particular the "criticism by weapon",^[\[13\]](#fwV21E029){#bkV21E029}^
and appealed to the *masses* and to the *proletariat*.

<div>

![Engels at 19](granat2.gif){align="right" hspace="14" vspace="14"}

</div>

In September 1844, Frederick Engels came to Paris for a few days, and
from that time on became Marx's closest friend. They both took a most
active part in the then seething life of the revolutionary groups in
Paris (of particular importance at the time was
Proudhon's^[\[4\]](#fwV21P047F04){#bkV21P047F04}^ doctrine), which Marx
pulled to pieces in his *[Poverty of
Philosophy](../../../../marx/works/1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm)*,
1847); waging a vigorous struggle against the various doctrines of
petty-bourgeois socialism, they worked out the theory and tactics of
revolutionary *proletarian socialism*, or communism Marxism). See Marx's
works of this period, 1844-48 in the *Bibliography*. At the insistent
request of the Prussian government, Marx was banished from Paris in
1845, as a dangerous revolutionary. He went to Brussels. In the spring
of 1847 Marx and Engels joined a secret propaganda society called the
Communist League;^[\[5\]](#fwV21P048F01){#bkV21P048F01}^ they took a
prominent part in the League's Second Congress (London, November 1847),
at whose request they drew up the celebrated *[Communist
Manifesto](../../../../marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm)*,
which appeared in February 1848. With the clarity and brilliance of
genius, this work outlines a new world-conception, consistent with
materialism, which also embrace the realm of social life; dialectics, as
the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of development; the theory
of the class struggle and of the world-historic revolutionary role of
the proletariat---the creator of a new, communist society.

On the outbreak of the Revolution of February
1848,^[\[6\]](#fwV21P048F02){#bkV21P048F02}^ Marx was banished from
Belgium. He returned to Paris, whence, after the March
Revolution,^[\[7\]](#fwV21P048F03){#bkV21P048F03}^ he went to Cologne,
Germany, where *Neue Rheinische
Zeitung*^[\[8\]](#fwV21P048F04){#bkV21P048F04}^ was published from June
1, 1848, to May 19, 1849, with Marx as editor-in-chief. The new theory
was splendidly confirmed by the course of the revolutionary events of
1848-49, just as it has been subsequently confirmed by all proletarian
and democratic movements in all countries of the world. The victorious
counter-revolution first instigated court proceedings against Marx (he
was acquitted on February 9, 1849), and then banished him from Germany
(May 16, 1849). First Marx went to Paris, was again banished after the
demonstration of June 13, 1849,^[\[9\]](#fwV21P048F05){#bkV21P048F05}^
and then went to London, where he lived until his death.

His life as a political exile was a very hard one, as the correspondence
between Marx and Engels (published in 1913) clearly reveals. Poverty
weighed heavily on Marx and his family; had it not been for Engels'
constant and selfless financial aid, Marx would not only have been
unable to complete *[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*
but would have inevitably have been crushed by want. Moreover, the
prevailing doctrines and trends of petty-bourgeois socialism, and of
non-proletarian socialism in general, forced Marx to wage a continuous
and merciless struggle and sometime to repel the most savage and
monstrous personal attacks (*Herr
Vogt*).^[\[10\]](#fwV21P049F01){#bkV21P049F01}^ Marx, who stood aloof
from circles of political exiles, developed his materialist theory in a
number of historical works (see [*Bibliography*](ch06.htm)), devoting
himself mainly to a study of political economy. Marx revolutionized
science (see ["The Marxist Doctrine"](ch02.htm), below) in his
[*Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy*](../../../../marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm)
(1859) and *Capital* (Vol. I, 1867).

The revival of the democratic movements in the late fifties and in the
sixties recalled Marx to practical activity. In 1864 (September 28) the
International Working Men's Association---the celebrated First
International---was founded in London. Marx was the heart and soul of
this organization, and author of its first
Address^[\[11\]](#fwV21P049F02){#bkV21P049F02}^ and of a host of
resolutions, declaration and manifestoes. In uniting the labor movement
of various forms of non-proletarian, pre-Marxist socialism (Mazzini,
Proudhon, Bakunin, liberal trade-unionism in Britain, Lassallean
vacillations to the right in Germany, etc.), and in combating the
theories of all these sects and schools, Marx hammered out a uniform
tactic for the proletarian struggle of the working in the various
countries. Following the downfall of the Paris Commune (1871)---of which
gave such a profound, clear-cut, brilliant *effective* and revolutionary
analysis ([*The Civil War In
France*](../../../../marx/works/1871/civil-war-france/index.htm),
1871)---and the Bakunin-caused^[\[12\]](#fwV21P049F03){#bkV21P049F03}^
cleavage in the International, the latter organization could no longer
exist in Europe. After the Hague Congress of the International (1872),
Marx had the General Council of the International had played its
historical part, and now made way for a period of a far greater
development of the labor movement in all countries in the world, a
period in which the movement grew in *scope*, and *mass* socialist
working-class parties in individual national states were formed.

Marx's health was undermined by his strenuous work in the International
and his still more strenuous theoretical occupations. He continued work
on the refashioning of political economy and on the completion of
*Capital*, for which he collected a mass of new material and studied a
number of languages (Russian, for instance). However, ill-health
prevented him from completing *Capital*.

His wife died on December 2, 1881, and on March 14, 1883, Marx passed
away peacefully in his armchair. He lies buried next to his wife at
Highgate Cemetery in London. Of Marx's children some died in childhood
in London, when the family were living in destitute circumstances. Three
daughters married English and French socialists; Eleanor Aveling, Laura
Lafargue and Jenny Longuet. The latters' son is a member of the French
Socialist Party.

[]{#notes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P047F01){#fwV21P047F01}^ This "Bibliography" written by
Lenin for the article is not included. ---*Ed.*

^[\[2\]](#bkV21P047F02){#fwV21P047F02}^ The reference is to the article
"*Justification of the Correspondent from the Mosel*" by Karl
Marx.---*Ed.*

^[\[3\]](#bkV21P047F03){#fwV21P047F03}^ The reference is to the
*Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher* (German-French Annals), a magazine
edited by Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge and published in German in Paris.
Only the first issue, a double one, appeared, in February 1844. It
included works by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels which marked the final
transition of Marx and Engels to materialism and communism. Publication
of the magazine was discontinued mainly as a result of basic differences
of opinion between Marx and the bourgeois radical Ruge.---*Ed.*

^[\[4\]](#bkV21P047F04){#fwV21P047F04}^ *Proudhonism*---An unscientific
trend in petty-bourgeois socialism, hostile to Marxism, so called after
its ideologist, the French anarchist Pierre Joseph Proudhon. Proudhon
criticized big capitalist property from the petty-bourgeois position and
dreamed of perpetuating small private ownership. He proposed the
foundation of "people's" and "exchange" banks, with the aid of which the
workers would be able to acquire the means of production, become
handicraftsmen and ensure the just marketing of their produce. Proudhon
did not understand the historic role of the proletariat and displayed a
negative attitude to the class struggle, the proletarian revolution, and
the dictatorship of the proletariat; as an anarchist, he denied the need
for the state. Marx subjected Proudhonism to ruthless criticism in his
work [The Poverty of
Philosophy](../../../../marx/works/1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm).---*Ed.*

^[\[5\]](#bkV21P048F01){#fwV21P048F01}^ *The Communist League*---The
first international communist organization of the proletariat founded
under the guidance of Marx and Engels in London early in June 1847.

Marx and Engels helped to work out the programmatic and organizational
principles of the League; they wrote its programme---the *[Manifesto of
the Communist
Party](../../../../marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm)*,
published in February 1848.

The Communist League was the predecessor of the International Working
Men's Association (The First International). It existed until November
1852, its prominent members later playing a leading role in the First
International.---*Ed.*

^[\[6\]](#bkV21P048F02){#fwV21P048F02}^ The reference is to the
bourgeois revolutions in Germany and Austria which began in March
1848.---*Ed.*

^[\[7\]](#bkV21P048F03){#fwV21P048F03}^ The reference is to the
bourgeois revolution in France in February 1848.---*Ed.*

^[\[8\]](#bkV21P048F04){#fwV21P048F04}^ *Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung
(New Rhenish Gazette)*---Published in Cologne from June 1, 1848, to May
19, 1849. Marx and Engels directed the newspaper, Marx being its
editor-in-chief. Lenin characterized *Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung* as
"the finest and unsurpassed organ of the revolutionary proletariat".
Despite persecution and the obstacles placed in its way by the police,
the newspaper staunchly defended the interests of revolutionary
democracy, the interests of the proletariat. Because of Marx's
banishment from Prussia in May 1849 and the persecution of the other
editors. *Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung* had to cease publication.---*Ed.*

^[\[9\]](#bkV21P048F05){#fwV21P048F05}^ The reference is to the mass
demonstration in Paris organized by the Montagne, the party of the petty
bourgeoisie, in protest against the infringement by the President and
the majority in the Legislative Assembly of the constitutional orders
established in the revolution of 1848. The demonstration was dispersed
by the government.---*Ed.*

^[\[10\]](#bkV21P049F01){#fwV21P049F01}^ The reference is to Marx's
pamphlet *Herr Vogt*, which was written in reply to the slanderous
pamphlet by Vogt, a Bonapartist agent provocateur, *My Process Against
"Allgemeine Zeitung"*.---*Ed.*

^[\[11\]](#bkV21P049F02){#fwV21P049F02}^ The First International
Workingmen's Association was the first international tendency that
grouped together all the worlds' workers parties in one unified
international party.---*Ed.*

^[\[12\]](#bkV21P049F03){#fwV21P049F03}^ *Bakuninism*---A trend called
after its leader Mikhail Bakunin, an ideologist of anarchism and enemy
of Marxism and scientific socialism.---*Ed.*

^[\[13\]](#bkV21E029){#fwV21E029}^ These words are from Marx's
"[Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right:
Introduction](../../../../marx/works/1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm)." The
relevant passage reads: "The weapon of criticism cannot, of course,
replace criticism by weapon, material force must be overthrown by a
material force; but theory, too, becomes a material force, as soon as it
grips the masses."---*Lenin*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#endnotes}

[Works Index](../../index.htm) \| [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm) \|
[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm) \| [L.I.A.
Index](../../../index.htm)\
[\< backward](ch00.htm "Preface") [forward
\>](ch02.htm "II: The Marxist Doctrine")

 
