## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Marxist Doctrine {#the-marxist-doctrine title="ch02"}

Marxism is the system of Marx's views and teachings. Marx was the genius
who continued and consummated the three main ideological currents of the
19th century, as represented by the three most advanced countries of
mankind: classical German philosophy, classical English political
economy, and French socialism combined with French revolutionary
doctrines in general. Acknowledged even by his opponents, the remarkable
consistency and integrity of Marx's views, whose totality constitutes
modern materialism and modern scientific socialism, as the theory and
programme of the working-class movement in all the civilized countries
of the world, make it incumbent on us to present a brief outline of his
world-conception in general, prior to giving an exposition of the
principal content of Marxism, namely, Marx's economic doctrine.

#### Philosophical Materialism {#philosophical-materialism .inline}

[]{#s1} Beginning with the years 1844--45, when his views took shape,
Marx was a materialist and especially a follower of Ludwig Feuerbach,
whose weak point he subsequently saw only in his materialism being
insufficiently consistent and comprehensive. To Marx, Feuerbach's
historic and "epoch-making" significance lay in his having resolutely
broken with Hegel's idealism and in his proclamation of materialism,
which already "in the 18th century, particularly French materialism, was
not only a struggle against the existing political institutions and
against\... religion and theology, but also\... against all metaphysics"
(in the sense of "drunken speculation" as distinct from "sober
philosophy"). (*[The Holy
Family,](../../../../marx/works/1845/holy-family/index.htm)* in
*Literarischer Nachlass*^[\[1\]](#fwV21P051F01){#bkV21P051F01}^) "To
Hegel\... ," wrote Marx, "the process of thinking, which, under the name
of 'the Idea', he even transforms into an independent subject, is the
demiurgos (the creator, the maker) of the real world\.... With me, on
the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought."
(*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*, Vol. I,
[Afterward to the Second
Edition](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/p3.htm).) In full conformity
with this materialist philosophy of Marx's, and expounding it, Frederick
Engels wrote in
*[Anti-Duhring](../../../../marx/works/1877/anti-duhring/index.htm)*
(read by Marx in the manuscript): "The real unity of the world consists
in its materiality, and this is proved\... by a long and wearisome
development of philosophy and natural science\...." "Motion is the mode
of existence of matter. Never anywhere has there been matter without
motion, or motion without matter, nor can there be\.... Bit if the\...
question is raised: what thought and consciousness really are, and where
they come from; it becomes apparent that they are products of the human
brain and that man himself is a product of Nature, which has developed
in and along with its environment; hence it is self-evident that the
products of the human brain, being in the last analysis also products of
Nature, do not contradict the rest of Nature's interconnections but are
in correspondence with them\....

"Hegel was an idealist, that is to say, the thoughts within his mind
were to him not the more or less abstract images \[*Abbilder*,
reflections; Engels sometimes speaks of "imprints"\] of real things and
processes, but on the contrary, things and their development were to him
only the images, made real, of the "Idea" existing somewhere or other
before the world existed."

In his *Ludwig Feuerbach*---which expounded his own and Marx's views on
Feuerbach's philosophy, and was sent to the printers after he had
re-read an old manuscript Marx and himself had written in 1844-45 on
Hegel, Feuerbach and the materialist conception of history---Engels
wrote:

"The great basic question of all philosophy, especially of more recent
philosophy, is the relation of thinking and being\... spirit to
Nature\... which is primary, spirit or Nature\.... The answers which the
philosophers gave to this question split them into two great camps.
Those who asserted the primary of spirit to Nature and, therefore, in
the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or other\...
comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded Nature as
primary, belonged to the various schools of materialism."

Any other use of the concepts of (philosophical) idealism and
materialism leads only to confusion. Marx decidedly rejected, not only
idealism, which is always linked in one way or another with religion,
but also the views---especially widespread in our day---of Hume and
Kant, agnosticism, criticism, and
positivism^[\[2\]](#fwV21P052F01){#bkV21P052F01}^ in their various
forms; he considered that philosophy a "reactionary" concession to
idealism, and at best a "shame-faced way of surreptitiously accepting
materialism, while denying it before the
world."^[\[3\]](#fwV21P052F02){#bkV21P052F02}^

On this question, see, besides the works by Engels and Marx mentioned
above, a letter Marx wrote to Engels on December 12, 1868, in which,
referring to an utterance by the naturalist Thomas Huxley, which was
"more materialistic" than usual, and to his recognition that "as long as
we actually observe and think, we cannot possibly get away from
materialism", Marx reproached Huxley for leaving a "loop hole" for
agnosticism, for Humism.

It is particularly important to note Marx's view on the relation between
freedom and necessity: "Freedom is the appreciation of necessity.
'Necessity is blind only insofar as it is not understood.'" (Engels in
*Anti-Duhring*) This means recognition of the rule of objective laws in
Nature and of the dialectical transformation of necessity into freedom
(in the same manner as the transformation of the uncognized but
cognizable "thing-in-itself" into the "thing-for-us", of the "essence of
things" into "phenomena"). Marx and Engels considered that the "old"
materialism, including that of Feuerbach (and still more the "vulgar"
materialism of Buchner, Vogt and Moleschott), contained the following
major shortcomings:

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
                                 (1)\ this materialism was "predominantly
                                    \ mechanical," failing to take
                                    \ account of the\
                                 (2)\ latest developments in chemistry
                                    \ and biology (today it would be
                                    \ necessary to add:\
                                 (3)\ and in the electrical theory of
                                      matter);\
                                      the old materialism was
                                      non-historical and non-dialectical
                                      (metaphysical, in the\
                                      meaning of anti-dialectical), and
                                      did not adhere consistently and
                                      comprehensively\
                                      to the standpoint of development;\
                                      it regarded the "human essence" in
                                      the abstract, not as the "complex
                                      of\
                                      all" (concretely and historically
                                      determined) "social relations", and
                                      therefore\
                                      merely "interpreted" the world,
                                      whereas it was a question of
                                      "changing" it,\
                                      i.e., it did not understand the
                                      importance of "revolutionary
                                      practical activity".

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------

#### Dialectics {#dialectics .inline}

[]{#s2} As the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of development,
and the richest in content, Hegelian dialectics was considered by Marx
and Engels the greatest achievement of classical German philosophy. They
thought that any other formulation of the principle of development, of
evolution, was one-sided and poor in content, and could only distort and
mutilate the actual course of development (which often proceeds by
leaps, and via catastrophes and revolutions) in Nature and in society.

"Marx and I were pretty well the only people to rescue conscious
dialectics \[from the destruction of idealism, including Hegelianism\]
and apply it in the materialist conception of Nature\.... Nature is the
proof of dialectics, and it must be said for modern natural science that
it has furnished extremely rich \[this was written before the discovery
of radium, electrons, the transmutation of elements, etc.!\] and daily
increasing materials for this test, and has thus proved that in the last
analysis Nature's process is dialectical and not metaphysical.

" The great basic thought," Engels writes, "that the world is not to be
comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a complex of
processes, in which the things apparently stable no less than their mind
images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted change of
coming into being and passing away\... this great fundamental thought
has, especially since the time of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated
ordinary consciousness that in this generality it is now scarcely ever
contradicted. But to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and
to apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation are two
different things\.... For dialectical philosophy nothing is final,
absolute, sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and
in everything; nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted
process of becoming and of passing away, of endless ascendancy from the
lower to the higher. And dialectical philosophy itself is nothing more
than the mere reflection of this process in the thinking brain." Thus,
according to Marx, dialectics is "the science of the general laws of
motion, both of the external world and of human
thought."^[\[4\]](#fwV21P054F01){#bkV21P054F01}^

This revolutionary aspect of Hegel's philosophy was adopted and
developed by Marx. Dialectical materialism "does not need any philosophy
standing above the other sciences." From previous philosophy there
remains "the science of thought and its laws---formal logic and
dialectics." Dialectics, as understood by Marx, and also in conformity
with Hegel, includes what is now called the theory of knowledge, or
epistemology, studying and generalizing the original and development of
knowledge, the transition from *non*-knowledge to knowledge.

In our times, the idea of development, of evolution, has almost
completely penetrated social consciousness, only in other ways, and not
through Hegelian philosophy. Still, this idea, as formulated by Marx and
Engels on the basis of Hegels' philosophy, is far more comprehensive and
far richer in content than the current idea of evolution is. A
development that repeats, as it were, stages that have already been
passed, but repeats them in a different way, on a higher basis ("the
negation of the negation"), a development, so to speak, that proceeds in
spirals, not in a straight line; a development by leaps, catastrophes,
and revolutions; "breaks in continuity"; the transformation of quantity
into quality; inner impulses towards development, imparted by the
contradiction and conflict of the various forces and tendencies acting
on a given body, or within a given phenomenon, or within a given
society; the interdependence and the closest and indissoluble connection
between *all* aspects of any phenomenon (history constantly revealing
ever new aspects), a connection that provides a uniform, and universal
process of motion, one that follows definite laws---these are some of
the features of dialectics as a doctrine of development that is richer
than the conventional one. (Cf. Marx's letter to Engels of January 8,
1868, in which he ridicules Stein's "wooden trichotomies," which it
would be absurd to confuse with materialist dialectics.)

#### The Materialist Conception of History {#the-materialist-conception-of-history .inline}

[]{#s3} A realization of the inconsistency, incompleteness, and
onesidedness of the old materialism convinced Marx of the necessity of
"bringing the science of society\... into harmony with the materialist
foundation, and of reconstructing it
thereupon."^[\[5\]](#fwV21P055F01){#bkV21P055F01}^ Since materialism in
general explains consciousness as the outcome of being, and not
conversely, then materialism as applied to the social life of mankind
has to explain *social* consciousness as the outcome of *social* being.
"Technology," Marx writes (*Capital*, Vol. I), "discloses man's mode of
dealing with Nature, the immediate process of production by which he
sustains his life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of
his social relations, and of the mental conceptions that flow from
them."^[\[6\]](#fwV21P055F02){#bkV21P055F02}^ In the preface to his
*Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*, Marx gives an
integral formulation of the fundamental principles of materialism as
applied to human society and its history, in the following words:

"In the social production of their life, men enter into definite
relations that are indispensable and independent of their will,
relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material productive forces.

"The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic
structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and
political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of
social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions
the social, political and intellectual life process in general. It is
not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the
contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness. At a
certain stage of their development, the material productive forces of
society come in conflict with the existing relations of production,
or---what is but a legal expression for the same thing---with the
property relations within which they have been at work hitherto. From
forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into
their fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution. With the
change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is
more or less rapidly transformed. In considering such transformations a
distinction should always be made between the material transformation of
the economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the
precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious,
aesthetic or philosophic---in short, ideological forms in which men
become conscious of this conflict and fight it out.

"Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on what he thinks of
himself, so we cannot judge of such a period of transformation by its
own consciousness; on the contrary, this consciousness must be explained
rather from the contradictions of material life, from the existing
conflict between the social productive forces and the relations of
production\.... In broad outlines, Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern
bourgeois modes of production can be designated as progressive epochs in
the economic formation of
society."^[\[7\]](#fwV21P056F01){#bkV21P056F01}^ [\[Cf. Marx's brief
formulation in a letter to Engels dated July 7, 1866: "Our theory that
the organization of labor is determined by the means of
production."\]]{.inote}

The discovery of the materialist conception of history, or more
correctly, the consistent continuation and extension of materialism into
the domain of social phenomena, removed the two chief shortcomings in
earlier historical theories. In the first place, the latter at best
examined only the ideological motives in the historical activities of
human beings, without investigating the origins of those motives, or
ascertaining the objective laws governing the development of the system
of social relations, or seeing the roots of these relations in the
degree of development reached by material production; in the second
place, the earlier theories did not embrace the activities of the
*masses* of the population, whereas historical materialism made it
possible for the first time to study with scientific accuracy the social
conditions of the life of the masses, and the changes in those
conditions. *At best*, pre-Marxist "sociology" and historiography
brought forth an accumulation of raw facts, collected at random, and a
description of individual aspects of the historical process. By
examining the *totality* of opposing tendencies, by reducing them to
precisely definable conditions of life and production of the various
*classes* of individual aspects of the historical process. By examining
the choice of a particular "dominant" idea or in its interpretation, and
by revealing that, without exception, all ideas and all the various
tendencies *stem* from the condition of the material forces of
production, Marxism indicated the way to an all-embracing and
comprehensive study of the process of the rise, development, and decline
of socio-economic systems. People make their own history but what
determines the motives of people, of the mass of people---i.e., what is
the sum total of all these clashes in the mass of human societies? What
are the objective conditions of production of material life that form
the basis of all man's historical activity? What is the law of
development of these conditions? To all these Marx drew attention and
indicated the way to a scientific study of history as a single process
which, with all its immense variety and contradictoriness, is governed
by definite laws.

#### The Class Struggle {#the-class-struggle .inline}

[]{#s4} It is common knowledge that, in any given society, the striving
of some of its members conflict with the strivings of others, that
social life is full of contradictions, and that history reveals a
struggle between nations and societies, as well as within nations and
societies, and, besides, an alternation of periods of revolution and
reaction, peace and war, stagnation and rapid progress or decline.
Marxism has provided the guidance ---i.e., the theory of the class
struggle---for the discovery of the laws governing this seeming maze and
chaos. It is only a study of the sum of the strivings of all the members
of a given society or group of societies that can lead to a scientific
definition of the result of those strivings. Now the conflicting
strivings stem from the difference in the position and mode of life of
the *classes* into which each society is divided.

"The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class
struggles," Marx wrote in the *Communist Manifesto* (with the exception
of the history of the primitive community, Engels added subsequently).
"Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master
and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant
opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now
open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary
reconstruction of society at large, or in the common ruin of the
contending classes\.... The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted
from the ruins of feudal society has not done away with class
antagonisms. It has but established new classes, new conditions of
oppression, new forms of struggle in place of the old ones. Our epoch,
the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive
feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more
and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great
classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat."

Ever since the Great French Revolution, European history has, in a
number of countries, tellingly revealed what actually lies at the bottom
of events---the struggle of classes. The Restoration period in
France^[\[8\]](#fwV21P058F01){#bkV21P058F01}^ already produced a number
of historians (Thierry, Guizot, Mignet, and Thiers) who, in summing up
what was taking place, were obliged to admit that the class struggle was
taking place, were obliged to admit that the class struggle was the key
to all French history. The modern period---that of complete victory of
the bourgeoisie, representative institutions, extensive (if not
universal) suffrage, a cheap daily press that is widely circulated among
the masses, etc., a period of powerful and ever-expanding unions of
workers and unions of employers, etc.---has shown even more strikingly
(though sometimes in a very one-sided, "peaceful", and "constitutional"
form) the class struggle as the mainspring of events. The following
passage from Marx's *Communist Manifesto* will show us what Marx
demanded of social science as regards an objective analysis of the
position of each class in modern society, with reference to an analysis
of each class's conditions of development:

"Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today,
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes
decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product. The lower middle
class, the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant,
all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their
existence as fractions of the middle class. They are therefore not
revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are reactionary, for
they try to roll back the wheel of history. If by chance they are
revolutionary, they are so only in view of their impending transfer into
the proletariat; they thus defend not their present, but their future
interests; they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that
of the proletariat."

In a number of historical works (see [*Bibliography*](ch06.htm)), Marx
gave brilliant and profound examples of materialist historiography, of
an analysis of the position of *each* individual class, and sometimes of
various groups or strata within a class, showing plainly why and how
"every class struggle is a political
struggle."^[\[9\]](#fwV21P059F01){#bkV21P059F01}^ The above-quoted
passage is an illustration of what a complex network of social relations
and *transitional* stages from one class to another, from the past to
the future, was analyzed by Marx so as to determine the resultant of
historical development.

Marx's economic doctrine is the most profound, comprehensive and
detailed confirmation and application of his theory.

 

[]{#notes}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P051F01){#fwV21P051F01}^ See Marx and Engels, [The Holy
Family](../../../../marx/works/1845/holy-family/index.htm) (Chapter
Eight)---*Lenin*

^[\[2\]](#bkV21P052F01){#fwV21P052F01}^ *Agnoticism*---An idealist
philosophical theory asserting that the world in unknowable, that the
human mind is limited and cannot know anything beyond the realms of
sensations. Agnosticism has various forms: some agnostics recognize the
objective existence of the material world but deny the possibility of
knowing it, others deny the existence of the material world on the plea
that man cannot know whether anything exists beyond his sensations.

*Criticism*---Kant gave this name to his idealist philosophy,
considering the criticism of man's cognitive ability to be the purpose
of that philosophy. Kant's criticism led him to the conviction that
human reason cannot know the nature of things.

*Positivism*---A widespread trend in bourgeois philosophy and sociology,
founded by Comte (1798-1857), a French philosopher and sociologist. The
positivists deny the possibility of knowing inner regularities and
relations and deny the significance of philosophy as a method of knowing
and changing the objective world. They reduce philosophy to a summary of
the data provided by the various branches of science and to a
superficial description of the results of direct observation---i.e., to
"positive" facts. Positivism considers itself to be "above" both
materialism and idealism but it is actually nothing more than a variety
of subjective idealism.---*Ed.*

^[\[3\]](#bkV21P052F02){#fwV21P052F02}^ Frederick Engels: [Ludwig
Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy](../../../../marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/index.htm)---*Lenin*

^[\[4\]](#bkV21P054F01){#fwV21P054F01}^ Frederick Engels: [Ludwig
Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy](../../../../marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/index.htm)---*Lenin*

^[\[5\]](#bkV21P055F01){#fwV21P055F01}^ Frederick Engels: [Ludwig
Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy](../../../../marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/index.htm)---*Lenin*

^[\[6\]](#bkV21P055F02){#fwV21P055F02}^ See Karl Marx,
*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*. Volume
I.---*Lenin*

^[\[7\]](#bkV21P056F01){#fwV21P056F01}^ Karl Marx, [*Contribution to the
Critique of Political
Economy*](../../../../marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm)
(1859)---*Lenin*

^[\[8\]](#bkV21P058F01){#fwV21P058F01}^ *The Restoration*---The period
in France between 1814 and 1830 when power was in the hands of the
Bourbons, restored to the throne after their overthrow by the French
bourgeois revolution in 1792.---*Ed.*

^[\[9\]](#bkV21P059F01){#fwV21P059F01}^ See Marx and Engels, *Selected
Works* Vol. 1, Moscow, 1973, pp. 108-09, 117-18, 116.---*Ed.*

[]{#endnotes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [ [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm)]{.footer}  \|    [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
                                   [ [\< backward](ch01.htm "I: Marx, Karl, was born...")]{.footer}        [ [forward \>](ch03.htm "III: Marx's Economic Doctrine")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
