## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Marx's Economic Doctrine {#marxs-economic-doctrine title="ch03"}

"It is the ultimate aim of this work to lay bare the economic law of
motion of modern society, i.e., capitalist, bourgeois society,"

says Marx in the preface to
*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*. An investigation
into the relations of production in a given, historically defined
society, in their inception, development, and decline---such is the
content of Marx's economic doctrine. In capitalist society, the
production of *commodities* is predominant, and Marx's analysis
therefore begins with an analysis of commodity.

#### Value

[]{#s1.1} A commodity is, in the first place, a thing that satisfies a
human want; in the second place, it is a thing that can be exchanged for
another thing. The utility of a thing makes is *use-value*.
Exchange-value (or, simply, value), is first of all the ratio, the
proportion, in which a certain number of use-values of one kind can be
exchanged for a certain number of use-values of another kind. Daily
experience shows us that million upon millions of such exchanges are
constantly equating with one another every kind of use-value, even the
most diverse and incomparable. Now, what is there in common between
these various things, things constantly equated with one another in a
definite system of social relations? Their common feature is that they
are *products of labor*. In exchanging products, people equate the most
diverse kinds of labor. The production of commodities is a system of
social relations in which individual producers create diverse products
(the social division of labor), and in which all these products are
equated with one another in the process of exchange. Consequently, what
is common to all commodities is not the concrete labor of a definite
branch of production, not labor of one particular kind, but *abstract*
human labor---human labor in general. All the labor power of a given
society, as represented in the sum total of the values of all
commodities, is one and the same human labor power. Thousands upon
thousands of millions of acts of exchange prove this. Consequently, each
particular commodity represents only a certain share of the *socially
necessary* labor time. The magnitude of value is determined by the
amount of socially necessary labor, or by the labor time that is
socially necessary for the production of a given commodity, of a given
use-value.

"Whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different products,
by that very act, we also equate, as human labor, the different kind of
labor expended upon them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do
it." \[*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*\]. As one
of the earlier economists said, value is a relation between two persons;
only he should have added: a relation concealed beneath a material
wrapping. We can understand what value is only when we consider it from
the standpoint of the system of social relations of production in a
particular historical type of society, moreover, or relations that
manifest themselves in the mass phenomenon of exchange, a phenomenon
which repeats itself thousands upon thousands of time. "As values, all
commodities are only definite masses of congealed labor time." \[*[A
Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy](../../../../marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm)*\].

After making a detailed analysis of the twofold character of the labor
incorporated in commodities, Marx goes on to analyze the *form of value*
and *money*. Here, Marx's main task is to study the *origin* of the
money form of value, to study the *historical process* of the
development of exchange, beginning with individual and incidental acts
of exchange (the "elementary or accidental form of value", in which a
given quantity of one commmodity is exchanged for a given quantity of
another), passing on to the universal form of value, in which a number
of different commodities are exchanged for one and the same particular
commodity, and ending with the money form of value, when gold becomes
that particular commodity, the universal equivalent. As the highest
product of the development of exchange and commodity production, money
masks, conceals, the social character of all individual labor, the
social link between individual producers united by the market. Marx
analyzes the various functions of money in very great detail; it is
important to note here in particular (as in the opening chapters of
*Capital* in general) that what seems to be an abstract and at times
purely deductive mode of exposition deals in reality with a gigantic
collection of factual material on the history of the development of
exchange and commodity production.

"If we consider money, its existence implies a definite stage in the
exchange of commodities. The particular functions of money, which it
performs either as the mere equivalent of commodities or as means of
circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point,
according to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function
or the other, to very different stages in the process of social
production." \[*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*\].

#### Surplus Value

[]{#s2.1} At a certain stage in the development of commodity production
money becomes transformed into capital. The formula of commodity
circulation was C-M-C (commodity---money---commodity)---i.e., the sale
of one commodity for the purpose of buying another.

The general formula of capital, on the contrary, is M-C-M---i.e., the
purchase for the purpose of selling (at a profit).

The increase over the original value of the money that is put into
circulation is called by Marx surplus value. The fact of this "growth"
of money in capitalist circulation is common knowledge. Indeed, it is
this "growth" which transforms money into *capital*, as a special and
historically determined social relation of production. Surplus value
cannot arise out of commodity circulation, for the latter knows only the
exchange of equivalents; neither can it arise out of price increases,
for the mutual losses and gains of buyers and sellers would equalize one
another, whereas what we have here in not an individual phenomenon but a
mass, average and social phenomenon. To obtain surplus value, the owner
of money "must \... find\... in the market a commodity, whose use-value
possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value"
\[*[Capital](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/index.htm)*\]---a commodity
whose process of consumption is at the same time a process of the
creation of value. Such a commodity exists---human labor power. Its
consumption is labor, and labor creates value. The owner of money buys
labor power at its value, which, like the value of every other
commodity, is determined by the socially necessary labor time requisite
for its production (i.e., the cost of maintaining the worker and his
family). Having bought enough labor power, the owner of money is
entitled to use it, that is, to set it to work for a whole day---12
hours, let us say. Yet, in the course of six hours ("necessary" labor
time) the worker creates product sufficient to cover the cost of his own
maintenance; in the course of the next six hours ("surplus" labor time),
he creates "surplus" product, or surplus value, for which the capitalist
does not pay. Therefore, from the standpoint of the process of
production, two parts must be distinguished in capital: constant
capital, which is expended on means of production (machinery, tools, raw
materials, etc.), whose value, without any change, is transferred
(immediately or part by part) to the finished product; secondly,
variable capital, which is expended on labor power. The value of this
latter capital is not invariable, but grows in the labor process,
creating surplus value. Therefore, to express the degree of capital's
exploitation of labor power, surplus must be compared not with the
entire capital but only with variable capital. Thus, in the example just
given, the rate of surplus value, as Marx calls this ratio, will be 6:6,
i.e., 100 per cent.

There were two historical prerequisites for capital to arise: first, the
accumulation of certain sums of money in the hands of individuals under
conditions of a relatively high level of development of commodity
production in general; secondly, the existence of a worker who is "free"
in a double sense: free of all constraint or restriction on the scale of
his labor power, and free from the land and all means of production in
general, a free and unattached laborer, a "proletarian", who cannot
subsist except by selling his labor power.

There are two main ways of increasing surplus value: lengthening the
working day ("absolute surplus value"), and reducing the necessary
working day ("relative surplus value"). In analyzing the former, Marx
gives a most impressive picture of the struggle of the working class for
a shorter working day and of interference by the state authority to
lengthen the working day (from the 14th century to the 17th) and to
reduce it (factory legislation in the 19th century). Since the
appearance of *Capital*, the history of the working class movement in
all civilized countries of the world has provided a wealth of new facts
amplifying this picture.

Analyzing the production of relative surplus value, Marx investigates
the three fundamental historical stages in capitalism's increase of the
productivity of labor: (1) simple co-operation; (2) the division of
labor, and manufacture; (3) machinery and large-scale industry. How
profoundly Marx has here revealed the basic and typical features of
capitalist development is shown incidentally by the fact that
investigations into the handicraft industries in Russia furnish abundant
material illustrating the first two of the mentioned stages. The
revolutionizing effect of large-scale machine industry, as described by
Marx in 1867, has revealed itself in a number of "new" countries
(Russia, Japan, etc.), in the course of the half-century that has since
elapsed.

To continue. New and important in the highest degree is Marx's analysis
of the *accumulation of capital*---i.e., the transformation of a part of
surplus value into capital, and its use, not for satisfying the personal
needs of whims of the capitalist, but for new production. Marx revealed
the error made by all earlier classical political economists (beginning
with Adam Smith), who assumed that the entire surplus value which is
transformed into capital goes to form variable capital. In actual fact,
it is divided into *means of production* and variable capital. Of
tremendous importance to the process of development of capitalism and
its transformation into socialism is the more rapid growth of the
constant capital share (of the total capital) as compared with the
variable capital share.

By speeding up the supplanting of workers by machinery and by creating
wealth at one extreme and poverty at the other, the accumulation of
capital also gives rise to what is called the "reserve army of labor",
to the "relative surplus" of workers, or "capitalist overpopulation",
which assumes the most diverse forms and enables capital to expand
production extremely rapidly. In conjunction with credit facilities and
the accumulation of capital in the form of means of production, this
incidentally is the key to an understanding of the *crises* of
overproduction which occur periodically in capitalist countries---at
first at an average of every 10 years, and later at more lengthy and
less definite intervals. From the accumulation of capital under
capitalism we should distinguish what is known as primitive
accumulation: the forcible divorcement of the worker from the means of
production, the driving of the peasant off the land, the stealing of
communal lands, the system of colonies and national debts, protective
tariffs, and the like. "Primitive accumulation" creates the "free"
proletarian at one extreme, and the owner of money, the capitalist, at
the other.

The **"historical tendency of capitalist accumulation"** is described by
Marx in the following celebrated words:

"The expropriation of the immediate producers is accomplished with
merciless vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most
infamous, the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious.
Self-earned private property \[of the peasant and handicraftsman\], that
is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated, independent
laboring-individual with the conditions of his labor, is supplanted by
capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the
nominally free labor of others\.... That which is now to be expropriated
is no longer the laborer working for himself, but the capitalist
exploiting many laborers. This expropriation is accomplished by the
action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production itself, by the
centralization of capital. One capitalist always kills many. Hand in
hand with this centralization, or this expropriation of many capitalists
by few, develop, on an ever extending scale, the co-operative form of
the labor process, the conscious technical application of science, the
methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the
instruments of labor into instruments of labor only usable in common,
the economizing of all means of production by their use as the means of
production of combined, socialized labor, the entanglement of all people
in the net of the world market, and with this the international
character of the capitalistic regime. Along with the constantly
diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolize
all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass of
misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this
too grows the revolt of the working class, a class always increasing in
numbers, and disciplined, united, organized by the very mechanism of the
process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes
a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished
along with, and under, it. Centralization of the means of production and
socialization of labor at last reach a point where they become
incompatible with their capitalist integument. The integument is burst
asunder. The knell of capitalist private property sound. The
expropriators are expropriated." (*Capital*, Volume I)

Also new and important in the highest degree is the analysis Marx gives,
in Volume Two of *Capital* of the reproduction of aggregate social
capital. Here, too, Marx deals, not with an individual phenomenon but
with a mass phenomenon; not with a fractional part of the economy of
society, but with that economy as a whole. Correcting the aforementioned
error of the classical economists, Marx divides the whole of social
production into two big sections: (I) production of the means of
production, and (II) production of articles of consumption, and examines
in detail, with numerical examples, the circulation of the aggregate
social capital---both when reproduced in its former dimension and in the
case of accumulation. Volume Three of *Capital* solves the problem of
how the *average rate of profit* is formed on the basis of the law of
value. This immense stride forward made by economic science in the
person of Marx consists in his having conducted an analysis, from the
standpoint of mass economic phenomena, of the social economy as a whole,
not from the standpoint of individual cases or of the external and
superficial aspects of competition, to which vulgar political economy
and the modern "theory of marginal
utility"^[\[1\]](#fwV21P066F01){#bkV21P066F01}^ frequently restrict
themselves. Marx first analyzes the origin of surplus value, and then
goes on to consider its division into profit, interest, and ground rent.
Profit is the ratio between surplus value and the total capital invested
in an undertaking. Capital with a "high organic composition" (i.e., with
a preponderance of constant capital over variable capital in excess of
the social average) yields a rate of profit below the average; capital
with a "low organic composition" yields a rate of profit above the
average. Competition among capitalists, and their freedom to transfer
their capital from one branch to another, will in both cases reduce the
rate of profit to the average. The sum total of the values of all the
commodities in a given society coincides with the sum total of the
prices of the commodities, but, in individual undertakings and branches
of production, as a result of competition, commodities are sold not at
their values at the *prices of production* (or production prices), which
are equal to the capital expended plus the average profit.

In this way, the well-known and indisputable fact of the divergence
between prices and values and of the equalization of profits is fully
explained by Marx on the basis of law of value, since the sum total of
values of all commodities coincides with the sum total of prices.
However, the equating of (social) value to (individual) prices does not
take place simply and directly, but in a very complex way. It is quite
natural that in a society of separate producers of commodities, who are
united only by the market, a conformity to law can be only an average,
social, mass manifestation, with individual deviations in either
direction mutually compensating one another.

A rise in the productivity of labor implies a more rapid growth of
constant capital as compared with variable capital. Inasmuch as surplus
value is a function of variable capital alone, it is obvious that the
rate of profit (the ratio of surplus value to the whole capital, not to
its variable part alone) tends to fall. Marx makes a detailed analysis
of this tendency and of a number of circumstances that conceal or
counteract it. Without pausing to deal with the extremely interesting
sections of Volume Three of *Capital*, Vol. I devoted to usurer's
capital, commercial capital and money capital, we must pass on to the
most important section---the theory of *ground rent*. Since the area of
land is limited and, in capitalist countries, the land is all held by
individual private owners, the price of production of agricultural
products is determined by the cost of production, not on soil of average
quality but on the worst soil; not under average conditions but under
the worst conditions of delivery of produce to the market. The
difference between this price and the price of production on better soil
(or in better conditions) constitutes *differential* rent. Analyzing
this in detail, and showing how it arises out of the difference in
fertility of different plots of land, and out of the difference in the
amount of capital invested in land, Marx fully reveals (see also
*Theories of Surplus Value*, in which the criticism of Rodbertus is most
noteworthy) the error of Ricardo, who considered that differential rent
is derived only when there is a successive transition from better land
to worse. On the contrary, there may be inverse transitions, land may
pass from one category into others (owing to advances in agricultural
techniques, the growth of towns, and so on), and the notorious "law of
diminishing returns", which charges Nature with the defects, limitations
and contradictions of capitalism, is profoundly erroneous. Further, the
equalisation of profit in all branches of industry and the national
economy in general presupposes complete freedom of competition and the
free flow of capital from one branch to another. However, the private
ownership of land creates monopoly, which hinders that free flow.
Because of that monopoly, the products of agriculture, where a lower
organic composition of capital obtains, and consequently an individually
higher rate of profit, do not enter into the quite free process of the
equalisation of the rate of profit. As a monopolist, the landowner can
keep the price above the average, and this monopoly price gives rise to
absolute rent. Differential rent cannot be done away with under
capitalism, but absolute rent can---for instance, by the nationalisation
of the land, by making it state property. That would undermine the
monopoly of private landowners, and would mean the sole consistent and
full operation of freedom of competition in agriculture. That is why, as
Marx points out, bourgeois radicals have again and again in the course
of history advanced this progressive bourgeois demand for
nationalisation of the land, a demand which, however, frightens most of
the bourgeoisie, because it would too closely affect another monopoly,
one that is particularly important and "sensitive" today---the monopoly
of the means of production in general. (A remarkably popular, concise,
and clear exposition of his theory of the average rate of profit on
capital and of absolute ground rent is given by Marx himself in a
[letter to Engels](../../../../marx/works/1862/letters/62_08_02.htm),
dated August 2, 1862. See Briefwechsel, Volume 3, pp. 77-81; also the
letter of August 9, 1862, ibid., pp. 86-87.)

With reference to the history of ground rent it is also important to
note Marx's analysis showing how labor rent (the peasant creates surplus
product by working on the lord's land) is transformed into rent paid in
produce or in kind (the peasant creates surplus product by working on
the lord's land) is transformed into rent paid in produce or in kind
(the peasant creates surplus product on his own land and hands it over
to the landlord because of "non-economic constraint"), then into
money-rent (rent in kind, which is converted into money---the
*obrok*^[\[2\]](#fwV21P068F01){#bkV21P068F01}^ of old Russia---as a
result of the development of commodity production), and finally into
capitalist rent, when the peasant is replaced by the agricultural
*entrepreneur*, who cultivates the soil with the help of hired labor. In
connection with this analysis of the "genesis of capitalistic ground
rent", note should be taken of a number of profound ideas (of particular
importance to backward countries like Russia) expressed by Marx
regarding the *evolution of capitalism in agriculture*:

"The transformation of rent in kind into money-rent is furthermore not
only inevitably accompanied, but even anticipated, by the formation of a
class of propertyless day-laborers, who hire themselves out for money.
During their genesis, when this new class appears but sporadically, the
custom necessarily develops among the more prosperous peasants, subject
to rent payments, of exploiting agricultural wage-laborers for their own
account, much as in feudal times, when the more well-to-do peasant serfs
themselves also held serfs. In this way, they gradually acquire the
possibility of accumulating a certain amount of wealth and themselves
becoming transformed into future capitalists. The old self-employed
possessors of land themselves just give rise to a nursery school for
capitalist tenants, whose development is conditioned by the general
development of capitalist production beyond the bounds of the
countryside." \[[*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1894-c3/index.htm),
Vol. III\]

"The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural population
not only set free for industrial capital the laborers, their means of
subsistence, and material for labor; it also created the home market."
(*Capital*, Vol. I) In their turn, the impoverishment and ruin of the
rural population play a part in the creation, for capital, or a reserve
army of labor. In every capitalist country "part of the agricultural
population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over into an
urban or manufacturing \[i.e., non-agricultural\] proletariat\.... This
source of relative surplus population is thus constantly flowing\....
The agricultural laborer is therefore reduced to the minimum of wages,
and always stands with one foot already in the swamp of pauperism."
(*Capital*, Vol. I) The peasant's private ownership of the land he tills
is the foundation of small-scale production and the condition for its
prospering and achieving the classical form. But such small-scale
production is compatible only with a narrow and primitive framework of
production and society. Under capitalism, the

"exploitation of the peasant differs only in form from the exploitation
of the industrial proletariat. The exploiter is the same: capital. The
individual capitalists exploit the individual peasant through mortgages
and usury; the capitalist class exploits the peasant class through the
state taxes." \[[*The Class Struggles in
France*](../../../../marx/works/1850/class-struggles-france/index.htm)\]

"The small holding of the peasant is now only the pretext that allows
the capitalist to draw profits, interest and rent from the soil, while
leaving it to the tiller of the soil himself to see how he can extract
his wages." (*The Eighteenth Brumaire*) As a rule, the peasant cedes to
capitalist society---i.e., to the capitalist class---even a part of the
wages, sinking "to the level of the Irish tenant farmer---all under the
pretense of being a private proprietor." (*The Class Struggles In
France*)

What is "one of the reasons why grain prices are lower in countries with
predominant small-peasant land proprietorship than in countries with a
capitalist mode of production?"
\[[*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1894-c3/index.htm), Vol. III\] It
is that the peasant hands over gratis to society (i.e., the capitalist
class) a part of his surplus product. "This lower price \[of grain and
other agricultural produce\] is consequently a result of the producers'
poverty and by no means of their labor productivity."
\[[*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1894-c3/index.htm), Vol. III\]
Under capitalism, the small-holding system, which is the normal form of
small-scale production, degenerates, collapses, and perishes.

"Proprietorship of land parcels, by its very nature, excludes the
development of social productive forces of labor, social forms of labor,
social concentration of capital, large-scale cattle raising, and the
progressive application of science. Usury and a taxation system must
impoverish it everywhere. The expenditure of capital in the price of the
land withdraws this capital from cultivation. An infinite fragmentation
of means of production and isolation of the producers themselves."

(Co-operative societies, i.e., associations of small peasants, while
playing an extremely progressive bourgeois role, only weakens this
tendency, without eliminating it; nor must it be forgotten that these
co-operative societies do much for the well-to-do peasants, and very
little---next to nothing---for the mass of poor peasants; then the
associations themselves become exploiters of hired labor.)

"Monstrous waste of human energy. Progressive deterioration of
conditions of production and increased prices of means of
production---an inevitable law of proprietorship of parcels."
\[[*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1894-c3/index.htm), Volume III\] In
agriculture, as in industry, capitalism transforms the process of
production only at the price of the "martyrdom of the producer."

"The dispersion of the rural laborers over larger areas breaks their
power of resistance, while concentration increases that of the town
operatives. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the
increased productiveness and quantity of the labor set in motion are
bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labor power
itself. Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress
in the art, not only of robbing the laborer, but of robbing the
soil\.... Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the
combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by
sapping the original sources of all wealth---the soil and the laborer."
\[[*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1894-c3/index.htm), Volume III\]

[]{#notes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P066F01){#fwV21P066F01}^ *The Theory of Marginal
Utility*---An economic theory that originated in the 1870s to counteract
Marx's theory of value. According to this theory, the value of
commodities are estimated by their usefulness and not the amount of
social labor expended on their production.---*Ed.*

^[\[2\]](#bkV21P068F01){#fwV21P068F01}^ Quit-rent.---*Ed.*

[]{#endnotes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [ [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm)]{.footer}  \|    [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
                                      [ [\< backward](ch02.htm "II: The Marxist Doctine")]{.footer}        [ [forward \>](ch04.htm "IV: Socialism")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
