## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Socialism {#socialism title="ch04"}

From the foregoing, it is evident that Marx deduces the inevitability of
the transformation of capitalist society into socialist society and
wholly and exclusively from the economic law of the development of
contemporary society. The socialization of labor, which is advancing
ever more rapidly in thousands of forms and has manifested itself very
strikingly, during the half-century since the death of Marx, in the
growth of large-scale production, capitalist cartels, syndicates and
trusts, as well as in the gigantic increase in the dimensions and power
of finance capital, provides the principal material foundation for the
inevitable advent of socialism. The intellectual and moral motive force
and the physical executor of this transformation is the proletariat,
which has been trained by capitalism itself. The proletariat's struggle
against the bourgeoisie, which finds expression in a variety of forms
ever richer in content, inevitably becomes a political struggle directed
towards the conquest of political power by the proletariat ("the
dictatorship of the proletariat"). The socialization of production
cannot but lead to the means of production becoming the property of
society, to the "expropriation of the expropriators." A tremendous rise
in labor productivity, a shorter working day, and the replacement of the
remnants, the ruins, of small-scale, primitive and disunited production
by collective and improved labor---such are the direct consequences of
this transformation. Capitalism breaks for all time the ties between
agriculture and industry, but at the same time, through its highest
development, it prepares new elements of those ties, a union between
industry and agriculture based on the conscious application of science
and the concentration of collective labor, and on a redistribution of
the human population (thus putting an end both to rural backwardness,
isolation and barbarism, and to the unnatural concentration of vast
masses of people in big cities). A new form of family, new conditions in
the status of women and in the upbringing of the younger generation are
prepared by the highest forms of present-day capitalism: the labor of
women and children and the break-up of the patriarchal family by
capitalism inevitably assume the most terrible, disastrous, and
repulsive forms in modern society. Nevertheless,

"modern industry, by assigning as it does, an important part in the
socially organized process of production, outside the domestic sphere,
to women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new
economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations
between the sexes. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the
Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it
would be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient
Greek, or the Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a
series in historic development. Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of
the collective working group being composed of individuals of both sexes
and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a
source of human development; although in its spontaneously developed,
brutal, capitalistic form, where the laborer exists for the process of
production, and not the process of production for the laborer, that fact
is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery."
([*Capital*](../../../../marx/works/1867-c1/ch13.htm), Vol. I, end of
Chapter 13)

The factory system contains

"the germ of the education of the future, an education that will, in the
ease of every child over a given age, combine productive labor with
instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the methods of adding to
the efficiency of social production, but as the only method of producing
fully developed human beings." \[*ibid*.\]

Marx's socialism places the problems of nationality and of the state on
the same historical footing, not only in the sense of explaining the
past but also in the sense of a bold forecast of the future and of bold
practical action for its achievement. Nations are an inevitable product,
an inevitable form, in the bourgeois epoch of social development. The
working class could not grow strong, become mature and take shape
without "constituting itself within the nation," without being
"national" ("though not in the bourgeois sense of the word"). The
development of capitalism, however, breaks down national barriers more
and more, does away with national seclusion, and substitutes class
antagonisms for national antagonism. It is, therefore, perfectly true of
the developed capitalist countries that "the workingmen have no country"
and that "united action" by the workers, of the civilized countries at
least, "is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the
proletariat" \[*[Communist
Manifesto](../../../../marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm)*\].
That state, which is organized coercion, inevitably came into being at a
definite stage in the development of society, when the latter had split
into irreconcilable classes, and could not exist without an "authority"
ostensibly standing above society, and to a certain degree separate from
society. Arising out of class contradictions, the state becomes "\...the
state of the most powerful, economically dominant class, which, through
the medium of the state, becomes also the politically dominant class,
and thus acquires new means of holding down and exploiting the oppressed
class. Thus, the state of antiquity was above all the state of the
slave-owners for the purpose of holding down the slaves, as the feudal
state was the organ of the nobility for holding down the peasant serfs
and bondsmen, and the modern representative state is an instrument of
exploitation of wage labor by capital." (Engels, *[The Origin of the
Family, Private Property and the
State](../../../../marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm)*, a
work in which the writer expounds his own views and Marx's.) Even the
democratic republic, the freest and most progressive form of the
bourgeois state, does not eliminate this fact in any way, but merely
modifies its form (the links between government and the stock exchange,
the corruption---direct and indirect---of officialdom and the press,
etc.). By leading to the abolition of classes, socialism will thereby
lead to the abolition of the state as well. "The first act," Engels
writes in
*[Anti-Dühring](../../../../marx/works/1877/anti-duhring/index.htm)* "by
virtue of which the state really constitutes itself the representative
of society as a whole---the taking possession of the means of production
in the name of society---is, at the same time, its last independent act
as a state. The state interference in social relations becomes
superfluous in one sphere after another, and then ceases of itself. The
government of persons is replaced by the administration of things and by
the direction of the processes of production. The state is not
'abolished,' it withers away"
\[*[Anti-Dühring](../../../../marx/works/1877/anti-duhring/index.htm)*\].

"The society that will organize production on the basis of a free and
equal association of the producers will put the whole machinery of state
where it will then belong: into the Museum of Antiquities, by the side
of the spinning wheel and the bronze axe." \[Engels, *The Origin of the
Family, Private Property and the State*\].

Finally, as regards the attitude of Marx's socialism towards the small
peasantry, which will continue to exist in the period of the
expropriation of the expropriators, we must refer to a declaration made
by Engels, which expresses Marx's views:

"\...when we are in possession of state power we shall not even think of
forcibly expropriating the small peasants (regardless of whether with or
without compensation), as we shall have to do in the case of the big
landowners. Our task relative to the small peasant consists, in the
first place, in effecting a transition of his private enterprise and
private possession to co-operative ones, not forcibly but by dint of
example and the proffer of social assistance for this purpose. And then
of course we shall have ample means of showing to the small peasant
prospective advantages that must be obvious to him even today."
\[Engels, [*The Peasant Question in France and
Germany*](../../../../marx/works/1894/peasant-question/index.htm),
^[\[1\]](#fwV21P074F01){#bkV21P074F01}^ published by Alexeyeva; there
are errors in the Russian translation. Original in *Die Neue Zeit*\].

[]{#notes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P074F01){#fwV21P074F01}^ See Marx and Engels, *Selected
Works*, Moscow, 1958, Vol. II, p. 433. ---*Ed.*

[]{#endnotes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [ [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm)]{.footer}  \|    [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
                                [ [\< backward](ch03.htm "III: Marx's Economic Doctrine")]{.footer}        [ [forward \>](ch05.htm "V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
