## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat {#tactics-of-the-class-struggle-of-the-proletariat title="ch05"}

After examining, as early as 1844-45, one of the main shortcomings in
the earlier materialism---namely, its inability to understand the
conditions or appreciate the importance of practical revolutionary
activity---Marx, along with his theoretical work, devoted unremitting
attention, throughout his lifetime, to the tactical problems of the
proletariat's class struggle. An immense amount of material bearing on
this is contained in *all* the works of Marx, particularly in the four
volumes of his correspondence with Engels, published in 1913. This
material is still far from having been brought together, collected,
examined and studied. We shall therefore have to confine ourselves here
to the most general and brief remarks, emphasizing that Marx justly
considered that, without *this* aspect, materialism is incomplete,
onesided, and lifeless. The fundamental task of proletarian tactics was
defined by Marx in strict conformity with all the postulates of his
materialist-dialectical *Weltanschauung* \["world-view"\]. Only an
objective consideration of the sum total of the relations between
absolutely all the classes in a given society, and consequently a
consideration of the objective stage of development reached by that
society and of the relations between it and other societies, can serve
as a basis for the correct tactics of an advanced class. At the same
time, all classes and all countries are regarded, not statically, but
dynamically ---i.e., not in a state of immobility---but in motion (whose
laws are determined by the economic conditions of existence of each
class). Motion, in its turn, is regarded from the standpoint, not only
of the past, but also of the future, and that not in the vulgar sense it
is understood in by the "evolutionists", who see only slow changes, but
dialectically: "\...in developments of such magnitude 20 years are no
more than a day," Marx wrote to Engels, "thought later on there may come
days in which 20 years are embodied" (*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 3, p.
127).^[\[2\]](#fwV21E030){#bkV21E030}^

At each stage of development, at each moment, proletarian tactics must
take account of this objectively inevitable dialectics of human history,
on the one hand, utilizing the periods of political stagnation or of
sluggish, so-called "peaceful" development in order to develop the
class-consciousness, strength and militancy of the advanced class, and,
on the other hand, directing all the work of this utilization towards
the "ultimate aim" of that class's advance, towards creating in it the
ability to find practical solutions for great tasks in the great days,
in which "20 years are embodied". Two of Marx's arguments are of special
importance in this connection: one of these is contained in [*The
Poverty of
Philosophy*](../../../../marx/works/1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm),
and concerns the economic struggle and economic organizations of the
proletariat; the other is contained in the *[Communist
Manifesto](../../../../marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm)*
and concerns the asks of the proletariat. The former runs as follows:

"Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people
unknown to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the
maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against their
boss, unites them in a common thought of resistance---combination\....
Combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves into groups \...
and in face of always united capital, the maintenance of the association
becomes more necessary to them \[i.e., the workers\] than that of
wages\.... In this struggle---a veritable civil war---all the elements
necessary for coming battle unite and develop. Once it has reached this
point, association takes on a political character. (Marx, [*The Poverty
of
Philosopy*](../../../../marx/works/1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm),
1847)

Here we have the programme and tactics of the economic struggle and of
the trade union movement for several decades to come, for all the
lengthy period in which the proletariat will prepare its forces for the
"coming battle." All this should be compared with numerous references by
Marx and Engels to the example of the British labor movement, showing
how industrial "property" leads to attempts "to buy the proletariat"
(*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 1, p. 136).^[\[3\]](#fwV21E031){#bkV21E031}^ to
divert them from the struggle; how this prosperity in general
"demoralizes the workers" (Vol. 2, p. 218); how the British proletariat
becomes "bourgeoisified"---"this most bourgeois of all nations is
apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois
aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat alongside the bourgeoisie"
Chartists (1866; Vol. 3, p. 305)^[\[4\]](#fwV21E033){#bkV21E033}^; how
the British workers' leaders are becoming a type midway between "a
radical bourgeois and a worker" (in reference to Holyoak, Vol. 4, p.
209); how, owning to Britain's monopoly, and as long as that monopoly
lasts, "the British workingman will not budge" (Vol. 4, p.
433).^[\[5\]](#fwV21E034){#bkV21E034}^ The tactics of the economic
struggle, in connection with the general course (*and outcome*) of the
working-class movement, are considered here from a remarkably broad,
comprehensive, dialectical, and genuinely revolutionary standpoint.

The *Communist Manifesto* advanced a fundamental Marxist principle on
the tactics of the political struggle:

"The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the
movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the future
of that movement." That was why, in 1848, Marx supported the party of
the "agrarian revolution" in Poland, "that party which brought about the
Krakow insurrection in 1846."^[\[1\]](#fwV21P077F01){#bkV21P077F01}^

In Germany, Marx, in 1848 and 1849, supported the extreme revolutionary
democrats, and subsequently never retracted what he had then said about
tactics. He regarded the German bourgeoisie as an element which was
"inclined from the very beginning to betray the people" (only an
alliance with the peasantry could have enabled the bourgeoisie to
completely achieve its aims) "and compromise with the crowned
representatives of the old society." Here is Marx's summing-up of the
German bourgeois-democratic revolution---an analysis which,
incidentally, is a sample of a materialism that examines society in
motion, and, moreover, not only from the aspect of a motion that is
*backward*:

"Without faith in itself, without faith in the people, grumbling at
those above, trembling before those below \... intimidated by the world
storm \... no energy in any respect, plagiarism in every respect \...
without initiative \... an execrable old man who saw himself doomed to
guide and deflect the first youthful impulses of a robust people in his
own senile interests\...." (*Neue Rheinische Zeitung*, 1848; see
*Literarischer Nachlass*, Vol. 3, p.
212.)^[\[6\]](#fwV21E035){#bkV21E035}^

About 20 years later, Marx declared, in a letter to Engels
(*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 3, p.224), that the Revolution of 1848 had failed
because the bourgeoisie had preferred peace with slavery to the mere
prospect of a fight for freedom. When the revolutionary period of
1848-49 ended, Marx opposed any attempt to play at revolution (his
struggle against Schapper and Willich), and insisted on the ability to
work in a new phase, which in a quasi-"peaceful" way was preparing new
revolutions. The spirit in which Marx wanted this work to be conducted
is to be seen in his appraisal of the situation in Germany in 1856, the
darkest period of reaction: "The whole thing in Germany will depend on
the possibility of backing the proletarian revolution by some second
edition of the Peasant War" (*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 2, p.
108).^[\[7\]](#fwV21E036){#bkV21E036}^ While the democratic (bourgeois)
revolution in Germany was uncompleted, Marx focused every attention, in
the tactics of the socialist proletariat, on developing the democratic
energy of the peasantry. He held that Lassalle's attitude was
"objectively\... a betrayal of the whole workers' movement to Prussia"
(Vol. 3, p.210), incidentally because Lassalle was tolerant of the
Junkers and Prussian nationalism.

"In a predominantly agricultural country," Engels wrote in 1865, in
exchanging views with Marx on their forthcoming joint declaration in the
press, "\...it is dastardly to make an exclusive attack on the
bourgeoisie in the name of the industrial proletariat but never to
devote a word to the patriarchal exploitation of the rural proletariat
under the lash of the great feudal aristocracy" (Vol. 3, p.
217).^[\[8\]](#fwV21E037){#bkV21E037}^

From 1864 to 1870, when the period of the consummation of the
bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany was coming to an end, a
period in which the Prussian and Austrian exploiting classes were
struggling to complete that revolution in one way or another *from
above*, Marx not only rebuked Lassalle, who was coquetting with
Bismarck, but also corrected Liebknecht, who had "lapsed into
Austrophilism" and a defense of particularism; Marx demanded
revolutionary tactics which would combat with equal ruthlessness both
Bismarck and the Austrophiles, tactics which would not be adapted to the
"victor"---the Prussian Junkers---but would immediately renew the
revolutionary struggle against him *despite the conditions* created by
the Prussian military victories (*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 3, pp. 134, 136,
147, 179, 204, 210, 215, 418, 437, 440-41).

In the celebrated Address of the International of September 9 1870, Marx
warned the French proletariat against an untimely uprising, but when an
uprising nevertheless took place (1871), Marx enthusiastically hailed
the revolutionary initiative of the masses, who were "storming heaven"
(Marx's [letter to
Kugelmann](../../../../marx/works/1871/letters/71_04_17.htm)).

From the standpoint of Marx's dialectical materialism, the defeat of
revolutionary action in that situation, as in many other, was a lesser
evil, in the general course *and outcome* of the proletarian struggle,
than the abandonment of a position already occupied, than surrender
without battle. Such a surrender would have demoralised the proletariat
and weakened its militancy. While fully appreciating the use of legal
means of struggle during periods of political stagnation and the
domination of bourgeois legality, Marx, in 1877 and 1878, following the
passage of the Anti-Socialist Law,^[\[9\]](#fwV21E038){#bkV21E038}^
sharply condemned Most's "revolutionary phrases"; no less sharply, if
not more so, did he attack the opportunism that had for a time come over
the official Social-Democratic Party, which did not at once display
resoluteness, firmness, revolutionary spirit and the readiness to resort
to an illegal struggle in response to the Anti-Socialist Law
(*Briefwechsel*, Vol. 4, pp. 397, 404, 418, 422, 424; cf. also letters
to Sorge).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#notes}

 

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P077F01){#fwV21P077F01}^ The reference is to the
democratic uprising for national liberation in the Krakow Republic which
in 1815 was placed under the joint control of Austria, Prussia and
Russia. The rebels set up a National Government which issued a manifesto
proclaiming abolition of feudal services and promising to give the
peasants lands without redemption. In its other proclamations it
announced the establishment of national workshops with higher wages and
the introduction of equal rights for all citizens. Soon, however, the
uprising was suppressed.---*Ed.*

[]{#endnotes}

^[\[2\]](#bkV21E030){#fwV21E030}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[3\]](#bkV21E031){#fwV21E031}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[4\]](#bkV21E033){#fwV21E033}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[5\]](#bkV21E034){#fwV21E034}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[6\]](#bkV21E035){#fwV21E035}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[7\]](#bkV21E036){#fwV21E036}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[8\]](#bkV21E037){#fwV21E037}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

^[\[9\]](#bkV21E038){#fwV21E038}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [ [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm)]{.footer}  \|    [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
                                                [ [\< backward](ch04.htm "IV: Socialism")]{.footer}        [ [forward \>](ch06.htm "VI: Bibliography")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
