## Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

### Karl Marx {#karl-marx .title}

#### A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism {#a-brief-biographical-sketch-with-an-exposition-of-marxism .subtitle}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Bibliography {#bibliography title="ch06"}

No complete collection of Marx's works and letters has yet been
published. More works by Marx have been translated into Russian than
into any other language. The following list of Marx's writings is
arranged in chronological order. In 1841 Marx wrote his thesis on
Epicurus's philosophy. (It was included in *Literarischer Nachiass*, of
which more will be said later.) In this thesis, Marx still fully adhered
to the Hegelian idealist point of view. In 1842 Marx wrote articles for
*Rheinische Zeitung* (Cologne), among them a criticism of the free-press
debate in the Sixth Rhenish Diet, an article on the laws concerning the
stealing of timber, another in defence of divorcing politics from
theology, etc. (partly included in *Literarischer Nachiass*). Here we
see signs of Marx's transition from idealism to materialism and from
revolutionary democracy to communism. In 1844, under the editorship of
Marx and Arnold Ruge, there appeared in Paris *Deutsche-Franzosische
Jahrbücher*, in which this transition was finally made. Among Marx's
articles published in that magazine, the most noteworthy are *A
Criticism of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right* (besides *Literarischer
Nachiass*, also published as a separate pamphlet) and *On the Jewish
Question* (likewise in *Literarischer Nachiass;* issued as a pamphlet
brought out by the *Znaniye* Publishers in their Cheap Library, No.
210). In 1845, Marx and Engels jointly published, in Frankfort on Main,
a pamphlet entitled *The Holy Family. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.*
(besides *Literarischer Nachiass*, there are two Russian editions as
pamphlets: one published by *Novy Gobs* in St. Petersburg, 1906, the
other by *Vesinik Znaniya*, St. Petersburg, 1907). In the spring of
1845, Marx wrote his theses on Feuerbach (published as an appendix to
Frederick Engels's pamphlet entitled *Ludwig Feuerbach* (there is a
Russian translation). In 1845-47 Marx wrote a number of articles (most
of which have not been collected, republished, or translated into
Russian) in the papers *Vorwärts, Deutsche Brässeler-Zeitung* (1847);
*Westphalisches Dampboot* (Bide. fold, 1845-48); *Der
Gesellschatsspiegel* (Elberfeld, 1846). In 1847 Marx wrote his
fundamental work against Proudhon, *The Poverty of Philosophy*, a reply
to Proudhon's work *The Philosophy of Poverty*. The book was published
in Brussels and Paris (there have been three publications in Russian by
*Novy Mir*, one by G. Lvovich, one by Alexeyeva, and one by
*Prosveshcheniye*, all in 1905-06). In 1848 the *Speech on Free Trade*
was published in Brussels (Russian translation available), followed by
the publication in London, in collaboration with Frederick Engels, of
the celebrated *Manifesto of the Communist Party*, which has been
translated into probably all the languages of Europe and into a number
of other languages (there are about eight Russian publications referring
to 1905 and 1906; by *Molot, Kolokol, Alexeyeva, etc.*, most of which
were confiscated. These appeared under various titles: *The Communist
Manifesto, On Communism, Social Classes and Communism, Capitalism and
Communism, The Philosophy of History*. A complete and most accurate
translation of this, as well as of other works by Marx, will be found in
the editions of the Emancipation of Labour group, issued
abroad^[\[31\]](#fwV21E039){#bkV21E039}^). From June 1, 1848, to May 19,
1849, *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* was published in Cologne with Marx as
the actual editor-in-chief. His numerous articles for that paper, which
to this very day remains the finest and unsurpassed organ of the
revolutionary proletariat, have not been collected and republished in
full. The most important of them were included in *Literarischer
Nachiass*. *Wage-Labour and Capital*, published in that paper, has been
repeatedly issued as a pamphlet (four Russian editions, by Kozman,
*Mobot*, Myagkov, and Lvovich, 1905 and 1906); also from the same paper
*The Liberals at the Helm* (published by Znaniye Publishers in their
Cheap Library, No. 272, St. Petersburg, 1901). In 1849 Marx published,
in Cologne, *Two Political Trials* (two speeches in his own defence by
Marx, who was acquitted by a jury when facing trial on the charge of
having violated the press law and called for armed resistance to the
government. Russian translations are available in five publications
brought out in 1905 and 1906 by Alexayeva, Molot, Myagkov, *Znaniye*,
and *Novy Mir*). In 1850 Marx published, in Hamburg, six issues of the
magazine *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*. The most important articles
published therein were later included in *Literarischer Nachiass*.
Especially noteworthy are Marx's articles, republished by Engels in 1895
in a pamphlet entitled *Class Struggles in France, 1848-1850* (Russian
translation, published by M. Malykh, Library, No. 59-60; also in the
*Collection of Historical Works*, translated by Bazarov and Stepanov and
published by Skirmunt, St. Petersburg, 1906; also *Thoughts and Views of
the 20th Century*, St. Petersburg, 1912). In 1852 a pamphlet by Marx was
published in New York under the title of *The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Bonaparte* (Russian translation in publications just mentioned).
In the same year a pamphlet was published in London under the title of
*Enthüllungen fiber den Communistenprozess in Köln* (Russian translation
entitled *The Cologne Trial of the Communards*, Popular Science Library,
No. 43, St. Petersburg, 1906, Oct. 28).

From August 1851 until 1862,^[\[1\]](#fwV21P082F01){#bkV21P082F01}^ Marx
was a regular contributor to the *New York Tribune*, where many of his
articles appeared unsigned, as editorials. Most outstanding among these
is a series of articles, *Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany*,
which were republished after the death of Marx and Engels in a German
translation (a Russian translation is available in collections
translated by Bazarov and Stepanov, and then, in pamphlet form, in five
editions brought out in 1905-06 by Alexeyeva, Obshchestvennaya Poiza,
Novy Mir, Vseobshchaya Biblioteka and *Molot*). Some of Marx's articles
in the *Tribune* were later published in London as separate pamphlets,
as, for instance, the one on Palmerston, published in 1856; *Revelations
of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century* (regarding the constant
venal dependence on Russia of the British Liberal Ministers), and
others. After Marx's death, his daughter, Eleanor Aveling, published a
number of his *Tribune* articles on the Oriental question, under the
title of *The Eastern Question*, London, 1897. Part has been translated
into Russian: *War and Revolution*, Issue I, Marx and Engels:
*Unpublished Articles (1852, 1853, 1854)*, Kharkov, 1919 (*Our Thought*
Library). From the end of 1854, and during 1855, Marx contributed to the
*Neue Oder-Zeitung* and in 1861-62 to the Viennese paper *Presse*. These
articles have not been collected, and only a few of them were reprinted
in *Die Neue Zeit*, as were also Marx's numerous letters. The same is
true about Marx's articles from *Das Volk* (London, 1859) on the
diplomatic history of the Italian War of 1859. In 1859 Marx's
*Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy* appeared in Berlin
(Russian translations: Moscow, 1896, edited by Manuilov; St. Petersburg,
1907, translated by Rumyantsev), In 1860 a pamphlet by Marx, entitled
*Herr Vogt*, appeared in London.

In 1864 the *Address of the International Workingmen's Association*,
which was written by Marx, came out in London (Russian translation
available). Marx was the author of numerous manifestos, appeals and
resolutions of the International's General Council. This material is far
from having been analysed or even collected. The first approach to this
work is Gustav Jaeckh's book, *Die Internationale* (in the Russian
translation: St. Petersburg, 1906, Znaniye Publishers), which includes
several of Marx's letters and draft resolutions. Among the documents of
the International that Marx wrote was the *Address of the General
Council on the Paris Commune*. The document appeared in 1871 in London,
as a pamphlet entitled *The Civil War in France* (Russian translations:
one edited by Lenin, Molot Publishers, and others). Between 1862 and
1874 Marx corresponded with Kugelniann, a member of the International
(two Russian translations: one by A. Goikhbarg, the other edited by
Lenin). In 1867 Marx's main work, *Capital: A Critique of Political
Economy*, Vol. 1, appeared in Hamburg. Volumes 2 and 3 were published by
Engels in 1885 and 1894, after the death of Marx. The Russian
translations: Vol. 1, in five editions (two in a translation by
Danielson, 1872 and 1898; two in a translation by E. A. Gurvich and L.
M. Zak, edited by Struve; 1st ed.---1899, 2nd ed.---1905; another edited
by Bazarov and Stepauov). Volumes 2 and 3 appeared in a translation by
Danielson (less satisfactory) and in another under the editorship of
Bazarov and Stepanov (the better). In 1876 Marx took part in the writing
of Engels's *Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft
(Anti-Dühring)*; he went over the manuscript of the whole work and wrote
an entire chapter dealing with the history of political economy.

The following works by Marx were published posthumously: *Critique of
the Gotha Programme* (St. Petersburg, 1906, and in German in *Die Neue
Zeit*, 1890-91, No, 18); *Value, Price and Profit* (a lecture delivered
on June 26, 1865; *Die Neue Zeit*, XVI, 1897-98; Russian translations,
brought out by *Molot*, 1906, and Lvovich, 1905); *Aus dem literarischen
Nachiass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle*, three
volumes, Stuttgart, 1902 (Russian translation, edited by Axelrod and
others, 2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1908: Vol. 1 also edited by E. Gurvich,
Moscow, 1907. Lassalle's letters to Marx, published separately, are
included in *Literarischer Nachiass); Letters from K. Marx and F. Engels
and Others to F. A. Sorge and Others* (two editions in Russian; one
edited by Axeirod, another published by Dauge, with a preface by Lenin);
*Theorien fiber den Mehrwert*, three volumes in four parts, Stuttgart,
1905-10, which is the manuscript of the fourth volume of *Capital* and
published by Kautsky (only the first volume translated into Russian; in
three editions; St. Petersburg, 1906, edited by Plekhanov; Kiev, 1906,
edited by Zheleznov, and Kiev, 1907, edited by Tuchapsky). In 1913 four
big volumes of *Marx-Engels Correspondence* came out in Stuttgart, with
1,386 letters written between September 1844 and January 10, 1883, and
providing a mass of highly valuable material for a study of Marx's
biography and views. In 1917, two volumes of Marx's and Engels's works
appeared, containing their articles for 1852-62 (in German). This list
of Marx's works must conclude with a note that many of Marx's shorter
articles and letters, published, for the most part, in *Die Neue Zeit*,
*Vorwürts*, and other German-language Social-Democratic periodicals,
have not been enumerated. The list of Russian translations of Marx is no
doubt incomplete especially with reference to pamphlets that appeared in
1905-06.

The literature on Marx and Marxism is very extensive. We shall mention
only what is most outstanding, and divide the authors into three main
groups: Marxists who, in important matters, adhere to Marx's point of
view; bourgeois writers, in essence hostile to Marxism; and
revisionists, who, while claiming to accept certain fundamentals of
Marxism, in fact replace it with bourgeois conceptions. The Narodnik
attitude towards Marx should be considered a peculiarly Russian variety
of revisionism. In his *Em Beitrag zur Bibliographie des Marxismus*
(Archiv für Soztalwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, XX, 2.
Heft,^[\[2\]](#fwV21P085F01){#bkV21P085F01}^ 1905, pp. 413-30), Werner
Sombart gives some three hundred titles in a list that is far from
complete. More can be found in the indexes to *Die Neue Zeit*,
1883-1907, et seq., also in Josef Stammhammer's *Bibliographie des
Sozialismus und Kommunismus*, Bd.
I---III,^[\[3\]](#fwV21P085F02){#bkV21P085F02}^ Jena (1893---1909). For
a detailed bibliography on Marxism see also *Bibliographic der
Soztalwissenschaften*, Berlin. Jahrgang 1, 1905, u.
ff.^[\[4\]](#fwV21P085F03){#bkV21P085F03}^

See also N. A. Rubakin, *Among Books* (Vol. 2, 2nd ed.). We mention here
only the most important bibliographies. On the subject of Marx's
biography, attention must be called first of all to Frederick Engels's
articles in *Volkskalender*,^[\[5\]](#fwV21P085F04){#bkV21P085F04}^
published by Bracke in Brunswick in 1878 and in *Handwörterbuch der
Staatswissenschatten*, Bd. 6, S.
600---03^[\[6\]](#fwV21P085F05){#bkV21P085F05}^; W. Liebknecht, *Karl
Marx zum Gedächtniss*,^[\[7\]](#fwV21P085F06){#bkV21P085F06}^ Nuremberg,
1896; Lafargue, *Karl Marx*, Persönlichee
Ermnnerungen;^[\[8\]](#fwV21P085F07){#bkV21P085F07}^ W. Liebknecht,
*Karl Marx*, 2nd ed., St. Petersburg, 1906; P. Lafargue, *My
Recollections of Karl Marx*, Odessa, 1905 (see original in *Die Neue
Zeit*, IX, 1); *Karl Marx: In Memoriam*, St. Petersburg, 1908, 410
pages, a collection of articles by Y. Nevzoroy, N. Rozhkov, V. Bazarov,
Y. Steklov, A. Finn-Yenotayevsky, P. Rumyantsev, K. Renner, H.
Roland-Holst, V. Ilyin, R. Luxemburg, G. Zinoviev, Y. Kamenev, P.
Orlovsky, M. Tagansky; Franz Mehring, Karl Marx. The extensive biography
of Marx written in English by the Amencan socialist, Spargo (John
Spargo, *Karl Marx, His Life and Work*, London, 1911), is
unsatisfactory. For a general review of Marx's activities, see Karl
Kautsky, *Die historische Leistung von Karl Marx*. Zum 25. Todestag des
Meisters,^[\[9\]](#fwV21P086F01){#bkV21P086F01}^ Berlin, 1908. The
Russian translation is entitled *Karl Marx and His Historical
Importance*, St. Petersburg, 1908. See also a popular pamphlet by Clara
Zetkin, *Karl Marx und sein
Lebenswerk*^[\[10\]](#fwV21P086F02){#bkV21P086F02}^ (1913).
Reminiscences of Marx: those by Annenkov in *Vestnik Yevropy*, 1880, No.
4 (also in his *Reminiscences*, Vol. 3, *A Remarkable Decade*, St.
Petersburg, 1882); those by Karl Schurz in *Russkoye Bogatstvo*, 1906,
No. 12; by M. Kovalevsky in *Vestnik Yevropy*, 1909, No. 6, et seq.

On the question of Marxist philosophy and historical materialism the
best exposition is given by G. V. Plekhanov, *For Twenty Years*, St.
Petersburg, 1909, 3rd ed.; *From Defence to Attack*, St. Petersburg,
1910; *Fundamental Problems of Marxism*, St. Petersburg, 1908; A
*Critique of Our Critics*, St. Petersburg, 1906; *The Development of the
Monist View of History*, St. Petersburg, 1908, and other works. Antonio
Labriola, *On the Materialist View of History* \[in Russian\], St.
Petersburg, 1898; also his *Historical Materialism and Philosophy*, St.
Petersburg, 1906; Franz Mehring, *On Historical Materialism* \[in
Russian\] (two editions, by *Prosveshcheniye* and *Molot*), St.
Petersburg, 1906, and *The Lessing Legend* \[in Russian\], St.
Petersburg, 1908 (*Znaniye*); see also Charles Andler (non-Marxist),
*The Communist Manifesto. History, Introduction, Comments* \[in
Russian\], St. Petersburg, 1906. See also *Historical Materialism*, St.
Petersburg, 1908, a collection of articles by Engels, Kautsky, Lafargue,
and many others; L. Axelrod, Philosophical Sketches. A Reply to
Philosophic Critics of *Historical Materialism*, St. Petersburg, 1906. A
special defence of Dietzgen's unsuccessful deviations from Marxism is
contained in E. Untermann's *Die logischen Mängel des engeren
Marxismus*,^[\[11\]](#fwV21P087F01){#bkV21P087F01}^ Munich, 1910 , 753
pages (an extensive but none too serious work). Hugo Riekes's *Die
philosophische Tvurzel des Marxismus*, in *Zeitschrift für die gesamte
Staatswissenschaft*, 62. Jahrgang, 1906, 3. Heft, S.
407---32,^[\[12\]](#fwV21P087F02){#bkV21P087F02}^ is an interesting
piece of work by an opponent of the Marxist views, showing their
philosophical integrity from the viewpoint of materialism. Benno
Erdmann's *Die philosophisehen Voraussetzungen der materialist ischen
Geschichtsaufiassung*, in *Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung*, Verwaltung und
Volkswirtschaft (Schtnollers Jahrbuch), 1907, 3. Heft, S.
156,^[\[13\]](#fwV21P087F03){#bkV21P087F03}^ is a very useful
formulation of some of the basic principles of Marx's philosophical
materialism, and a summary of arguments against it from the current
viewpoint of Kantianism, and agnosticism in general. Rudolph Stammier (a
Kantian), *Wirtschaft und Rechi nach der materialistischen
Geschichtsauffassung*,^[\[14\]](#fwV21P087F04){#bkV21P087F04}^ 2nd ed.,
Leipzig, 1906; Woltmann (also a Kantian), *Historical Materialism* (in a
Russian translation, 1901); Vorländer (also a Kantian), *Kant and Marx*,
\[in Russian\], St. Petersburg, 1909. See also the polemic between A.
Bogdanov, V. Bazarov and others, on the one hand, and V.
Ilyin,^[\[15\]](#fwV21P087F05){#bkV21P087F05}^ on the other (the views
of the former being contained in *An Outline of the Philosophy of
Marxism*, St. Petersburg, 1908; A. Bogdanov, *The Downfall of a Great
Fetishism*, Moscow, 1909, and elsewhere, and the views of the latter, in
*Materialism and Empirio-Criticism*, Moscow, 1909). On the question of
historical materialism and ethics: Karl Kautsky, *Ethics and the
Materialist Conception of History*, St. Petersburg, 1906, and numerous
other works by Kautsky; Louis Boudin, *The Theoretical System of Karl
Marx in the Light of Recent Criticism*, translated from the English
under the editorship of V. Zasulich, St. Petersburg, 1908; Hermann
Gorter, *Der historische
Materialismus*,^[\[16\]](#fwV21P088F01){#bkV21P088F01}^ 1909. Of works
by opponents to Marxism, we would name Tugan-Baranovsky, *The
Theoretical Fundamentals of Marxism*, St. Petersburg, 1907; S.
Prokopovieb, *A Critique of Marx*, St. Petersburg, 1901; Hammacher,
*Dasphilosophisch-ökonomische System des
Marxismus*,^[\[17\]](#fwV21P088F02){#bkV21P088F02}^ Leipzig, 1910 (730
pages, collection of quotations); Werner Sombart, *Socialism and the
Social-Movement in the Nineteenth Century* in Russian\], St. Petersburg;
Max Adler (a Kantian), *Kausalitilt und Teleologie*, Vienna, 1909, in
*Marx-Studien*, also *Marx als
Denker*^[\[18\]](#fwV21P088F03){#bkV21P088F03}^ by the same author.

The book of an Hegelian idealist, Giovanni Gentile, *La filosofia di
Marx*,^[\[19\]](#fwV21P088F04){#bkV21P088F04}^ Pisa, 1899, is
noteworthy. The author deals with some important aspects of Marx's
materialist dialectics which usually escape the attention of the
Kantians, Positivists, etc.. Likewise: Levy, *Feuerbach*, a work about
one of the main philosophical predecessors of Marx. A useful collection
of quotations from a number of Marx's works is contained in Chernyshev's
*Notebook of a Marxist*, St. Petersburg (Dyelo), 1908. On Marx's
economic doctrine, the following books are outstanding: Karl Kautsky,
*The Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx* (numerous editions in Russian),
The *Agrarian Question, The Erfurt Programme*, and numerous pamphlets.
Cf. also: *Eduard Bernstein, The Economic Doctrine of Marx. The Third
Volume of Capital* (Russian translation, 1905); Gabriel Deville,
*Capital* (an exposition of the first volume of *Capital*, Russian
translation, 1907). A representative of so-called revisionism among
Marxists, as regards the agrarian question, is Eduard David, *Socialism
and Agriculture* (Russian translation, St. Petersburg, 1902). For a
critique of revisionism see V. Ilyin, *The Agrarian Question*, Part I,
St. Petersburg, 1908. See also the following books by V. Ilyin: *The
Development of Capitalism in Russia*, second edition, St. Petersburg,
1908; *Economic Essays and Articles*, St. Petersburg, 1899; *New Data on
the Laws of Development of Capitalism in Agriculture*, Book 1, 1917. An
application of Marx's views, with some deviations, to the latest data
concerning agrarian relations in France can be found in Cornpère-Morel,
*La question agraire et le socialisme en
France*,^[\[20\]](#fwV21P089F01){#bkV21P089F01}^ Paris, 1912, 455 pages.
For the further development of Marx's economic views as applied to
recent phenomena in economic life see Hilferding's *Finance Capital*
\[in Russian\], St. Petersburg, 1911 (outstanding inaccuracies in the
author's views on the theory of value have been corrected by Kautsky in
"Gold, Papier und Ware",---"Gold, Paper Money and Commodities"---in *Die
Neue Zeit*, XXX, 1; 1912, pp. 837 and 886); and V. Ilyin's *Imperialism,
the Highest Stage of Capitalism*, 1917. Pyotr Maslov in his *Agrarian
Question* (two volumes) and *The Theory of Economic Development*, St.
Petersburg, 1910, deviates from Marxism on important points. A criticism
of some of Maslov's deviations may be found in Kautsky's "*Malthusianism
and Socialism*" in *Die Neue Zeit*, XXIX, 1, 1911.

A criticism of the economic doctrine of Marx, from the point of view of
the so-called marginal utility theory that is widespread among bourgeois
professors, is contained in the following works: Böhm-Bawerk, *Zum
Abschluss des Marxschen Systems*^[\[21\]](#fwV21P089F02){#bkV21P089F02}^
(Berlin 1896, in *Staatswiss*. A ibeiten, Fesigabe für K. Knies),
Russian translation, St. Petersburg, 1897, *The Theory of Marx and Its
Criticism*, and also his *Kapital und Kapitalzins*, 2nd ed., two
volumes, Innsbruck, 1900-02 (Russian translation, *Capital and Profits*,
St. Petersburg, 1909). See also: Riekes, *Wert und Tauschwert*
(1899)^[\[22\]](#fwV21P089F03){#bkV21P089F03}^; von Bortkiewicz,
*Wertrechnung und Preisrechnung im Marxschen System* (Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft, 1906---07)^[\[23\]](#fwV21P089F04){#bkV21P089F04}^;
Leo von Buch, *Über die Elemente der politisczen Olconomie*. I. Th. *Die
Intensität d. Arbeit*, Tvert u.
Preis^[\[24\]](#fwV21P089F05){#bkV21P089F05}^ (published also in
Russian). For an analysis of Böhm-Bawerk's critique from a Marxist point
of view see Hilferding's *Böhm-Bawerks
Marx-Kritik*^[\[25\]](#fwV21P090F01){#bkV21P090F01}^ (Marx-Sludien, I.
Band, Vienna, 1904), and in shorter articles published in *Die Neue
Zeit*.

On the question of the two main currents in the interpretation and
development of Marxism---the "revisionist" and the radical
("orthodox")---see Eduard Bernstein's *Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus
und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie* (German original, Stuttgart,
1899; Russian translations: *Historical Materialism*, St. Petersburg,
1901, and *Social Problems*, Moscow, 1901); see also his *From the
History and Theory of Socialism*, St. Petersburg, 1902. A reply to
Bernstein is contained in Karl Kautsky's *Bernstein und das
sozialdemokratische Programm* (German original, Stuttgart, 1899; Russian
translation in four editions; 1905-06). For French Marxist literature
see Jules Guesde's *Quatre ans de lutte des classes*, *En garde* and
*Questions d'hier et d'aujourd'hui* (Paris,
1911)^[\[26\]](#fwV21P090F02){#bkV21P090F02}^; Paul Lafargue, *Le
déterminisme économique de K. Marx* (Paris,
1909)^[\[27\]](#fwV21P090F03){#bkV21P090F03}^; Anton Pannokoek, *Zwei
Tendenzen in der
Arbeiterbewegung*.^[\[28\]](#fwV21P090F04){#bkV21P090F04}^

On the question of the Marxist theory of the accumulation of capital
there is a new work by Rosa Luxemburg, *Die Accumulation des Kapitals*
(Berlin, 1913),^[\[29\]](#fwV21P090F05){#bkV21P090F05}^ and an analysis
of her incorrect interpretation of Marx's theory by Otto Bauer, *Die
Accumulation des Kapitals* (*Die Neue Zeit*, XXXI, 1, 1913, §.831 und
862).^[\[30\]](#fwV21P090F06){#bkV21P090F06}^ See also Eckstein in
Vorwürtsand Pannekoek in *Bremer Bürger-Zeitung* for 1913.

Of the older Russian literature on Marxism the following should be
noted: B. Chicherin, "The German Socialists," in Bezobrazov's
*Collection of Political Science*, St. Petersburg, 1888, and *The
History of Political Doctrines*, Part 5, Moscow, 1902, 156 pages; a
reply to the above by Zieber, "The German Economists Through Mr.
Chicherin's Glasses," in his *Collected Works*, Vol. II, St. Petersburg,
1900; L. Slonimsky, *The Economic Doctrine of Karl Marx*, St.
Petersburg, 1898; N. Zieber, *David Ricardo and Karl Marx in Their
Socioeconomic Investigations*, St. Petersburg, 1885, and his *Collected
Works*, in two volumes, St. Petersburg, 1900. Also J. Kaufmann's (J.
K-n) review of *Capital* in *Vesinik Yevropy* for 1872, No. 5---an
article marked by the fact that, in his addendum to the second edition
of *Capital*, Marx quoted J. K-n's arguments, recognising them as a
correct exposition of his dialectical-materialist method.

The Russian Narodniks on Marxism: N. K. Mikhailovskyin *Russcoye
Bogatstvo*, 1894, No. 10, and 1895, Nos. 1 and 2; also reprinted in his
*Collected Works*---remarks on P. Struve's *Critical Notes* (St.
Petersburg, 1894). Mikhailovsky's views were analysed from a Marxist
point of view by K. Tulin (V. Ilyin) in his *Data Characterising Our
Economic Development* (St. Petersburg, 1895, destroyed by the censor),
later reprinted in V. Ilyin's *For Twelve Years*, St. Petersburg, 1908.
Other Narodnik works: V. V., *Our Lines of Policy*, St. Petersburg,
1892, and *From the Seventies to the Twentieth Century*, St. Petersburg,
1907; Nikolai-on, *Outline of Our Post-Reform Social Economy*, St.
Petersburg, 1893; V. Chernov, *Marxism and the Agrarian Problem*, St.
Petersburg, 1906, and *Philosophical and Sociological Sketches*, St.
Petersburg, 1907.

Besides the Narodniks, the following may also be mentioned: N. Kareyev,
*Old and New Sketches on Historical Materialism*, St. Petersburg, 1896,
2nd edition in 1913 under the title *A Critique of Economic
Materialism*; Masaryk, *Philosophical and Sociological Foundations of
Marxism* \[in Russian\], Moscow, 1900; Croce, *Historical Materialism
and Marxian Economy* \[in Russian\], St. Petersburg, 1902.

For a correct appraisal of Marx's views, an acquaintance is essential
with the works of Frederick Engels, his closest fellow-thinker and
collaborator. It is impossible to understand Marxism and to propound it
fully without taking into account all the works of Engels.

For a critique of Marx from the point of view of anarchism, see V.
Cherkezov, *The Doctrines of Marxism*, two parts, St. Petersburg, 1905;
V. Tucker, *In Lieu of a Book* \[in Russian\], Moscow, 1907; Sorel (a
syndicalist), *Social Studies of Modern Economy*, Moscow, 1908.

[]{#notes}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[]{#footnotes}

^[\[1\]](#bkV21P082F01){#fwV21P082F01}^ Engels, in his article on Marx
in the *Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften*, Band VI, S. 603, and
Bernstein, in his article on Marx in the Eleventh Edition of the
*Encyclopædia Britannica*, 1911, erroneously give the dates as 1853-60.
See *Briefwechsel* of Marx and Engels, published in 1913.---*Lenin*

^[\[2\]](#bkV21P085F01){#fwV21P085F01}^ "A Contribution to the
Bibliography of Marxism" published in *Archive for Social Science and
Social Politics*, Vol. 20, Book 2.---*Ed*.

^[\[3\]](#bkV21P085F02){#fwV21P085F02}^ *Bibliography of Socialism and
Communism*, Vols. 1---3.---*Ed*.

^[\[4\]](#bkV21P085F03){#fwV21P085F03}^ *Bibliography of the Social
Sciences*, Berlin, the first year of publication, 1905, and the
following years.---*Ed*.

^[\[5\]](#bkV21P085F04){#fwV21P085F04}^ *People's Calendar*.---*Ed*.

^[\[6\]](#bkV21P085F05){#fwV21P085F05}^ *Dictionary of the Political
Sciences*, Vol. 6, pp. 600---03.---*Ed*.

^[\[7\]](#bkV21P085F06){#fwV21P085F06}^ W. Liebknecht, *Karl Marx,
Biographical Memoirs*.---*Ed*.

^[\[8\]](#bkV21P085F07){#fwV21P085F07}^ Paul Lafargue, *Personal
Recollections of Karl Marx*.---*Ed*.

^[\[9\]](#bkV21P086F01){#fwV21P086F01}^ Karl Kautsky, *The Historical
Contribution of Karl Marx*. *On the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the
Master's Death*.---*Ed*.

^[\[10\]](#bkV21P086F02){#fwV21P086F02}^ Clara Zetkin, *Karl Marx and
His Life Work*.---*Ed*.

^[\[11\]](#bkV21P087F01){#fwV21P087F01}^ E. Untermann, *The Logical
Defects of Narrow Marxism*.---*Ed*.

^[\[12\]](#bkV21P087F02){#fwV21P087F02}^ Hogo Riekes, "The Philosophical
Roots of Marxism," in the *Journal of All Political Sciences*, 62nd year
of publication, 1906, Book 3, pp. 407---32.---*Ed*.

^[\[13\]](#bkV21P087F03){#fwV21P087F03}^ Benno Erthnann, "The
Philosophic Assumptions of the Materialist Conception of History" in the
*Yearbook for Legislation, Administration and National Economy*
(Schiller's Yearbook), 1907, Book 3, pp. 1---56.---*Ed*.

^[\[14\]](#bkV21P087F04){#fwV21P087F04}^ Rudolph Stammier, *Economy and
Law According to the Materialist Conception of History*.---*Ed*.

^[\[15\]](#bkV21P087F05){#fwV21P087F05}^ V. Ilyin---one of the literary
pseudonyms of V. I. Lenin.---*Ed*.

^[\[16\]](#bkV21P088F01){#fwV21P088F01}^ Hermann Gorter, *Historical
Materialism*.---*Ed*.

^[\[17\]](#bkV21P088F02){#fwV21P088F02}^ Flarnmacher, *The
Philosophic-Economic System of Marxism*.---*Ed*.

^[\[18\]](#bkV21P088F03){#fwV21P088F03}^ Max Adler, *Causality and
Teleology* and *Marx as a Thinker*.---*Ed*.

^[\[19\]](#bkV21P088F04){#fwV21P088F04}^ Giovanni Gentile, *The
Philosophy of Marx*.---*Ed*.

^[\[20\]](#bkV21P089F01){#fwV21P089F01}^ Compbre-Morel, *Agrarian
Question and Socialism in France*.---*Ed*.

^[\[21\]](#bkV21P089F02){#fwV21P089F02}^ Böhrn-Bawerk, *Karl Marx and
the Close of His System*.---*Ed*.

^[\[22\]](#bkV21P089F03){#fwV21P089F03}^ Riekes, *Value and Exchange
Value*, (1899).---*Ed*.

^[\[23\]](#bkV21P089F04){#fwV21P089F04}^ Von Bortkiewicz, *Calculation
of Value and Calculation of Price in the Marxian System* (Archive for
Social Science, 1906---07).---*Ed*.

^[\[24\]](#bkV21P089F05){#fwV21P089F05}^ Leo von Buch, *On the Elements
of Political Economy. Intensity of Labour, Value and Price*.---*Ed*.

^[\[25\]](#bkV21P090F01){#fwV21P090F01}^ Hulferding *Bohm-Bawerk's
Criticism of Marx*.---*Ed*.

^[\[26\]](#bkV21P090F02){#fwV21P090F02}^ Jules Guesde, *Four Years of
Class Struggle, On-Guard! Questions of Today*, Paris, 1911.---*Ed*.

^[\[27\]](#bkV21P090F03){#fwV21P090F03}^ Paul Lafargue, *Economic
Determinism, The Historical Method of Karl Marx*, Paris, 1909.---*Ed*.

^[\[28\]](#bkV21P090F04){#fwV21P090F04}^ Anton Pannekoek, *Two
Tendencies in the Labour Movement*.---*Ed*.

^[\[29\]](#bkV21P090F05){#fwV21P090F05}^ Rosa Luxemhurg, *The
Accumulation of Capital*, Berlin, 1913---*Ed*.

^[\[30\]](#bkV21P090F06){#fwV21P090F06}^ Otto Bauer, *The Accumulation
of Capital* (*Die Neue Zeit*, XXXI, 1, 1913, pp. 831 and 862).---*Ed*.

[]{#endnotes}

^[\[31\]](#bkV21E039){#fwV21E039}^ \[PLACEHOLDER.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [ [Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm)]{.footer}  \|    [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
          [ [\< backward](ch05.htm "V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat")]{.footer}        [ [forward \>](../dec/05.htm "A German Voice on the War")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 
