---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 20 August 1898.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The statement made by one of our contributors in last week's issue that
the action of the '98 Executive in fixing the date for the Wolfe Tone
Demonstration on 15th August, a generally recognised Catholic festival,
would be fraught with evil consequences, has already been justified.

The return of the Belfast contingent from Dublin to the former city was
made the occasion of a sectarian outburst in the streets, in the course
of which Protestant and Catholic belaboured each other in the most
beautiful manner, in a truly Christian spirit.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| And proved their doctrine orthodox,\                                  |
| By Apostolic blows and knocks.                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

He who could hit the hardest felt himself master of the soundest
theology, and he whose blows did not flatten out his opponents' skull
was, no doubt, afflicted by conscientious scruples as to his own
orthodoxy.

And when Catholic and Protestant workmen absented themselves from work
next morning in order to procure the needed sticking-plaster for their
craniums, Catholic and Protestant employers stopped their wages
accordingly with the most beautiful impartiality.

Commend me to an employer of labour for strict impartiality in his
dealings between workmen of different creeds. If the Catholic employer
can make more profit out of a Protestant workman than out of a Catholic,
he does not allow religious scruples to bind *him*. Oh, no!

He straightaway discharges his co-religionist and engages the man who
yields him the greatest plunder. And the Protestant employer is equally
fair-minded (*sic*) in his dealings with the Protestant worker.

Harland and Wolff, Belfast, are great Protestants and Unionists, so are
their workmen. But in the course of an industrial dispute in the
shipbuilding trade a few years ago, the Protestant employer locked out
the Protestant workmen and *starved* or attempted to starve them into
subjection.

Mr Alderman Meade and the Master Builders' Association on the one hand
and the building trades on the other point the moral on the Catholic
side for Dublin readers, who have not forgotten the building trade
dispute of '96.

To the employing class, as a whole, we might indeed apply the terms
employed by John Mitchel to the Anglo-Saxon section of them. Listen --

> They worship money, they pray to no other god but money, they would
> buy and sell the Holy Ghost for money, and they believe the whole
> world is created, sustained, and governed, and can only be saved by
> the one true, immutable and almighty £ s d.

Wherefore, oh, my Belfast Brethren, should you make your city a scandal
to Europe by insensate fights over religious dogmas, while as you spill
each other's boozy blood throughout the streets, the ruling class in
industry and politics calmly seat themselves firmer upon your backs and
dive their hands deeper into your pockets.

Consider, do our masters fight over religion when their pockets are
involved? No. The only union of Home Ruler and Unionist we have had in
the last generation, viz, that over the Financial Relations Question,
was on a question not of principle, but of purse.

Not the purse of the people. Indeed with most of the working class a
purse would be a mere superfluity, like breeches to a highlandman, or a
conscience to a politician. They would not have any use for it, or know
what to do with it.

For the Financial Relations Question does not concern the workers in
town or country. Our wages as workers are fixed, roughly speaking, by
our competition for employment. If there are many unemployed, our wages
*will be* low; if there are few idle, our wages *may be* high; but
whether our masters pay heavy direct taxation or none at all, does not
affect our wages.

Ditto with the tenants in the country districts. Their rents are fixed
by the Land Court in proportion, not to the value of the land, but in
proportion to their ability to pay. In estimating that ability, taxes
are taken into consideration as well as prices of agricultural produce.

If, not merely Ireland's (?) over-taxation, but all taxes in Ireland
were abolished tomorrow, the Land Court would see in that fact a reason
why the tenant, his expenses being lower, could pay a higher rent, and
would fix it accordingly.

The Financial Relations agitation is merely a fight between Irish
capitalists and landlords, and English capitalists and landlords. The
working people can not hope for anything good as a result of the
struggle, except, perhaps, that it might end like the famous struggle
between the Kilkenny cats -- in the mutual destruction of both parties.

The only Financial Relation with which the working class are concerned
generally hangs out three golden balls.

Oh, my prophetic soul, my uncle.

The Commemoration Banquet at the Mansion House produced some curious
results. I do not know whether it was due to the liquor or the
excitement, or both combined, but certain it is that the speakers seemed
to mix up their opinions and sentiments in the most wonderful manner.

Our Lord Mayor was especially felicitous (?) in his remarks.

"He was himself," he assured the audience, "descended from people who
had to fly from their peasant home to the mountains to escape
persecution." He forgot to point out the moral, and so we can only guess
at it. Perhaps he meant that in view of that fact he had made up his
mind that he, at least, did not intend to be forced to fly to the
mountains if acting the flunkey would keep him at home.

Therefore he hastened to make the astounding declaration -- astounding
in such a time and place -- that "he claimed that Irishmen could best
govern themselves, *and could do it best under English Law*".

Lord Mayor Tallon won't fly to the mountains if he knows it. The Mansion
House is good enough for him. The mountains can wait.

Poor Wolfe Tone. Lived, fought, and suffered for Ireland in order that a
purse-proud, inflated windbag should exploit your memory to his own
aggrandisement.

Lord Mayor Tallon is also reported to have said that "after many years
of residence in Dublin he was as good an Irishman as when he entered
it." What did this mean?

Are we to understand that he considers the people of Dublin so bad a lot
that he should be complimented for his tenacity in sticking to his
patriotism in *their* company?

If not what does he mean? Perhaps that, however, is not a fair question.
Perhaps the wine was good. Perhaps the capacity of our Lord Mayor for
assimilating liquors is no greater than his capacity for talking sense.

Which is saying a great deal.

Mr John O'Leary labours under the disadvantage of age, and,
consequently, it is not safe to accept as literally correct any
newspaper report of his speech. So I can only hope that his utterances
at the banquet, as reported, were not his exact sentiments.

He is reported to have said, "He infinitely preferred that Ireland
should be under her own laws, and not English laws," which was of course
right enough. So say all of us.

But he went on, "He did not mind whether it was a republic, an absolute
monarchy, or a limited monarchy." According to this theory, if the Queen
of England were to come to Dublin and get crowned Queen of Ireland the
aspirations of Irish Nationalists would be realized.

Some of our theoretical revolutionists of the political type are fond of
building great hopes on the possibility of an alliance between France
and Russia against England. If this did happen and Russian troops landed
in Ireland, kicked England out and then crowned the Czar absolute
monarch of Ireland, according to Mr O'Leary's theory we would be free.

But perhaps I will be told this is not a fair assumption, because the
Czar would not then rule by the free consent of the Irish people, but by
the power of his bayonets. But does an absolute monarch ever rule solely
by the consent of his people? Does he not always depend upon his
bayonets?

Do our friends only object to tyranny when it is English? Would they hug
their chains if they were guaranteed of Irish manufacture?

But if our friends think only of native Irish Kings will they please
tell us where to get them.

Will the gentle and courtier-like Tim Healy do?

How would this read in our newspapers. "His Royal Highness Timothy I,
King of All Ireland, held a levee at Dublin Castle to-day. Lords
Harrington, Dillon and Redmond attended as pages-in waiting. Amongst
others present we noticed T.P. O'Connor, Esq, who as bearer of the royal
snuff-box was the object of considerable admiration."

This you will say, dear reader, is only fooling. It is. But so is the
talk of those people who talk of revolting against British rule and
refuse to recognise the fact that our way to freedom can only be hewn by
the strong hand of *labour*, and that labour revolts against oppression
of *all kinds*, not merely against the peculiarly British brand.

The whole edifice of modern society to-day is built upon the oppression
and plunder of labour. The Sovereign on her throne, the nobleman in his
palace, the capitalist in his mansion, the judge on the bench, and the
lawyer at the bar are all pensioners on the labour of the workers, are
all seated like Sinbad's Old Man of the Sea astride the back of the
worker riding him to social death.

The politics of the master class are only the quarrels of thieves over
the division of the spoil. The politics of the working class are the
organised efforts of the victims conscious of the thieving, to put an
end to the system of society which makes it possible.

The mixed character of all speeches in connection with the '98 movement,
at the banquet and elsewhere, proves conclusively that our middle-class
leaders are afraid to trust democracy. In the midst of their most
fervent vituperations against the British Government, there rises up
before their mind's eye the spectacle of the Irish working people
demanding Freedom for their class from the economic slavery of to-day.

And struck with affright the middle-class politician buttons up *his*
trousers pocket, and shoving his hand deep into the pockets of his
working class compatriots, cries out as his fingers close upon the
plunder: "No class questions in Irish politics."

So our middle-class become Home Rulers, secretly or openly leaning to
the British Constitution.

What is the difference between the Unionist and the Home Ruler? Answer:
Starting from the postulate that we accept Mitchel's definition of the
British Empire, as "a pirate institution robbing and plundering upon the
public highway" we must conclude that the Unionists wish to keep the
Irish people as *subjects* of the British Empire, the Home Ruler desires
to raise them to the dignity of *accomplices*.

And the Socialist Republican wishes to kick the whole Empire and all its
fraudulent institutions into the outer darkness.

And once it is effectually elevated from off the face of this planet it
has so long cursed by its presence, whether it goes to join the angels
above or the politicians below is no concern of

SPAILPÍN.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
