---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Rule Journalists and Patriotism

#### An Object Lesson

### (13 August 1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 13 August 1898.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.12.\
Transcribed by [Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh](mailto:red_banner@yahoo.com).\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most Irishmen who remember the early days of the Land League movement in
this country will also remember how the present Home Rule politicians,
then pushing their way into public life, contrived to 'rig' the Irish
newspaper press and use it as an advertising agency in their own behalf.
The middle-class adventurers who now style themselves our 'National
leaders' were confronted with a problem which may be stated thus: Given
an oppressed people, an alien government and an insolent aristocracy,
how best out of their mutual conflicts to evolve fame and fortune. From
the Government not much could be expected. Secure in its position, it
cared not for the hungry hordes of office-seekers and civil service
aspirants with which our Irish middle-class besiege the Government
buildings at every examination: it knew the exact value of the
patriotism of the middle-class Nationalist newspaper, which denounces
the 'Sacsanach' rule, and, at the same time, devotes whole columns of
its space to explaining for the benefit of its readers how they may best
sell themselves into the service of the Sacsanach, whether in the Army,
Navy, Constabulary or Civil Service. Still less could be hoped for from
the landlord class, the enemy's garrison in Ireland. But there remained
the people, the enthusiastic hot-headed, warm-hearted, patriotic people.
And accordingly our patriot politicians, save the mark, set themselves
to the task of gulling, cajoling and bewildering the people of Ireland
in a manner absolutely unique in the history of any country. The method
was simple. Our newspapers are not what their name would imply, merely
chroniclers of news, they are, in Ireland at least, primarily political
weapons in the hands of political parties. Accordingly the Irish public
which delights to take its opinions from newspapers had its opinions on
our 'leaders' formed somewhat in this manner:-- Tim Healy, being
appointed London letter-writer to a Dublin weekly, would, in the course
of his letter, refer in terms of glowing admiration to the "matchless
eloquence and statesmanlike speeches" of Mr Sexton; Mr Sexton, who wrote
as lobby correspondent to another paper, in his turn could scarcely find
terms eulogistic enough to describe the "brilliant sarcasm and legal
acumen" of Tim Healy; Mr Harrington from the scene of the land war
would, through the columns of the press, and like the others always
under the cloak of anonymity, inform the tenants that the world was lost
in admiration of Mr Redmond, and Mr Redmond would repay the compliment
by half a column of gush over the "organising genius" of Tim Harrington;
John Dillon would conclude his speeches by a quotation from the
over-praised doggerel of T.D. Sullivan, and William O'Brien never lost a
chance at home or abroad of calling Heaven to witness the love and
esteem he cherished "from the depths of his heart" for the many high
qualities of Mr T.P. O'Connor. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

How well the dodge worked the world knows. The Irish people worshipped
those men with an enthusiastic self-sacrificing devotion. The Irish race
at home and abroad poured in its hard-earned wealth to sustain those men
in the fight, accepting them at their own estimation and bowing down
before them, even when we saw some of them in prison making more clamour
over the loss of their trousers than the United Irishmen or the
Manchester Martyrs had evoked over the loss of their lives. But in due
time the bubble burst. The Parnell crisis, and all the stormy scenes and
base betrayals that accompanied it, showed us of what pitiful material
our vaunted demigods were composed. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2} Every effort now
being made, or likely to be made, to rehabilitate those men in public
esteem must be regarded with contempt by every right-minded Irishman. We
have been permitted to look behind the scenes of politics for a brief
moment while the actors quarrelled in front, and they who have once seen
the mechanism of the stage will never again be frightened by its
thunder.

And if the discredited journalists who trafficked on our credulity in
the past can no longer command our respect what of the journalistic
staff who man our papers today? Their patriotism and also their honesty
can be gauged from the following incident which was recorded in all our
Dublin daily papers at the time absolutely without comment. We extract
from the **Freeman's Journal**.

#### IRISH INSTITUTE OF JOURNALISTS

##### Annual Dinner

> The annual dinner in connection with the annual general meeting of the
> Irish Association District Institute of Journalists was held on
> Saturday evening in the Grand Hotel, Malahide. In the evening at 6.30
> over sixty members and guests sat down to dinner in the spacious
> supper room.
>
> Mr J.P. Hayden MP (chairman) presided. To his right sat the Right Hon.
> the Lord Mayor, Mr W.C. Mills, chairman of the Dublin District; to his
> left Mr Geo. McSweeney BL, ex-chairman, and Mr Thos. Kennedy BL, Lord
> Mayor's secretary. Those present included Mr F.J. Allan, C. Ryan, J.B.
> Hall, J. Sherlock BA; M.F. McGrenahan BL; W.F. Dennehy, J.P. Gaynor
> BL; John Magrath, M.P. Ryle, T.R. Harrington, E. Tuohy, Cork; W.
> Barrett, do.; J. Geary, do.; James Murray, J. Wyse Power, Edward Byrne
> FJI; M.J. Cosgrave, R. O'Dwyer, C. Lehane, A.J. Conway, V.D. Hughes,
> P.J. Meade, P.J. Hooper, M.A. Casey, Drogheda; R. Donovan, J. Linehan
> BL; J. Jameson, R.J. O'Mulrennin MA; T. Fitzpatrick, F.C. Wallis
> Healy, L. Dennehy, solicitor; W.M. Seaver, M. Wheeler, William
> Stewart, H. McWeeney, P. Delany, P.J. Griffith, V. Kilbride,
> solicitor; G. Sherlock, T.D. Fitzgerald, J. McNerney, J.W. Bacon, T.J.
> Condon MP; R.M. Peter, Lionel Johnson, J. Mooney, W. Clarke, hon.
> sec., Dublin District; E.H. Kearney BL; Frank Manley, Edwin Hamilton
> MA; Dr Joze, John O'Connell, T. O'Connor, W.W. O'Mahony (Naas), M.
> Code (Wexford), P.F. Keenan (Enniscorthy).
>
> The vice-chairs were occupied by Mr J.B. Hall and Mr T.R. Harrington.

Our readers will please perceive that from this list of names it appears
that every newspaper in Dublin was there represented -- Dillonite,
Healyite, Parnellite, they are all there. All the men who write the
furiously patriotic leading articles, all the literary guides of
politics, all the men who in season and out of season are protesting
their love for Ireland, their hatred of tyranny, their unquenchable
determination to follow in the footsteps of Tone and Emmet. Well, these
hot-headed, high-minded patriots (*sic*) met together and at a purely
social, non-political function, where they were in an overwhelming
majority, they commenced proceedings by drinking a toast, to what, think
ye? To our martyred dead, no; to our motherland, no; to Freedom's cause,
no; perhaps to the 1,225,000 persons who died of famine in the present
reign in Ireland, no. But to

Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen.

The sovereign under whose rule those countrymen and women of ours were
starved to death, in a land as fertile as any in Europe, in obedience to
a hellish system of political economy, and in accordance with the
deliberate government policy sanctioned and approved of by *Her Most
Gracious Majesty the Queen*.

The very next Sunday most of those journalistic patriots were at the
demonstration in Bodenstown [\[3\]](#n3){#f3}, the greatest rebels of us
all (*mar dhea*) and outvying each other in enthusiastic cheers for the
great republican of '98, protesting their admiration for his inflexible
purpose and democratic virtues, even while the liquor they had consumed
in drinking the 'loyal' toast had scarcely died out in their veins. And
the day after the Wolfe Tone demonstration all our Dublin daily papers
in the Home Rule interest contained long editorials written by these
same versatile gentlemen, complimenting the Irish people for their
fidelity to the cause of freedom. Could arrant knavery and hypocrisy go
further?

Irish political history, written by such men as these, has represented
our middle-class Home Rulers and their journalistic allies as the
high-minded apostles of a distressed people; future history will more
correctly stigmatise them as the most unscrupulous political charlatans
who ever imposed upon a confiding race.

Before leaving this unsavoury subject we would like to ask a civil
question. In the list of names given as being present at the loyal
function spoken of, we see the name of Mr F.J. Allan. Mr Allan is
manager of the **Independent**, is a member of the '98 Executive, is
reputed to be an advanced nationalist. If he was present at the banquet,
why did he not protest? If he was not present, why did he not repudiate
the name of those who used his name in that connection? Was it because
he did not like to expose the lily-livered hypocrites who call
themselves nationalist journalists? Or is he himself as great a
hypocrite as any? Mr F.J. Allan is an official of the Irish Institute of
Journalists who gave this dinner -- Treasurer in fact -- and as such
*directly responsible for this loyal toast*. Let him answer.
[\[4\]](#n4){#f4} And let him and all others take notice that there is
now entered into the journalistic world of Ireland a new force in the
shape of a newspaper pledged to carry out the revolutionary principles
of the United Irishmen, in accordance with the changed economical and
political development of the time. [\[5\]](#n5){#f5} In accordance with
that pledge, which we here make to our readers, there devolves upon our
shoulders the duty, which we accept with pleasure, of relentlessly
exposing to the public gaze and trampling into the mire to which they
belong all the horde of middle-class tricksters and political
wirepullers who have so long emasculated and weakened our political
faith. Let those "hirelings of England in the green livery of our
country" take notice.

Setanta

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} Healy, Thomas Sexton, Harrington, John Redmond, Dillon,
O'Brien and O'Connor were Home Rule MPs. T.D. Sullivan was author of
*God Save Ireland* and other nationalist verses.

[2.](#f2){#n2} After Charles Stewart Parnell's relationship with a
married woman was exposed in 1890, the Home Rule party turned against
him and split into warring factions.

[3.](#f3){#n3} Called by the '98 Executive to commemorate the centenary
of the United Irish rising.

[4.](#f4){#n4} In the July 1, 1899 issue of **The Workers' Republic**
(after Connolly had accused him of acquiescing in another royal toast)
Allan claimed that he had left the room when the toast was announced.
Connolly replied that his explanation resolved nothing.

[5.](#f5){#n5} This was the first issue of **The Workers' Republic**.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
