---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Labour Representation

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, August 27, 1898\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### I

The farmers of Ireland denounced as unpatriotic everything that failed
to serve their class interest -- including even the labourer's demand
for a cottage -- let the working class of Ireland follow their lead and
test the sincerity of every man's patriotism by his devotion to the
interests of labour. In the eyes of the farmers no wagging of green
flags could make a landgrabber a patriot; let the workers apply the same
test and brand as enemies of Ireland all who believe in the subjection
of labour to capital -- brand as traitors to his country all who live by
skinning Irish labour. For the working class of the world the lesson is
also plain. In every country socialism is foreign, is unpatriotic, and
will continue so until the working class embracing it as their salvation
make socialism the dominant political force \... By their aggressiveness
and intolerance the possessing classes erect the principles of their
capitalist supremacy into the dignity of national safeguards; according
as the working class infuse into its political organisation the same
aggressiveness and intolerance it will command the success it deserves,
and make the socialist the only good and loyal citizen.

**Workers' Republic**, May, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II

The action taken upon the Local Government Act by the representatives of
the trade unionists of Dublin is perhaps the most important step yet
taken by the organised workers in Ireland \... We do not, however,
labour under the belief that delegates so chosen will be socialists, or
consciously in favour of socialist principles. On the contrary, we are
quite prepared to find each and every one of these representatives
solemnly repudiating the taint of socialism. But we do believe, and not
only believe but know that every workingman elected to the Municipal
Council of Dublin, if he be true to his class when elected, will find
that every step he takes in the Council in furtherance of the interests
of his class, must of necessity take the form of an application of
socialist principles. The direct employment of labour by the
municipality and consequent abolition of contracting, the rigid
enforcement of sanitary laws, reductions of the hours of labour,
increase of the wages of the lower grades of workers and reduction of
the absurdly high salaries of superior officials, exceptional taxation
of unlet property, in short, every measure for the betterment of the
condition of the workers which our working class representatives in the
Corporation could urge for adoption, has long since been adopted into
the palliative programme of the socialists, and is, in greater or less
degree, the result of socialist principles applied to the working of our
civic life.

Moreover, in pressing forward even the mildest of these reforms, it will
be found that the representatives of property in the Corporation will,
irrespective of party, line up solidly against reform, and our friends
who imagine that they will secure the cooperation of the master class in
safeguarding the interests of labour will be sadly deceived. It is
because we realise these facts that we are unqualifiedly in favour of
this proposed action of the Dublin trade unions.

When the worker has so far advanced as to realise that his master\'s
interests are antagonistic to his own, that the master class use every
weapon from Parliament to prison to maintain their position against what
they consider the encroachment of their serfs, then we have no doubt
that the next step in the intellectual development of the worker will be
to consider whether it is wise to tolerate longer a class in society
which requires to be watched so constantly and guarded against so
vigilantly; whether there is indeed any useful function performed by the
capitalist and landlord class which the organised workers cannot perform
without them. Whether the ownership of property cannot be vested in the
organised community, and the conduct of industry entrusted to our trade
unions, who could surely furnish men who would organise production and
distribution in the interests of all much better than it is at present
done by a class animated solely by considerations of profit. When the
logic of events forces this question on the Dublin workers as it surely
will, we believe that they will not fail to answer it aright, and that
the answer will be well for our hopes of a socialist republic.

We are trade unionists, but we are more than trade unionists. The trade
unionist who is only a trade unionist is to the socialist what the
believer in constitutional monarchy is to a republican. The
constitutional monarchist wishes to limit the power of the king, but
still wishes to have a king; the republican wishes to abolish kingship
and puts his trust in the people; the trade unionist wishes to limit the
power of the master but still wishes to have masters: the socialist
wishes to have done with masters and pins his faith to the collective
intelligence of a democratic community.

We, as socialist republicans, adopt in each case the more logical course
and bend our energies to the abolition of that principle of evil, whose
influence our moderate friends would seek only to minimise. A socialist
republic is the application to agriculture and industry; to the farm,
the field, the workshop, of the democratic principle of the republican
ideal.

We repeat then, we hail with joy this action of the Dublin trade unions,
our candidates will joyfully cooperate with them, for if they do not
become lackeys of the capitalist class, they must inevitably become
allies of the Socialist Republican.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
