---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

## James Connolly

# An Open Letter to Dublin Castle

### (1898) [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 13 August 1898\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.1 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcription: Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN AND HONOURABLE BOARDS, -- To-day you occupy the
seat of power. You are the 'constituted authorities,' and knowing as I
do that our advent in however humble a manner on the political horizon
will be to you a matter of some slight interest, I hasten to address
your honourable Lordships to let you know the whyfor and whereof of our
coming. I am sure your lordships and honorable Boards will hear
patiently what I have to say. At least if you do not you certainly
ought, for I know you have the time at your disposal, there being no
need for you to worry about your daily bread, as the industrious though
'vulgar crowd' whom you so kindly condescend to govern see to it that
you are all provided with bread and a great many other things besides:
in quantities that are much more than sufficient. I have always noticed
my honorable lords and gentlemen when occasions have arisen that seemed
to you to require it, your solemn instructions and advice to the 'vulgar
crowd' one of whom I am, have always been issued commencing with the
word whereas, and thinking perhaps you understand a statement better
when so begun, I therefore follow your honourable lordships' example. If
I did otherwise I *might* err, but of course everyone knows that what is
done by your lordships *must* be right, and if they do not so
understand, your lordships can easily convince them, having at your
disposal all the necessary legal and other machinery for that purpose.
In saying so I am, perhaps, referring to a fact, to remind you of which
is rather disagreeable, but you cannot at least pretend that you have
been slow to use this convincing machinery when opportunity or necessity
occurred. Now to my statement.

WHEREAS:\
It has been found, and is a matter of everyday experience, that within
the shores of Ireland poverty, misery, degradation, slums, overwork and
underpay \[lies in store\] for those of the workers who succeed in
selling themselves into the slavery of some member of the capitalist
class, and unemployment with all its attendant evils of degradation,
misery and contempt for those who suffer when their effort to do so is
unsuccessful. Constantly recurring famine in the agricultural districts,
overcrowding and general wretchedness in the towns. A population
steadily dwindling, driven from the land by grasping landlordism and
huddling together in the towns, either to be used as a means of keeping
down the wages of those already there in the interest of the landlord's
twin brother, the capitalist exploiter of human flesh and blood, or
crossing the ocean to some other land, there to swell the ranks of
slavery; there to become victims of the cursed system sought to be
escaped from here. And whereas further, it is manifest these things do
not exist without a cause, and as your lordships profess to be unable to
find it, it behoves the masses of the people to do so, they being the
parties most interested, as they are the sufferers.

It is right I should admit that your lordships often apply palliatives
and soothing measures generally to this terrible social evil, this
festering sore on the back of humanity. That is all you profess to be
able to do; indeed you are never tired of asserting it is all *can* be
done. It is true also these soothing measures often allay the pain just
as the pain from a rotten tooth is allayed by the application of some
so-called 'cure'. The tooth, however, still continues its course of
decay, and again and again imposes upon its possessor the natural
penalty of allowing its continued existence, until the evil becoming
unbearable, the sufferer at length decides to remove the cause by means
of the care and instruments necessary for that purpose; or in other
words, my lords, to completely remove the cause of discomfort by means
of what your lordships would term 'sudden revolution,' if applied to
social or political matters. The palliatives do not *remove* the cause
of pain, they only *temporarily abate* its force. Just so is it my lords
with the economic system of society to-day.

Capitalism, or in other words the private ownership by a small minority
(your class, my lords) of the land and all other things necessary to the
life of the community, is the curse, the terrible sore. The great table
of nature is abundantly spread, overflowing with luxuries as well as
necessaries of life. Your class are in possession; the other class, now
commonly called the proletariat, possess nothing but their own ability
to labour, their lifelong occupation is the work of producing. They
produce all that exists. Your class then, as the law says, "fraudulently
appropriates to your own use" almost all they have produced. You get all
the luxuries and the best of necessaries, their share is the refuse;
that is, the plainest and coarsest of everything and often not enough of
these. Things, my lords, at which, if placed before you, your
aristocratic noses would turn up in a manner more eloquent than words.
*They* have never respite or ease from the work of producing and
distributing. *Your* only occupation is gambling with each other on the
different stock exchanges to see which of you shall become possessed of
a greater share of the results of the workers' toil. This is capitalism.
This is what you so highly extol as the competitive system of modern
society. It is truly a competitive system, but working in different
directions according as the individual belongs to the possessing or
unpossessing class.

The members of your class being in possession, and therefore certain of
the first fruits, have, as I said, only to gamble with each other (that
is, compete) for a larger share of the total. But the unpossessing class
being certain of nothing, compete with each other in an endeavour to
live upon the lowest possible quantity in order to obtain the right to
work, and therefore live at all.

You never hear of the unpossessing class competing with each other to
see who will obtain the most; oh! no. No more than you ever hear of the
possessing or capitalist class competing to see who will obtain the
least. These are the beauties of the competitive system; blessings on
it, why should we ever try to get rid of it?

It is true though, we do want to get rid of it, and it is with this
object, what you would call the "red spectre of socialism" is spreading
itself over every country where the system exists. We will have in its
stead the co-operative, or National ownership of the land and industries
necessary to everyday life. Originally, my lords, your class obtained
possession by fraud; to-day you retain it, partly by fraud and partly by
force. The time is at hand, however, when an educated democracy will
control and permeate the organizations of force, then your fraud, your
cant and humbug will be of no avail.

The private property system is the festering sore on the back of
humanity to which I have alluded. Notwithstanding your constant palaver
and soothing measures, the pain and sting is becoming more and more
unbearable. Palliatives will not do, the cancer must be cut out. My
lords, when the people so decide it will be cut out, and the mission of
Socialist propaganda is to educate the masses up to the point necessary
to have the operation of removing the cancer carried out scientifically
and successfully.

SAOIRSE

 

### Note

[1.](#f1){#n1} Dublin Castle was the seat of the British administration
in Ireland.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
