---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

## James Connolly

# The Men We Honour

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, August 13, 1898.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apostles of Freedom are ever idolised when dead, but crucified when
living. Universally true as this statement is, it applies with more than
usual point to the revolutionary hero in whose memory the Irish people
will, on Monday, 15th August, lay the foundation stone of a great
memorial.

Accustomed, as we are, to accept without question the statements of
platform oratory or political journalism as embodying the veriest truths
of history, the real meaning and significance of the life and struggles
of the high-soured organiser of the United Irish movement of 1798 is too
often lost to the people of Ireland today. We think with pride and joy
of Wolfe Tone and his struggle for Ireland, but when we think of his
enemies, of those who thwarted him at every opportunity, who ceased not
to revile him while alive and paused not in their calumnies even when he
had passed beyond the grave, we are too apt to forget that the most
virulent and unforgiving of those enemies were not the emissaries of the
British Crown, but the men from whose lips the cant of patriotism was
never absent, the leaders in Church and politics of the people whose
emancipation Wolfe Tone had laboured to secure - and met death in the
effort to forward. Yet it is a lesson we need to remember, fraught as it
is with meaning, in the task before the Irish democracy today.

There are few passages in the life of Tone more pregnant with interest
to the attentive reader than that which chronicles the negotiations
between himself and the great Whig Party of which Grattan was such a
shining light. The attempt of the Whig aristocracy to cajole and bribe
the young and ardent democrat into lending his intellect and powers to
the service of their party, and the scornful refusal of the high-minded,
but penniless, Tone to thus prostitute his genius in the cause of
compromise and time-serving, points a moral the young men of Ireland
might well lay to heart in deciding under which flag they will take
their stand in the struggle to which we henceforth challenge friends and
enemies.

"I was a democrat from the commencement," proudly declared our hero, and
in the light of that announcement we at once perceive why the wealthy
classes of Ireland with scarce a dozen exceptions ranged themselves
against him; why Grattan never by word or deed testified the slightest
sympathy with the United Irishmen; why Dan O'Connell took up arms to
defend Dublin for the British Government against his own countrymen and
rebel co-religionists; why the Catholic aristocracy fought side by side
with the Orange yeomanry; why the fiercest invectives of Lord
Castlereagh or Beresford of the Riding School were but faint echoes of
the maledictions heaped upon the revolutionists by the aristocratic
Catholic Bishops; why, in short, Wolfe Tone and his comrades were
overwhelmed by the treachery of their own countrymen more than by the
force of the foreign enemy. He was crucified in life, now he is idolised
in death, and the men who push forward most arrogantly to burn incense
at the altar of his fame are drawn from the very class who, were he
alive today, would hasten to repudiate him as a dangerous malcontent.
False as they are to every one of the great principles to which our hero
consecrated his life, they cannot hope to deceive the popular instinct,
and their presence at the '98 commemorations will only bring into
greater relief the depth to which they have sunk. Our Home Rule leaders
will find that the glory of Wolfe Tone's memory will serve, not to
cover, but to accentuate the darkness of their shame.

Wolfe Tone was abreast of the revolutionary thought of his day, as are
the Socialist Republicans of our day. He saw clearly, as we see, that a
dominion as long rooted in any country as British dominion in Ireland
can only be dislodged by a revolutionary impulse in line with the
development of the entire epoch. Grasping this truth in all its fulness
he broke with the so-called 'practical' men of the time, and wherever he
could get a hearing he, by voice and pen, inculcated the republican
principles of the French Revolution and counselled his countrymen to
embark the national movement on the crest of that revolutionary wave.
His Irish birth did not create his hatred of the British Constitution,
but only intensified it. Like Mitchel, fifty years later, he held ideas
on political and social order such as would have made him a rebel even
had he been an Englishman. In this fact lay his strength and the secret
of his enthusiasm. We who hold his principles cherish his memory all the
more on that account, believing as we do that any movement which would
successfully grapple with the problem of national freedom must draw its
inspiration, not from the mouldering records of a buried past, but from
the glowing hopes of the living present, the vast possibilities of the
mighty future.

When the hour of the social revolution at length strikes and the
revolutionary lava now pent up in the Socialist movement finally
overflows and submerges the kings and classes who now rule and ruin the
world, high up in the topmost niches of the temple a liberated human
race will erect to the heroes and martyrs who have watered the tree of
liberty with the blood of their body and the sweat of their intellect,
side by side with the Washingtons, Kosciuszkos and Tells of other lands,
a grateful Irish people will carve the name of our precursor, Theobald
Wolfe Tone, the man whose virtues we can only honour by imitation as the
Socialist Republic will yet honour his principles by realisation.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
