---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

## James Connolly

# Peasant Proprietorship and Socialism

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, August 27, 1898.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We quite appreciate the fact that peasant proprietary is somewhat of a
hindrance to the spread of socialist ideas, but an effective bulwark for
capitalism it decidedly is not. Two of the countries named as possessing
a peasant proprietary, and therefore as safe from socialism, are just
the two countries in which socialism is strongest, viz., France and
Germany.

In Germany the socialist party has the strongest voting power of any
party in the state, polling over two million and a quarter votes, and in
France, we are informed on the authority of the clerical organ, the
**Gaulois**, that the socialist party was the only party which emerged
from the late general election in that country stronger and more hopeful
than it entered it. In fact, peasant proprietary is rather belated in
Ireland just now to be an effective barrier against the spread of
socialist principles. We do not need to fight peasant proprietary, we
only need to allow free scope for the development of capitalist
enterprise in order to see the system of small farming crushed out by
the competition of the great farms and scientific cultivation of America
and Australia. Prices of agricultural produce have been falling for the
last twenty-five years, are falling now, and will fall still lower in
the future, and as they fall the peasant proprietor finds his margin of
profit disappearing and himself drawing nearer to bankruptcy. Every
fresh application of science to agriculture, every cheapening of transit
brought about by the development of transatlantic commerce, everything
in short which increases the facilities of trade, tends to cheapen the
price of agricultural produce and leaves an ever-decreasing margin of
profit for the cultivator. Landlordism is fast becoming an economic
impossibility in Ireland, and peasant proprietary itself in nowise
provides the small farmer with an outlet from the life of constant toil
and hunger which is his lot today.

But the principle of socialism affords just that outlet and at the same
time ministers to both his social and political aspirations. When
agriculture ceases to be a private enterprise, when a free nation
organises the production of its own food stuffs as a public function,
and intrusts the management of the function to the agricultural
population, under popular boards of their own election, then the "keen
individualism of the Irish peasant" will find its expression in constant
watchfulness over the common stock and supervision of each other's
labour, and will form the best security against wastefulness, and the
best incentive to honest toil. When the land is the property of the
people in the fullest sense (all the people whether in town or country),
then all the aids to agriculture which science supplies, but which are
impossible to the poverty-stricken peasant, will be utilised by the
national administrators and placed at the service of the cultivators of
the soil. The same shrewd sense which has inspired the Irish farmers to
appreciate the advantages of agricultural cooperation in dairies and
banks, with only their little savings to finance the enterprise, will
also lead them to appreciate the advantages which might be derived from
cooperation on a national scale with the entire resources of the nation
to equip it. And such cooperation applied to industry as well as land is
the basic idea of the future socialist republic.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
