---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Roots of Modern War

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, 20 August 1898\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Cabinets who rule the destinies of nations from the various capitals
of Europe are but the tools of the moneyed interest. Their quarrels are
not dictated by sentiments of national pride or honour, but by the
avarice and lust of power on the part of the class to which they belong.
The people who fight under their banners in the various armies or navies
do indeed imagine they are fighting the battles of their own country,
but in what country has it ever happened that the people have profited
by foreign conquest?

The influence which impels towards war today is the influence of
capitalism. Every war now is a capitalist move for new markets, and it
is a move capitalism must make or perish. The mad scramble for wealth
which this century has witnessed has resulted in lifting almost every
European country into the circle of competition for trade. New
machinery, new inventions, new discoveries in the scientific world have
all been laid under contribution as aids to industry, until the wealth
producing powers of society at large have far outstripped the demand for
goods, and now those very powers we have conjured up from the bosom of
nature threaten to turn and rend us. Every new labour-saving machine at
one and the same time, by reducing the number of workers needed, reduces
the demand for goods which the worker cannot buy, while increasing the
power of producing goods, and thus permanently increases the number of
unemployed, and shortens the period of industrial prosperity.
Competition between capitalists drives them to seek for newer and more
efficient wealth-producing machines, but as the home market is now no
longer able to dispose of their produce they are driven to foreign
markets. So it is in China today. The great industrial nations of the
world, driven on by their respective moneyed classes, themselves driven
on by their own machinery, now front each other in the far East, and,
with swords in hand, threaten to set the armed millions of Europe in
terrible and bloody conflict, in order to decide which shall have the
right to force upon John Chinaman the goods which his European brother
produces. Laveleye says somewhere that capitalism came into the world
covered with blood and tears and dirt. We might add that if this war
cloud now gathering in the East does burst, it will be the last
capitalist war, so the death of that baneful institution will be like
its birth, bloody, muddy and ignominious.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
