---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Unpatriotic?

### (1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, May 1903.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In every country of the earth in which Socialism has taken root its
advocates meet with the objection that their doctrines are
'unpatriotic', that Socialism is a foreign idea. Whether it be in
Ireland, Germany, France, America, England, Russia, Italy or any other
country we find the enemies of Socialism harping upon this one theme,
the unpatriotic character of the Socialist movement. It is fitting,
therefore, that we should examine and analyse this theory in order that
we may find out upon what it is founded, how it is that in countries so
widely separated the Socialist movement meets with an almost identical
objection -- in conservative Ireland as in cosmopolitan America.

We need not go far in our analysis. It is an axiom accepted by all
Socialists that the ruling class industrially will always be the ruling
class politically, and will also dominate in all other walks of life and
fields of thought.

That until the epoch of revolution arrives the interests of the class
who hold the dominant machinery of production will colour and mould the
entire thought and institutions of society at large; making whatever
serves such interests appear as 'patriotic', 'native' and thoroughly
'Irish' or 'American' or whatever the nationality of the possessing
class may be. And in like manner stamping as 'foreign', 'unpatriotic',
'un-Irish' or 'un-American' everything that savours of danger to that
possessing class. In other words the possessing class always and
everywhere arrogates to itself an exclusive right to be considered **the
Nation**, and basing itself upon that right to insist that the laws of
the land should be in its hands to frame and administer in its own
interests, which, it pleasantly informs us, are the highest interests of
the nation.

This is a characteristic of the propertied classes everywhere, even
where they are not a ruling class. The Land League agitation in Ireland,
and in a lesser degree the present Land agitation, exemplified this
trait. The Land League agitation centred round the fight of the tenant
farmers for better terms for their holdings. It was primarily a contest
betwixt tenant and landlord.

The agricultural labourer had no concern in it, indeed he invariably got
better terms from the landlord than the tenant farmer; the urban
population had no interests directly at stake, town workers were not
considered in Land Bills; all the mercantile, industrial and
professional classes knew they would be left outside the scope of the
settlement between landlord and tenant should one be arrived at, yet,
the tenant farmers being organised politically and industrially, and
above all being class-conscious, that is to say conscious of the
identity of their class interests, succeeded in impressing the character
of their movement upon the whole life of Ireland.

Every farmer's grievance became an Irish national grievance, every
farmer refusing to pay rent was idealised as a patriot battling, not for
his own purse, but for his country, every farmer evicted was acclaimed
as a martyr for his country; if a man took an evicted farm he was not
merely a landgrabber or scab on his class, he was a traitor to
'Ireland', and every person who spoke to him, or helped to feed, clothe
or shelter him was also an enemy to Ireland, a traitor to his native
land, a Judas or a Diarmuid Mac Murchadha. Thus the tenant farmers
dominated the thought of the country and made the fight of their own
class for its rights identical with the idea of Irish patriotism.

Now we are not pointing this fact out in order to denounce it. On the
contrary we consider the farmers acted wisely in their own interests.
But we do point it out in order to emphasise our contention that any
particular act or political doctrine is patriotic or unpatriotic in the
exact proportion in which it serves the interests of the class who for
the time being hold political power. The Farmers of Ireland denounced as
unpatriotic everything that failed to serve their class interests, --
including even the labourer's demand for a cottage; let the Working
Class of Ireland follow their lead and test the sincerity of every man's
patriotism by his devotion to the interests of Labour. In the eyes of
the farmer no wagging of green flags could make a landgrabber a patriot:
let the Workers apply the same test and brand as enemies to Ireland all
who believe in the subjection of Labour to Capital -- brand as traitors
to this country all who live by skinning Irish Labour.

For the working class of the world the lesson is also plain. In every
country Socialism is foreign, is unpatriotic, and will continue so until
the Working Class embracing it as their salvation make Socialism the
dominant political force.

Then the interests of the Working Class will be in the ascendant and
every man's patriotism will be gauged by his services and devotion to
these interests, thus Socialism will be patriotic and native everywhere,
and the advocates of Capitalistic property will be the unpatriotic ones.

By their aggressiveness and intolerance the possessing classes erect the
principles of their capitalist supremacy into the dignity of national
safeguards; according as the Working Class infuses into its political
organisation the same aggressiveness and intolerance will it command the
success it deserves, and make the Socialist the only good and loyal
citizen.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
