Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# Appendix. A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

#### 1892 From *Die Neue Zeit* Vol. XI, No. I, pp. 373-75

[S]{.cap}ince it has recently become fashionable among certain
rationalistic ethnographers to deny the existence of group marriage, the
following report is of interest; I translate it from the *Russkiye
Vyedomosti*, Moscow, October 14, 1892 (Old Style). Not only group
marriage, i.e., the right of mutual sexual intercourse between a number
of men and a number of women, is expressly affirmed to be in full force,
but a form of group marriage which closely follows the punaluan marriage
of the Hawaiians, the most developed and classic phase of group
marriage. While the typical punaluan family consists of a number of
brothers (own and collateral), who are married to a number of own and
collateral sisters, we here find on the island of Sakhalin that a man is
married to all the wives of his brothers and to all the sisters of his
wife, which means, seen from the woman\'s side, that his wife may freely
practice sexual intercourse with the brothers of her husband and the
husbands of her sisters. It therefore differs from the typical form of
punaluan marriage only in the fact that the brothers of the husband and
the husbands of the sisters are not necessarily the same persons.

It should further be observed that this report again confirms what I
said in *The Origin of the Family*, 4th edition, pp. 28-29: that group
marriage does not look at all like what our brother-obsessed philistine
imagines; that the partners in group marriage do not lead in public the
same kind of lascivious life as he practices in secret, but that this
form of marriage, at least in the instances still known to occur today,
differs in practice from a loose pairing marriage or from polygamy only
in the fact that custom permits sexual intercourse in a number of cases
where otherwise it would be severely punished. That the actual exercise
of these rights is gradually dying out only proves that this form of
marriage is itself destined to die out, which is further confirmed by
its infrequency.

The whole description, moreover, is interesting because it again
demonstrates the similarity, even the identity in their main
characteristics, of the social institutions of primitive peoples at
approximately the same stage of development. Most of what the report
states about these Mongoloids on the island of Sakhalin also holds for
the Dravidian tribes of India, the South Sea Islanders at the time of
their discovery, and the American Indians. The report runs:

\"At the session of October 10 (Old Style; October 22, New Style) of the
Anthropological Section of the Society of the Friends of Natural
Science, N. A. Yanchuk read an interesting communication from Mr.
Sternberg on the Gilyaks, a little-studied tribe on the island of
Sakhalin, who are at the cultural level of savagery. The Gilyaks are
acquainted neither with agriculture nor with pottery; they procure their
food chiefly by hunting and fishing; they warm water in wooden vessels
by throwing in heated stones, etc. Of particular interest are their
institutions relating to the family and to the gens. The Gilyak
addresses as father, not only his own natural father, but also all the
brothers of his father; all the wives of these brothers, as well as all
the sisters of his mother, he addresses as his mothers; the children of
all these \'fathers\' and \'mothers\' he addresses as his brothers and
sisters. This system of address also exists, as is well known, among the
Iroquois and other Indian tribes of North America, as also among some
tribes of India. But whereas in these cases it has long since ceased to
correspond to the actual conditions, among the Gilyaks it serves to
designate *a state still valid today*. To this day *every Gilyak has the
rights of a husband in regard to the wives of his brothers and to the
sisters of his wife*; at any rate, the exercise of these rights is not
regarded as impermissible. These survivals of group marriage on the
basis of the gens are reminiscent of the well-known punaluan marriage,
which still existed in the Sandwich Islands in the first half of this
century. Family and gens relations of this type form the basis of the
whole gentile order and social constitution of the Gilyaks.

\"The gens of a Gilyak consists of all-nearer and more remote, real and
nominal-brothers of his father, of their fathers and mothers of the
children of his brothers, and of his own children.

One can readily understand that a gens so constituted may comprise an
enormous number of people. Life within the gens proceeds according to
the following principles. Marriage within the gens is unconditionally
prohibited. When a Gilyak dies, his wife passes by decision of the gens
to one of his brothers, own or nominal. The gens provides for the
maintenance of all of its members who are unable to work. \'We have no
poor,\' said a Gilyak to the writer. \'Whoever is in need, is fed by the
*khal* \[gens\].\' The members of the gens are further united by common
sacrificial ceremonies and festivals, a common burial place, etc.

\"The gens guarantees the life and security of its members against
attacks by non-gentiles; the means of repression used is blood-revenge,
though under Russian rule the practice has very much declined. Women are
completely excepted from gentile blood-revenge. In some very rare cases
the gens adopts members of other gentes. It is a general rule that the
property of a deceased member may not pass out of the gens; in this
respect the famous provision of the Twelve Tables holds literally among
the Gilyaks: *si suos heredes non habet, gentiles familiam habento* --
if he has no heirs of his own, the members of the gens shall inherit. No
important event takes place in the life of a Gilyak without
participation by the gens. Not very long ago, about one or two
generations, the oldest gentile member was the head of the community,
the *starosta* of the gens; today the functions of the chief elder of
the gens are restricted almost solely to presiding over religious
ceremonies. The gentes are often dispersed among widely distant places,
but even when separated the members of a gens still remember one another
and continue to give one another hospitality, and to provide mutual
assistance and protection, etc. Except under the most extreme necessity,
the Gilyak never leaves the fellow-members of his gens or the graves of
his gens. Gentile society has impressed a very definite stamp on the
whole mental life of the Gilyaks, on their character, their customs and
institutions. The habit of common discussion and decision on all
matters, the necessity of continually taking an active part in all
questions affecting the members of the gens, the solidarity of
blood-revenge, the fact of being compelled and accustomed to live
together with ten or more like himself in great tents (*yurtas*), and to
be, in short, always with other people-all this has given the Gilyak a
sociable and open character. The Gilyak is extraordinarily hospitable;
he loves to entertain guests and to come himself as a guest. This
admirable habit of hospitality is especially prominent in times of
distress. In a bad year, when a Gilyak has nothing for himself or for
his dogs to eat, he does not stretch out his hand for alms, but
confidently seeks hospitality, and is fed, often for a considerable
time.

\"Among the Gilyaks of Sakhalin crimes from motives of personal gain
practically never occur. The Gilyak keeps his valuables in a storehouse,
which is never locked. He has such a keen sense of shame that if he is
convicted of a disgraceful act, he immediately goes into the forest and
hangs himself. Murder is very rare, and is hardly ever committed except
in anger, never from intentions of gain. In his dealings with other
people, the Gilyak shows himself honest, reliable, and conscientious.

\"Despite their long subjection to the Manchurians, now become Chinese,
and despite the corrupting influence of the settlement of the Amur
district, the Gilyaks still preserve in their moral character many of
the virtues of a primitive tribe. But the fate awaiting their social
order cannot be averted. One or two more generations, and the Gilyaks on
the mainland will have been completely Russianized, and together with
the benefits of culture they will also acquire its defects. The Gilyaks
on the island of Sakhalin, being more or less remote from the centers of
Russian settlement, have some prospect of preserving their way of life
unspoiled rather longer. But among them, too, the influence of their
Russian neighbors is beginning to make itself felt. The Gilyaks come
into the villages to trade, they go to Nikolaievsk to look for work; and
every Gilyak who returns from such work to his home brings with him the
same atmosphere which the Russian worker takes back from the town into
his village. And at the same time, working in the town, with its chances
and changes of fortune, destroys more and more that primitive equality
which is such a prominent feature of the artlessly simple economic life
of these peoples.

\"Mr. Sternberg\'s article, which also contains information about their
religious views and customs and their legal institutions, will appear
unabridged in the *Etnografitcheskoye Obozrenie* (*Ethnographical
Review*).

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)\
[Marx/Engels Works Index](../../index.htm)
