Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# I. Stages of Prehistoric Culture

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

MORGAN is the first man who, with expert knowledge, has attempted to
introduce a definite order into the history of primitive man; so long as
no important additional material makes changes necessary, his
classification will undoubtedly remain in force.

Of the three main epochs -- savagery, barbarism, and civilization -- he
is concerned, of course, only with the first two and the transition to
the third. He divides both savagery and barbarism into lower, middle,
and upper stages according to the progress made in the production of
food; for, he says:

Upon their skill in this direction, the whole question of human
supremacy on the earth depended. Mankind are the only beings who may be
said to have gained an absolute control over the production of food \...
It is accordingly probable that the great epochs of human progress have
been identified, more or less directly, with the enlargement of the
sources of subsistence.

\[Morgan, op. cit., p. 19. -Ed.\]

The development of the family takes a parallel course, but here the
periods have not such striking marks of differentiation.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. Savagery

(a.) LOWER STAGE. Childhood of the human race. Man still lived in his
original habitat, in tropical or subtropical forests, and was partially
at least a tree-dweller, for otherwise his survival among huge beasts of
prey cannot be explained. Fruit, nuts and roots served him for food. The
development of articulate speech is the main result of this period. Of
all the peoples known to history none was still at this primitive level.
Though this period may have lasted thousands of years, we have no direct
evidence to prove its existence; but once the evolution of man from the
animal kingdom is admitted, such a transitional stage must necessarily
be assumed.^[\[A\]](#A){#Ab}^

(b.) MIDDLE STAGE. Begins with the utilization of fish for food
(including crabs, mussels, and other aquatic animals), and with the use
of fire. The two are complementary, since fish becomes edible only by
the use of fire. With this new source of nourishment, men now became
independent of climate and locality; even as savages, they could, by
following the rivers and coasts, spread over most of the earth. Proof of
these migrations is the distribution over every continent of the crudely
worked, unsharpened flint tools of the earlier Stone Age, known as
"palaeoliths," all or most of which date from this period. New
environments, ceaseless exercise of his inventive faculty, and the
ability to produce fire by friction, led man to discover new kinds of
food: farinaceous roots and tubers, for instance, were baked in hot
ashes or in ground ovens. With the invention of the first weapons, club
and spear, game could sometimes be added to the fare. But the tribes
which figure in books as living entirely, that is, exclusively, by
hunting never existed in reality; the yield of the hunt was far too
precarious. At this stage, owing to the continual uncertainty of food
supplies, cannibalism seems to have arisen, and was practiced from now
onwards for a long time. The Australian aborigines and many of the
Polynesians are still in this middle stage of savagery
today.^[\[B\]](#B){#Bb}^

(c.) UPPER STAGE. Begins with the invention of the bow and arrow,
whereby game became a regular source of food, and hunting a normal form
of work. Bow, string, and arrow already constitute a very complex
instrument, whose invention implies long, accumulated experience and
sharpened intelligence, and therefore knowledge of many other inventions
as well. We find, in fact, that the peoples acquainted with the bow and
arrow but not yet with pottery (from which Morgan dates the transition
to barbarism) are already making some beginnings towards settlement in
villages and have gained some control over the production of means of
subsistence; we find wooden vessels and utensils, finger-weaving
(without looms) with filaments of bark; plaited baskets of bast or
osier; sharpened (neolithic) stone tools. With the discovery of fire and
the stone ax, dug-out canoes now become common; beams and planks arc
also sometimes used for building houses. We find all these advances, for
instance, among the Indians of northwest America, who are acquainted
with the bow and arrow but not with pottery. The bow and arrow was for
savagery what the iron sword was for barbarism and fire-arms for
civilization -- the decisive weapon.^[\[C\]](#C){#Cb}^

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. Barbarism

(a.) LOWER STAGE. Dates from the introduction of pottery. In many cases
it has been proved, and in all it is probable, that the first pots
originated from the habit of covering baskets or wooden vessels with
clay to make them fireproof; in this way it was soon discovered that the
clay mold answered the purpose without any inner vessel.

Thus far we have been able to follow a general line of development
applicable to all peoples at a given period without distinction of
place. With the beginning of barbarism, however, we have reached a stage
when the difference in the natural endowments of the two hemispheres of
the earth comes into play. The characteristic feature of the period of
barbarism is the domestication and breeding of animals and the
cultivation of plants. Now, the Eastern Hemisphere, the so-called Old
World, possessed nearly all the animals adaptable to domestication, and
all the varieties of cultivable cereals except one; the Western
Hemisphere, America, had no mammals that could be domesticated except
the llama, which, moreover, was only found in one part of South America,
and of all the cultivable cereals only one, though that was the best,
namely, maize. Owing to these differences in natural conditions, the
population of each hemisphere now goes on its own way, and different
landmarks divide the particular stages in each of the two cases.

(b.) MIDDLE STAGE. Begins in the Eastern Hemisphere with domestication
of animals; in the Western, with the cultivation, by means of
irrigation, of plants for food, and with the use of adobe (sun-dried)
bricks and stone for building.

We will begin with the Western Hemisphere, as here this stage was never
superseded before the European conquest.

At the time when they were discovered, the Indians at the lower stage of
barbarism (comprising all the tribes living east of the Mississippi)
were already practicing some horticulture of maize, and possibly also of
gourds, melons, and other garden plants, from which they obtained a very
considerable part of their food. They lived in wooden houses in villages
protected by palisades. The tribes in the northwest, particularly those
in the region of the Columbia River, were still at the upper stage of
savagery and acquainted neither with pottery nor with any form of
horticulture. The so-called Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, however, and
the Mexicans, Central Americans, and Peruvians at the time of their
conquest were at the middle stage of barbarism. They lived in houses
like fortresses, made of adobe brick or of stone, and cultivated maize
and other plants, varying according to locality and climate, in
artificially irrigated plots of ground, which supplied their main source
of food; some animals even had also been domesticated -- the turkey and
other birds by the Mexicans, the llama by the Peruvians. They could also
work metals, but not iron; hence they were still unable to dispense with
stone weapons and tools. The Spanish conquest then cut short any further
independent development.

In the Eastern Hemisphere the middle stage of barbarism began with the
domestication of animals providing milk and meat, but horticulture seems
to have remained unknown far into this period.^[\[D\]](#D){#Db}^ It was,
apparently, the domestication and breeding of animals and the formation
of herds of considerable size that led to the differentiation of the
Aryans and Semites from the mass of barbarians. The European and Asiatic
Aryans still have the same names for cattle, but those for most of the
cultivated plants are already different.

In suitable localities, the keeping of herds led to a pastoral life: the
Semites lived upon the grassy plains of the Euphrates and Tigris, and
the Aryans upon those of India and of the Oxus and Jaxartes, of the Don
and the Dnieper. It must have been on the borders of such pasture lands
that animals were first domesticated. To later generations,
consequently, the pastoral tribes appear to have come from regions
which, so far from being the cradle of mankind, were almost
uninhabitable for their savage ancestors and even for man at the lower
stages of barbarism. But having once accustomed themselves to pastoral
life in the grassy plains of the rivers, these barbarians of the middle
period would never have dreamed of returning willingly to the native
forests of their ancestors. Even when they were forced further to the
north and west, the Semites and Aryans could not move into the forest
regions of western Asia and of Europe until by cultivation of grain they
had made it possible to pasture and especially to winter their herds on
this less favorable land. It is more than probable that among these
tribes the cultivation of grain originated from the need for cattle
fodder and only later became important as a human food supply.

The plentiful supply of milk and meat and especially the beneficial
effect of these foods on the growth of the children account perhaps for
the superior development of the Aryan and Semitic races. It is a fact
that the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, who are reduced to an almost
entirely vegetarian diet, have a smaller brain than the Indians at the
lower stage of barbarism, who eat more meat and fish.^[\[E\]](#E){#Eb}^
In any case, cannibalism now gradually dies out, surviving only as a
religious act or as a means of working magic, which is here almost the
same thing.

(c.) UPPER STAGE. Begins with the smelting of iron ore, and passes into
civilization with the invention of alphabetic writing and its use for
literary records. This stage (as we have seen, only the Eastern
Hemisphere passed through it independently) is richer in advances in
production than all the preceding stages together. To it belong the
Greeks of the heroic age, the tribes of Italy shortly before the
foundation of Rome, the Germans of Tacitus and the Norsemen of the
Viking age.^[\[F\]](#F){#Fb}^

Above all, we now first meet the iron plowshare drawn by cattle, which
made large-scale agriculture, the cultivation of fields, possible, and
thus created a practically unrestricted food supply in comparison with
previous conditions. This led to the clearance of forest land for
tillage and pasture, which in turn was impossible on a large scale
without the iron ax and the iron spade. Population rapidly increased in
number, and in small areas became dense. Prior to field agriculture,
conditions must have been very exceptional if they allowed half a
million people to be united under a central organization; probably such
a thing never occurred[.]{#art}

We find the upper stage of barbarism at its highest in the Homeric
poems, particularly in the Iliad. Fully developed iron tools, the
bellows, the hand-mill, the potter's wheel, the making of oil and wine,
metal work developing almost into a fine art, the wagon and the
war-chariot, ship-building with beams and planks, the beginnings of
architecture as art, walled cities with towers and battlements, the
Homeric epic and a complete mythology -- these are the chief legacy
brought by the Greeks from barbarism into civilization. When we compare
the descriptions which Caesar and even Tacitus give of the Germans, who
stood at the beginning of the cultural stage from which the Homeric
Greeks were just preparing to make the next advance, we realize how rich
was the development of production within the upper stage of barbarism.

The sketch which I have given here, following Morgan, of the development
of mankind through savagery and barbarism to the beginnings of
civilization, is already rich enough in new features; what is more, they
cannot be disputed, since they are drawn directly from the process of
production. Yet my sketch will seem flat and feeble compared with the
picture to be unrolled at the end of our travels; only then will the
transition from barbarism to civilization stand out in full light and in
all its striking contrasts. For the time being, Morgan's division may be
summarized thus:

***Savagery*** -- the period in which man's appropriation of products in
their natural state predominates; the products of human art are chiefly
instruments which assist this appropriation.

***Barbarism*** -- the period during which man learns to breed domestic
animals and to practice agriculture, and acquires methods of increasing
the supply of natural products by human activity.

***Civilization*** -- the period in which man learns a more advanced
application of work to the products of nature, the period of industry
proper and of art.

\
\

[Preface](preface.htm) \| [Chapter 2](ch02.htm)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#notes}

## Editorial Footnotes

The intent of these footnotes are both to help the modern reader
critically assess this work in face of recent scientific evidence and to
show how effective Engels\' dialectical method was that many of his
conclusions remain true to this day. The following chapters do not have
editorial footnotes because they are not needed as much as they are in
this chapter (and this editor is not as knowledgable on those other
subjects!). It should be noted that Engels predominant focus on European
cultures is due to his lack of data on other cultures. These notes were
written by MIA volunteer Brian Baggins (July, 2000).

[[A](#Ab){#A}]{.term} While written in the late nineteenth century,
these characteristics are descriptive of the first hominin genus:
australopithecus who came into existence \~4 million years ago on the
continent of Africa, and became extinct \~2 million years ago. They
primarily were dependent on fruits, roots, etc. but likely supplemented
this as scavengers.

[[B](#Bb){#B}]{.term} This stage is a reasonable facsimile of homo
erectus. Collection of their own food was predominant, the use of fire
is likely, they hunted animals to some extent, and most importantly
these practices allowed for the migration of humanity: settling much of
Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.

There are however two significant mistakes. Australian Aborigines and
Polynesians were not in a \"middle stage of savagery". This was a false
characterization used by Europeans to justify the colonization of those
people. Similarly, cannibalism is an accusation often made to justify
exploitation, and its existence is extremely rare.

[[C](#Cb){#C}]{.term} This stage is descriptive of homo sapiens, i.e.
modern human beings, who first emerged \~200,000 years ago, and who
originated in Africa. At around the same time, homo erectus went
extinct.

[[D](#Db){#D}]{.term} Current estimates are that domestication of
animals occurred in 11,000 BCE, while agriculture began around 9,500
BCE.

[[E](#Eb){#E}]{.term} The theory that brain size correlates to
intelligence was discredited by the end of the 19th century. This theory
was used to justify both gender and race inequities for over a century.
Modern theories about intelligence relating to physical characteristics,
including size, are highly nuanced.

[[F](#Fb){#F}]{.term} This is inaccurate. The Mesopotamian (3500-1000
B.C.E.), Egyptian (3000-500 B.C.E.), Harrapan (2500-1000 B.C.E.), &
Chinese (2000 B.C.E. -- 1800 C.E.) civilizations long preceded the
Europeans in this stage: the Greeks were the first in Europe at around
500 B.C.E. Further, societies throughout the western hemisphere
(Mesoamerica) developed their own writing and metallurgy. Morgan and
Engels failed to recognize that the majority of humans on earth reached
this final stage before European colonization.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Origins of the Family Index](index.htm)
