Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# II. The Family

### 3. The Pairing Family

\

A certain amount of pairing, for a longer or shorter period, already
occurred in group marriage or even earlier; the man had a chief wife
among his many wives (one can hardly yet speak of a favorite wife), and
for her he was the most important among her husbands. This fact has
contributed considerably to the confusion of the missionaries, who have
regarded group marriage sometimes as promiscuous community of wives,
sometimes as unbridled adultery. But these customary pairings were bound
to grow more stable as the gens developed and the classes of "brothers"
and "sisters" between whom marriage was impossible became more numerous.
The impulse given by the gens to the prevention of marriage between
blood relatives extended still further. Thus among the Iroquois and most
of the other Indians at the lower stage of barbarism we find that
marriage is prohibited between *all* relatives enumerated in their
system -- which includes several hundred degrees of kinship. The
increasing complication of these prohibitions made group marriages more
and more impossible; they were displaced by the *pairing family*. In
this stage, one man lives with one woman, but the relationship is such
that polygamy and occasional infidelity remain the right of the men,
even though for economic reasons polygamy is rare, while from the woman
the strictest fidelity is generally demanded throughout the time she
lives with the man, and adultery on her part is cruelly punished. The
marriage tie can, however, be easily dissolved by either partner; after
separation, the children still belong, as before, to the mother alone.

In this ever extending exclusion of blood relatives from the bond of
marriage, natural selection continues its work. In Morgan's words:

The influence of the new practice, which brought unrelated persons into
the marriage relation, tended to create a more vigorous stock physically
and mentally \... When two advancing tribes, with strong mental and
physical characters, are brought together and blended into one people by
the accidents of barbarous life, the new skull and brain would widen and
lengthen to the sum of the capabilities of both.

\[Morgan, Op. cit., p. 468. -- Ed.\]

Tribes with gentile constitution were thus bound to gain supremacy over
more backward tribes, or else to carry them along by their example.

Thus the history of the family in primitive times consists in the
progressive narrowing of the circle, originally embracing the whole
tribe, within which the two sexes have a common conjugal relation. The
continuous exclusion, first of nearer, then of more and more remote
relatives, and at last even of relatives by marriage, ends by making any
kind of group marriage practically impossible. Finally, there remains
only the single, still loosely linked pair, the molecule with whose
dissolution marriage itself ceases. This in itself shows what a small
part individual sex-love, in the modern sense of the word, played in the
rise of monogamy. Yet stronger proof is afforded by the practice of all
peoples at this stage of development. Whereas in the earlier forms of
the family men never lacked women, but, on the contrary, had too many
rather than too few, women had now become scarce and highly sought
after. Hence it is with the pairing marriage that there begins the
capture and purchase of women -- widespread *symptoms*, but no more than
symptoms, of the much deeper change that had occurred. These symptoms,
mere methods of procuring wives, the pedantic Scot, McLennan, has
transmogrified into special classes of families under the names of
"marriage by capture" and "marriage by purchase." In general, whether
among the American Indians or other peoples (at the same stage), the
conclusion of a marriage is the affair, not of the two parties
concerned, who are often not consulted at all, but of their mothers. Two
persons entirely unknown to each other are often thus affianced; they
only learn that the bargain has been struck when the time for marrying
approaches. Before the wedding the bridegroom gives presents to the
bride\'s gentile relatives (to those on the mother\'s side, therefore,
not to the father and his relations), which are regarded as gift
payments in return for the girl. The marriage is still terminable at the
desire of either partner, but among many tribes, the Iroquois, for
example, public opinion has gradually developed against such
separations; when differences arise between husband and wife, the gens
relatives of both partners act as mediators, and only if these efforts
prove fruitless does a separation take place, the wife then keeping the
children and each partner being free to marry again.

The pairing family, itself too weak and unstable to make an independent
household necessary or even desirable, in no wise destroys the
communistic household inherited from earlier times. Communistic
housekeeping, however, means the supremacy of women in the house; just
as the exclusive recognition of the female parent, owing to the
impossibility of recognizing the male parent with certainty, means that
the women -- the mothers -- are held in high respect. One of the most
absurd notions taken over from eighteenth-century enlightenment is that
in the beginning of society woman was the slave of man. Among all
savages and all barbarians of the lower and middle stages, and to a
certain extent of the upper stage also, the position of women is not
only free, but honorable. As to what it still is in the pairing
marriage, let us hear the evidence of Ashur Wright, for many years
missionary among the Iroquois Senecas:

As to their family system, when occupying the old long-houses
\[communistic households comprising several families\], it is probable
that some one clan \[gens\] predominated, the women taking in husbands,
however, from the other clans \[gentes\] \... Usually, the female
portion ruled the house \... The stores were in common; but woe to the
luckless husband or lover who was too shiftless to do his share of the
providing. No matter how many children, or whatever goods he might have
in the house, he might at any time be ordered to pick up his blanket and
budge; and after such orders it would not be healthful for him to
attempt to disobey. The house would be too hot for him; and \... he must
retreat to his own clan \[gens\]; or, as was often done, go and start a
new matrimonial alliance in some other. The women were the great power
among the clans \[gentes\], as everywhere else. They did not hesitate,
when occasion required, "to knock off the horns," as it was technically
called, from the head of a chief, and send him back to the ranks of the
warriors.

\[Quoted by Morgan, Op. cit., P. 464. -- Ed.\]

The communistic household, in which most or all of the women belong to
one and the same gens, while the men come from various gentes, is the
material foundation of that supremacy of the women which was general in
primitive times, and which it is Bachofen's third great merit to have
discovered. The reports of travelers and missionaries, I may add, to the
effect that women among savages and barbarians are overburdened with
work in no way contradict what has been said. The division of labor
between the two sexes is determined by quite other causes than by the
position of woman in society. Among peoples where the women have to work
far harder than we think suitable, there is often much more real respect
for women than among our Europeans. The lady of civilization, surrounded
by false homage and estranged from all real work, has an infinitely
lower social position than the hard-working woman of barbarism, who was
regarded among her people as a real lady (lady, *frowa, Frau* --
mistress) and who was also a lady in character.

Whether pairing marriage has completely supplanted group marriage in
America today is a question to be decided by closer investigation among
the peoples still at the upper stage of savagery in the northwest, and
particularly in South America. Among the latter, so many instances of
sexual license are related that one can hardly assume the old group
marriage to have been completely overcome here. At any rate, all traces
of it have not yet disappeared. In at least forty North American tribes
the man who marries an eldest sister has the right to take all her other
sisters as his wives as soon as they are old enough -- a relic of the
time when a whole line of sisters had husbands in common. And Bancroft
reports of the Indians of the California peninsula (upper stage of
savagery) that they have certain festivals when several "tribes" come
together for the purpose of promiscuous sexual intercourse. These
"tribes" are clearly gentes, who preserve in these feasts a dim memory
of the time when the women of one gens had all the men of the other as
their common husbands, and conversely. The same custom still prevails in
Australia. We find among some peoples that the older men, the chieftains
and the magician-priests, exploit the community of wives and monopolize
most of the women for themselves; at certain festivals and great
assemblies of the people, however, they have to restore the old
community of women and allow their wives to enjoy themselves with the
young men. Westermarck (*History of Human Marriage*, 1891, pp. 28, 29)
quotes a whole series of instances of such periodic Saturnalian feasts,
when for a short time the old freedom of sexual intercourse is again
restored: examples are given among the Hos, the Santals, the Punjas and
Kotars in India, among some African peoples, and so forth. Curiously
enough, Westermarck draws the conclusion that these are survivals, not
of the group marriage, which he totally rejects, but of the mating
season which primitive man had in common with the other animals.

Here we come to Bachofen's fourth great discovery -- the widespread
transitional form between group marriage and pairing. What Bachofen
represents as a penance for the transgression of the old divine laws --
the penance by which the woman purchases the right of chastity -- is in
fact only a mystical expression of the penance by which the woman buys
herself out of the old community of husbands and acquires the right to
give herself to *one* man only. This penance consists in a limited
surrender: the Babylonian women had to give themselves once a year in
the temple of Mylitta; other peoples of Asia Minor sent their girls for
years to the temple of Anaitis, where they had to practice free love
with favorites of their own choosing before they were allowed to marry.
Similar customs in religious disguise are common to almost all Asiatic
peoples between the Mediterranean and the Ganges. The sacrifice of
atonement by which the woman purchases her freedom becomes increasingly
lighter in course of time, as Bachofen already noted:

Instead of being repeated annually, the offering is made once only; the
hetaerism of the matrons is succeeded by the hetaerism of the maidens;
hetaerism during marriage by hetaerism before marriage; surrender to all
without choice by surrender to some.

(*Mutterrecht*, p. xix.)

Among other peoples the religious disguise is absent. In some cases --
among the Thracians, Celts, and others, in classical times, many of the
original inhabitants of India, and to this day among the Malayan
peoples, the South Sea Islanders and many American Indians -- the girls
enjoy the greatest sexual freedom up to the time of their marriage. This
is especially the case almost everywhere in South America, as everyone
who has gone any distance into the interior can testify. Thus Agassiz
(*A Journey in Brazil*, Boston and New York, 1868, p. 266) tells this
story of a rich family of Indian extraction: when he was introduced to
the daughter, he asked after her father, presuming him to be her
mother\'s husband, who was fighting as an officer in the war against
Paraguay; but the mother answered with a smile: \"*Naõ tem pai, é filha
da fortuna*\" (She has no father. She is a child of chance):

It is the way the Indian or half-breed women here always speak of their
illegitimate children \... without an intonation of sadness or of blame
\... So far is this from being an unusual case, that \... the opposite
seems the exception. Children are frequently quite ignorant of their
parentage. They know about their mother, for all the care and
responsibility falls upon her, but they have no knowledge of their
father; nor does it seem to occur to the woman that she or her children
have any claim upon him.

What seems strange here to civilized people is simply the rule according
to mother-right and in group marriage.

Among other peoples, again, the friends and relatives of the bridegroom,
or the wedding guests, claim their traditional right to the bride at the
wedding itself, and the bridegroom\'s turn only comes last; this was the
custom in the Balearic Islands and among the Augilers of Africa in
ancient times; it is still observed among the Bareas of Abyssinia. In
other cases, an official personage, the head of the tribe or the gens,
*cacique*, shaman, priest, prince or whatever he may be called,
represents the community and exercises the right of the first night with
the bride. Despite all necromantic whitewashing, this *jus prime noctis*
[\[Right of first night. -- Ed.\]]{.context} still persists today as a
relic of group marriage among most of the natives of the Alaska region
(Bancroft, *Native Races*, I, p. 8i), the Tahus of North Mexico (Ibid.,
p. 584) and other peoples; and at any rate in the countries originally
Celtic, where it was handed down directly from group marriage, it
existed throughout the whole of the middle ages, for example, in Aragon.
While in Castile the peasants were never serfs, in Aragon there was
serfdom of the most shameful kind right up till the decree of Ferdinand
the Catholic in 1486. This document states:

We judge and declare that the aforementioned lords (senors, barons) \...
when the peasant takes himself a wife, shall neither sleep with her on
the first night; nor shall they during the wedding-night, when the wife
has laid herself in her bed, step over it and the aforementioned wife as
a sign of lordship; nor shall the aforementioned lords use the daughter
or the son of the peasant, with payment or without payment, against
their will.

(Quoted in the original Catalan by Sugenheim,\
*Serfdom*, Petersburg, 1861, p. 35)

Bachofen is also perfectly right when he consistently maintains that the
transition from what he calls "Hetaerism" or "*Sumpfzeugung*" to
monogamy was brought about primarily through the women. The more the
traditional sexual relations lost the native primitive character of
forest life, owing to the development of economic conditions with
consequent undermining of the old communism and growing density of
population, the more oppressive and humiliating must the women have felt
them to be, and the greater their longing for the right of chastity, of
temporary or permanent marriage with one man only, as a way of release.
This advance could not in any case have originated with the men, if only
because it has never occurred to them, even to this day, to renounce the
pleasures of actual group marriage. Only when the women had brought
about the transition to pairing marriage were the men able to introduce
strict monogamy -- though indeed only for women.

The first beginnings of the pairing family appear on the dividing line
between savagery and barbarism; they are generally to be found already
at the upper stage of savagery, but occasionally not until the lower
stage of barbarism. The pairing family is the form characteristic of
barbarism, as group marriage is characteristic of savagery and monogamy
of civilization. To develop it further, to strict monogamy, other causes
were required than those we have found active hitherto. In the single
pair the group was already reduced to its final unit, its two-atom
molecule: one man and one woman. Natural selection, with its progressive
exclusions from the marriage community, had accomplished its task; there
was nothing more for it to do in this direction. Unless new, *social*
forces came into play, there was no reason why a new form of family
should arise from the single pair. But these new forces did come into
play.

We now leave America, the classic soil of the pairing family. No sign
allows us to conclude that a higher form of family developed here, or
that there was ever permanent monogamy anywhere in America prior to its
discovery and conquest. But not so in the Old World.

Here the domestication of animals and the breeding of herds had
developed a hitherto unsuspected source of wealth and created entirely
new social relations. Up to the lower stage of barbarism, permanent
wealth had consisted almost solely of house, clothing, crude ornaments
and the tools for obtaining and preparing food -- boat, weapons, and
domestic utensils of the simplest kind. Food had to be won afresh day by
day. Now, with their herds of horses, camels, asses, cattle, sheep,
goats, and pigs, the advancing pastoral peoples -- the Semites on the
Euphrates and the Tigris, and the Aryans in the Indian country of the
Five Streams (Punjab), in the Ganges region, and in the steppes then
much more abundantly watered of the Oxus and the Jaxartes -- had
acquired property which only needed supervision and the rudest care to
reproduce itself in steadily increasing quantities and to supply the
most abundant food in the form of milk and meat. All former means of
procuring food now receded into the background; hunting, formerly a
necessity, now became a luxury.

But to whom did this new wealth belong? Originally to the gens, without
a doubt. Private property in herds must have already started at an early
period, however. It is difficult to say whether the author of the
so-called first book of Moses regarded the patriarch Abraham as the
owner of his herds in his own right as head of a family community or by
right of his position as actual hereditary head of a gens. What is
certain is that we must not think of him as a property owner in the
modern sense of the word. And it is also certain that at the threshold
of authentic history we already find the herds everywhere separately
owned by heads of families, as are the artistic products of barbarism --
metal implements, luxury articles and, finally, the human cattle -- the
slaves.

For now slavery had also been invented. To the barbarian of the lower
stage, a slave was valueless. Hence the treatment of defeated enemies by
the American Indians was quite different from that at a higher stage.
The men were killed or adopted as brothers into the tribe of the
victors; the women were taken as wives or otherwise adopted with their
surviving children. At this stage human labor-power still does not
produce any considerable surplus over and above its maintenance costs.
That was no longer the case after the introduction of cattle-breeding,
metalworking, weaving and, lastly, agriculture. just as the wives whom
it had formerly been so easy to obtain had now acquired an exchange
value and were bought, so also with the forces of labor, particularly
since the herds had definitely become family possessions. The family did
not multiply so rapidly as the cattle. More people were needed to look
after them; for this purpose use could be made of the enemies captured
in war, who could also be bred just as easily as the cattle themselves.

Once it had passed into the private possession of families and there
rapidly begun to augment, this wealth dealt a severe blow to the society
founded on pairing marriage and the matriarchal gens. Pairing marriage
had brought a new element into the family. By the side of the natural
mother of the child it placed its natural and attested father, with a
better warrant of paternity, probably, than that of many a "father"
today. According to the division of labor within the family at that
time, it was the man's part to obtain food and the instruments of labor
necessary for the purpose. He therefore also owned the instruments of
labor, and in the event of husband and wife separating, he took them
with him, just as she retained her household goods. Therefore, according
to the social custom of the time, the man was also the owner of the new
source of subsistence, the cattle, and later of the new instruments of
labor, the slaves. But according to the custom of the same society, his
children could not inherit from him. For as regards inheritance, the
position was as follows:

At first, according to mother-right -- so long, therefore, as descent
was reckoned only in the female line -- and according to the original
custom of inheritance within the gens, the gentile relatives inherited
from a deceased fellow member of their gens. His property had to remain
within the gens. His effects being insignificant, they probably always
passed in practice to his nearest gentile relations -- that is, to his
blood relations on the mother\'s side. The children of the dead man,
however, did not belong to his gens, but to that of their mother; it was
from her that they inherited, at first conjointly with her other blood
relations, later perhaps with rights of priority; they could not inherit
from their father, because they did not belong to his gens, within which
his property had to remain. When the owner of the herds died, therefore,
his herds would go first to his brothers and sisters and to his sister's
children, or to the issue of his mother's sisters. But his own children
were disinherited.

Thus, on the one hand, in proportion as wealth increased, it made the
man's position in the family more important than the woman's, and on the
other hand created an impulse to exploit this strengthened position in
order to overthrow, in favor of his children, the traditional order of
inheritance. This, however, was impossible so long as descent was
reckoned according to mother-right. Mother-right, therefore, had to be
overthrown, and overthrown it was. This was by no means so difficult as
it looks to us today. For this revolution -- one of the most decisive
ever experienced by humanity -- could take place without disturbing a
single one of the living members of a gens. All could remain as they
were. A simple decree sufficed that in the future the offspring of the
male members should remain within the gens, but that of the female
should be excluded by being transferred to the gens of their father. The
reckoning of descent in the female line and the matriarchal law of
inheritance were thereby overthrown, and the male line of descent and
the paternal law of inheritance were substituted for them. As to how and
when this revolution took place among civilized peoples, we have no
knowledge. It falls entirely within prehistoric times. But that it *did*
take place is more than sufficiently proved by the abundant traces of
mother-right which have been collected, particularly by Bachofen. How
easily it is accomplished can be seen in a whole series of American
Indian tribes, where it has only recently taken place and is still
taking place under the influence, partly of increasing wealth and a
changed mode of life (transference from forest to prairie), and partly
of the moral pressure of civilization and missionaries. Of eight
Missouri tribes, six observe the male line of descent and inheritance,
two still observe the female. Among the Shawnees, Miamis and Delawares
the custom has grown up of giving the children a gentile name of their
father\'s gens in order to transfer them into it, thus enabling them to
inherit from him.

Man"s innate casuistry! To change things by changing their names! And to
find loopholes for violating tradition while maintaining tradition, when
direct interest supplied sufficient impulse. (Marx.)

The result was hopeless confusion, which could only be remedied and to a
certain extent was remedied by the transition to father-right. "In
general, this seems to be the most natural transition." (Marx.) For the
theories proffered by comparative jurisprudence regarding the manner in
which this change was effected among the civilized peoples of the Old
World -- though they are almost pure hypotheses see M. Kovalevsky,
*Tableau des origines et de l\'évolution de la famille et de la
propriété*. Stockholm, 1890.

The overthrow of mother-right was the world historical defeat of the
female sex. The man took command in the home also; the woman was
degraded and reduced to servitude, she became the slave of his lust and
a mere instrument for the production of children. This degraded position
of the woman, especially conspicuous among the Greeks of the heroic and
still more of the classical age, has gradually been palliated and glozed
over, and sometimes clothed in a milder form; in no sense has it been
abolished.

The establishment of the exclusive supremacy of the man shows its
effects first in the patriarchal family, which now emerges as an
intermediate form. Its essential characteristic is not polygyny, of
which more later, but "the organization of a number of persons, bond and
free, into a family, under paternal power, for the purpose of holding
lands, and for the care of flocks and herds \... (In the Semitic form)
the chiefs, at least, lived in polygamy \... Those held to servitude,
and those employed as servants, lived in the marriage relation."

\[Morgan, op. cit., p. 474\]

Its essential features are the incorporation of unfree persons, and
paternal power; hence the perfect type of this form of family is the
Roman. The original meaning of the word "family" (*familia*) is not that
compound of sentimentality and domestic strife which forms the ideal of
the present-day philistine; among the Romans it did not at first even
refer to the married pair and their children, but only to the slaves.
*Famulus* means domestic slave, and familia is the total number of
slaves belonging to one man. As late as the time of Gaius, the *familia,
id est patrimonium* (family, that is, the patrimony, the inheritance)
was bequeathed by will. The term was invented by the Romans to denote a
new social organism, whose head ruled over wife and children and a
number of slaves, and was invested under Roman paternal power with
rights of life and death over them all.

This term, therefore, is no older than the iron-clad family system of
the Latin tribes, which came in after field agriculture and after
legalized servitude, as well as after the separation of Greeks and
Latins.

\[Morgan, Op. cit., p. 478\]

Marx adds:

The modern family contains in germ not only slavery (*servitus*), but
also serfdom, since from the beginning it is related to agricultural
services. It contains *in miniature* all the contradictions which later
extend throughout society and its state.

Such a form of family shows the transition of the pairing family to
monogamy. In order to make certain of the wife's fidelity and therefore
of the paternity of the children, she is delivered over unconditionally
into the power of the husband; if he kills her, he is only exercising
his rights.

With the patriarchal family, we enter the field of written history a
field where comparative jurisprudence can give valuable help. And it has
in fact brought an important advance in our knowledge. We owe to Maxim
Kovalevsky (*Tableau etc. de la mine et de propriété*, Stockholm, 1890,
pp. 60-100), the proof that the patriarchal household community, as we
still find it today among the Serbs and the Bulgars under the name of
*zádruga* (which may be roughly translated \"bond of friendship\") or
*bratstvo* (brotherhood), and in a modified form among the Oriental
peoples, formed the transitional stage between the matriarchal family
deriving from group marriage and the single family of the modern world.
For the civilized peoples of the Old World, for the Aryans and Semites
at any rate, this seems to be established.

The Southern Slav *zádruga* provides the best instance of such a family
community still in actual existence. It comprises several generations of
the descendants of one father, together with their wives, who all live
together in one homestead, cultivate their fields in common, feed and
clothe themselves from a common stock, and possess in common the surplus
from their labor. The community is under the supreme direction of the
head of the house (*domácin*), who acts as its representative outside,
has the right to sell minor objects, and controls the funds, for which,
as for the regular organization of business, he is responsible. He is
elected, and it is not at all necessary that he should be the oldest in
the community. The women and their work are under the control of the
mistress of the house (*domácica*), who is generally the wife of the
*domácin*. She also has an important and often a decisive voice in the
choice of husbands for the girls. Supreme power rests, however, with the
family council, the assembly of all the adult members of the household,
women as well as men. To this assembly the master of the house renders
account; it takes all important decisions, exercises jurisdiction over
the members, decides on sales and purchases of any importance,
especially of land and so on.

It is only within the last ten years or so that such great family
communities have been proved to be still in existence in Russia; it is
now generally recognized that they are as firmly rooted in the customs
of the Russian people as the *obshchina* or village community. They
appear in the oldest Russian code of laws, the *Pravda* of Yaroslav,
under the same name as in the Dalmatian laws (*vervj*), and references
to them can also be traced in Polish and Czech historical sources.

Among the Germans also, according to Heusler (*Institutionen des
deutschen Rechts*), the economic unit was originally not the single
family in the modern sense, but the "house community," which consisted
of several generations or several single families, and often enough
included unfree persons as well. The Roman family is now also considered
to have originated from this type, and consequently the absolute power
of the father of the house, and the complete absence of rights among the
other members of the family in relation to him, have recently been
strongly questioned. It is supposed that similar family communities also
existed among the Celts in Ireland; in France, under the name of
*parconneries*, they survived in Nivernais until the French Revolution,
and in the Franche Comte they have not completely died out even today
\[1884\]. In the district of Louhans (Saône et Loire) large peasant
houses can be seen in which live several generations of the same family;
the house has a lofty common hall reaching to the roof, and surrounding
it the sleeping-rooms, to which stairs of six or eight steps give
access.

In India, the household community with common cultivation of the land is
already mentioned by Nearchus in the time of Alexander the Great, and it
still exists today in the same region, in the Punjab and the whole of
northwest India. Kovalevsky was himself able to prove its existence in
the Caucasus. In Algeria it survives among the Kabyles. It is supposed
to have occurred even in America, and the *calpullis* which Zurita
describes in old Mexico have been identified with it; on the other hand,
Cunow has proved fairly clearly (in the journal *Ausland*, 1890, Nos.
42-44) that in Peru at the time of the conquest there was a form of
constitution based on marks (called, curiously enough, *marca*), with
periodical allotment of arable land and consequently with individual
tillage. In any case, the patriarchal household community with common
ownership and common cultivation of the land now assumes an entirely
different significance than hitherto. We can no longer doubt the
important part it played, as a transitional form between the matriarchal
family and the single family, among civilized and other peoples of the
Old World. Later we will return to the further conclusion drawn by
Kovalevsky that it was also the transitional form out of which developed
the village, or mark, community with individual tillage and the
allotment, first periodical and then permanent, of arable and pasture
land.

With regard to the family life within these communities, it must be
observed that at any rate in Russia the master of the house has a
reputation for violently abusing his position towards the younger women
of the community, especially his daughters-in-law, whom he often
converts into his harem; the Russian folk-songs have more than a little
to say about this.

Before we go on to monogamy, which developed rapidly with the overthrow
of mother-right, a few words about polygyny and polyandry. Both forms
can only be exceptions, historical luxury products, as it were, unless
they occur side by side in the same country, which is, of course, not
the case. As the men excluded from polygyny cannot console themselves
with the women left over from polyandry, and as hitherto, regardless of
social institutions, the number of men and women has been fairly equal,
it is obviously impossible for either of these forms of marriage to be
elevated to the general form. Polygyny on the part of one individual man
was, in fact, obviously a product of slavery and confined to a few
people in exceptional positions. In the Semitic patriarchal family it
was only the patriarch himself, and a few of his sons at most, who lived
in polygyny; the rest had to content themselves with one wife. This
still holds throughout the whole of the Orient; polygyny is the
privilege of the wealthy and of the nobility, the women being recruited
chiefly through purchase as slaves; the mass of the people live in
monogamy.

A similar exception is the polyandry of India and Tibet, the origin of
which in group marriage requires closer examination and would certainly
prove interesting. It seems to be much more easy-going in practice than
the jealous harems of the Mohammedans. At any rate, among the Nairs in
India, where three or four men have a wife in common, each of them can
have a second wife in common with another three or more men, and
similarly a third and a fourth and so on. It is a wonder that McLennan
did not discover in these marriage clubs, to several of which one could
belong and which he himself describes, a new class of *club marriage*!
This marriage-club system, however, is not real polyandry at all; on the
contrary, as Giraud-Teulon has already pointed out, it is a specialized
form of group marriage; the men live in polygyny, the women in
polyandry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter II (Part II)](ch02b.htm) \| [Chapter II (Part IV)](ch02d.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
