Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# II. The Family

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[The Consanguine Family](#partI)\
The First Stage of the Family\
\
[The Punaluan Family](ch02b.htm)\
\
[The Pairing Family](ch02c.htm)\
\
[The Monogamous Family](ch02d.htm)\

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

[M]{.cap}ORGAN, who spent a great part of his life among the Iroquois
Indians -- settled to this day in New York State -- and was adopted into
one of their tribes (the Senecas), found in use among them a system of
consanguinity which was in contradiction to their actual family
relationships. There prevailed among them a form of monogamy easily
terminable on both sides, which Morgan calls the "pairing family." The
issue of the married pair was therefore known and recognized by
everybody: there could be no doubt about whom to call father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister. But these names were actually used quite
differently. The Iroquois calls not only his own children his sons and
daughters, but also the children of his brothers; and they call him
father. The children of his sisters, however, he calls his nephews and
nieces, and they call him their uncle. The Iroquois woman, on the other
hand, calls her sisters' children, as well as her own, her sons and
daughters, and they call her mother. But her brothers' children she
calls her nephews and nieces, and she is known as their aunt. Similarly,
the children of brothers call one another brother and sister, and so do
the children of sisters. A woman\'s own children and the children of her
brother, on the other hand, call one another cousins. And these are not
mere empty names, but expressions of actual conceptions of nearness and
remoteness, of equality and difference in the degrees of consanguinity:
these conceptions serve as the foundation of a fully elaborated system
of consanguinity through which several hundred different relationships
of one individual can be expressed. What is more, this system is not
only in full force among all American Indians (no exception has been
found up to the present), but also retains its validity almost unchanged
among the aborigines of India, the Dravidian tribes in the Deccan and
the Gaura tribes in Hindustan. To this day the Tamils of southern India
and the Iroquois Seneca Indians in New York State still express more
than two hundred degrees of consanguinity in the same manner. And among
these tribes of India, as among all the American Indians, the actual
relationships arising out of the existing form of the family contradict
the system of consanguinity.

How is this to be explained? In view of the decisive part played by
consanguinity in the social structure of all savage and barbarian
peoples, the importance of a system so widespread cannot be dismissed
with phrases. When a system is general throughout America and also
exists in Asia among peoples of a quite different race, when numerous
instances of it are found with greater or less variation in every part
of Africa and Australia, then that system has to be historically
explained, not talked out of existence, as McLennan, for example, tried
to do. The names of father, child, brother, sister are no mere
complimentary forms of address; they involve quite definite and very
serious mutual obligations which together make up an essential part of
the social constitution of the peoples in question.

The explanation was found. In the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) there still
existed in the first half of the nineteenth century a form of family in
which the fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, sons and daughters,
uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces were exactly what is required by
the American and old Indian system of consanguinity. But now comes a
strange thing. Once again, the system of consanguinity in force in
Hawaii did not correspond to the actual form of the Hawaiian family. For
according to the Hawaiian system of consanguinity all children of
brothers and sisters are without exception brothers and sisters of one
another and are considered to be the common children not only of their
mother and her sisters or of their father and his brothers, but of all
the brothers and sisters of both their parents without distinction.
While, therefore, the American system of consanguinity presupposes a
more primitive form of the family which has disappeared in America, but
still actually exists in Hawaii, the Hawaiian system of consanguinity,
on the other hand, points to a still earlier form of the family which,
though we can nowhere prove it to be still in existence, nevertheless
*must* have existed; for otherwise the corresponding system of
consanguinity could never have arisen.

The family \[says Morgan\] represents an active principle. It is never
stationary, but advances from a lower to a higher form as society
advances from a lower to a higher condition \... Systems of
consanguinity, on the contrary, are passive; recording the progress made
by the family at long intervals apart, and only changing radically when
the family has radically changed.

\[Morgan, op. cit., p. 444. -- Ed.\]

"And," adds Marx, "the same is true of the political, juridical,
religious, and philosophical systems in general." While the family
undergoes living changes, the system of consanguinity ossifies; while
the system survives by force of custom, the family outgrows it. But just
as Cuvier could deduce from the marsupial bone of an animal skeleton
found near Paris that it belonged to a marsupial animal and that extinct
marsupial animals once lived there, so with the same certainty we can
deduce from the historical survival of a system of consanguinity that an
extinct form of family once existed which corresponded to it.

The systems of consanguinity and the forms of the family we have just
mentioned differ from those of today in the fact that every child has
more than one father and mother. In the American system of
consanguinity, to which the Hawaiian family corresponds, brother and
sister cannot be the father and mother of the same child; but the
Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the contrary, presupposes a family
in which this was the rule. Here we find ourselves among forms of family
which directly contradict those hitherto generally assumed to be alone
valid. The traditional view recognizes only monogamy, with, in addition,
polygamy on the part of individual men, and at the very most polyandry
on the part of individual women; being the view of moralizing
philistines, it conceals the fact that in practice these barriers raised
by official society are quietly and calmly ignored. The study of
primitive history, however, reveals conditions where the men live in
polygamy and their wives in polyandry at the same time, and their common
children are therefore considered common to them all -- and these
conditions in their turn undergo a long series of changes before they
finally end in monogamy. The trend of these changes is to narrow more
and more the circle of people comprised within the common bond of
marriage, which was originally very wide, until at last it includes only
the single pair, the dominant form of marriage today.

[]{#1.1}

Reconstructing thus the past history of the family, Morgan, in agreement
with most of his colleagues, arrives at a primitive stage when
unrestricted sexual freedom prevailed within the tribe, every woman
belonging equally to every man and every man to every woman. Since the
eighteenth century there had been talk of such a primitive state, but
only in general phrases. Bachofen -- and this is one of his great merits
-- was the first to take the existence of such a state seriously and to
search for its traces in historical and religious survivals. Today we
know that the traces he found do not lead back to a social stage of
promiscuous sexual intercourse, but to a much later form -- namely,
group marriage. The primitive social stage of promiscuity, if it ever
existed, belongs to such a remote epoch that we can hardly expect to
prove its existence *directly* by discovering its social fossils among
backward savages. Bachofen\'s merit consists in having brought this
question to the forefront for examination. [[\[1\]](#1)]{.note}

Lately it has become fashionable to deny the existence of this initial
stage in human sexual life. Humanity must be spared this "shame." It is
pointed out that all direct proof of such a stage is lacking, and
particular appeal is made to the evidence from the rest of the animal
world; for, even among animals, according to the numerous facts
collected by Letourneau (*L\'évolution du mariage et de la famille*,
1888), complete promiscuity in sexual intercourse marks a low stage of
development. But the only conclusion I can draw from all these facts, so
far as man and his primitive conditions of life are concerned, is that
they prove nothing whatever. That vertebrates mate together for a
considerable period is sufficiently explained by physiological causes --
in the case of birds, for example, by the female's need of help during
the brooding period; examples of faithful monogamy among birds prove
nothing about man, for the simple reason that men are not descended from
birds. And if strict monogamy is the height of all virtue, then the palm
must go to the tapeworm, which has a complete set of male and female
sexual organs in each of its 50-200 proglottides, or sections, and
spends its whole life copulating in all its sections with itself.
Confining ourselves to mammals, however, we find all forms of sexual
life -- promiscuity, indications of group marriage, polygyny, monogamy.
Polyandry alone is lacking -- it took human beings to achieve that. Even
our nearest relations, the quadrumana, exhibit every possible variation
in the grouping of males and females; and if we narrow it down still
more and consider only the four anthropoid apes, all that Letourneau has
to say about them is that they are sometimes monogamous, sometimes
polygamous, while Saussure, quoted by Giraud-Teulon, maintains that they
are monogamous. The more recent assertions of the monogamous habits of
the anthropoid apes which are cited by Westermarck (*The History of
Human Marriage,* London 1891), are also very far from proving anything.
In short, our evidence is such that honest Letourneau admits: "Among
mammals there is no strict relation between the degree of intellectual
development and the form of sexual life." And Espinas (*Des sociétés
animates*, 1877), says in so many words:

The herd is the highest social group which we can observe among animals.
It is composed, *so it appears*, of families, but from the start *the
family and the herd are in conflict with one another* and develop in
inverse proportion.

As the above shows, we know practically nothing definite about the
family and other social groupings of the anthropoid apes; the evidence
is flatly contradictory. Which is not to be wondered at. The evidence
with regard to savage human tribes is contradictory enough, requiring
very critical examination and sifting; and ape societies are far more
difficult to observe than human. For the present, therefore, we must
reject any conclusion drawn from such completely unreliable reports.

The sentence quoted from Espinas, however, provides a better starting
point. Among the higher animals the herd and the family are not
complementary to one another, but antagonistic. Espinas shows very well
how the jealousy of the males during the mating season loosens the ties
of every social herd or temporarily breaks it up.

When the family bond is close and exclusive, herds form only in
exceptional cases. When on the other hand free sexual intercourse or
polygamy prevails, the herd comes into being almost spontaneously \...
Before a herd can be formed, family ties must be loosened and the
individual must have become free again. This is the reason why organized
flocks are so rarely found among birds \... We find more or less
organized societies among mammals, however, precisely because here the
individual is not merged in the family \... In its first growth,
therefore, the common feeling of the herd has no greater enemy than the
common feeling of the family. We state it without hesitation: only by
absorbing families which had undergone a radical change could a social
form higher than the family have developed; at the same time, these
families were thereby enabled later to constitute themselves afresh
under infinitely more favorable circumstances.

\[Espinas, op. cit., quoted by Giraud-Teulon, *Origines du mariage et de
la famille*,\
1884, pp. 518-20\].

Here we see that animal societies are, after all, of some value for
drawing conclusions about human societies; but the value is only
negative. So far as our evidence goes, the higher vertebrates know only
two forms of family -- polygyny or separate couples; each form allows
only *one* adult male, only one husband. The jealousy of the male, which
both consolidates and isolates the family, sets the animal family in
opposition to the herd. The jealousy of the males prevents the herd, the
higher social form, from coming into existence, or weakens its cohesion,
or breaks it up during the mating period; at best, it attests its
development. This alone is sufficient proof that animal families and
primitive human society are incompatible, and that when primitive men
were working their way up from the animal creation, they either had no
family at all or a form that does not occur among animals. In small
numbers, an animal so defenseless as evolving man might struggle along
even in conditions of isolation, with no higher social grouping than the
single male and female pair, such as Westermarck, following the reports
of hunters, attributes to the gorillas and the chimpanzees. For man\'s
development beyond the level of the animals, for the achievement of the
greatest advance nature can show, something more was needed: the power
of defense lacking to the individual had to be made good by the united
strength and co-operation of the herd. To explain the transition to
humanity from conditions such as those in which the anthropoid apes live
today would be quite impossible; it looks much more as if these apes had
strayed off the line of evolution and were gradually dying out or at
least degenerating. That alone is sufficient ground for rejecting all
attempts based on parallels drawn between forms of family and those of
primitive man. Mutual toleration among the adult males, freedom from
jealousy, was the first condition for the formation of those larger,
permanent groups in which alone animals could become men. And what, in
fact, do we find to be the oldest and most primitive form of family
whose historical existence we can indisputably prove and which in one or
two parts of the world we can still study today? Group marriage, the
form of family in which whole groups of men and whole groups of women
mutually possess one another, and which leaves little room for jealousy.
And at a later stage of development we find the exceptional form of
polyandry, which positively revolts every jealous instinct and is
therefore unknown among animals. But as all known forms of group
marriage are accompanied by such peculiarly complicated regulations that
they necessarily point to earlier and simpler forms of sexual relations,
and therefore in the last resort to a period of promiscuous intercourse
corresponding to the transition from the animal to the human, the
references to animal marriages only bring us back to the very point from
which we were to be led away for good and all.

What, then, does promiscuous sexual intercourse really mean? It means
the absence of prohibitions and restrictions which are or have been in
force. We have already seen the barrier of jealousy go down. If there is
one thing certain, it is that the feeling of jealousy develops
relatively late. The same is true of the conception of incest. Not only
were brother and sister originally man and wife; sexual intercourse
between parents and children is still permitted among many peoples
today. Bancroft (*The Native Races of the Pacific States of North
America*, 1875, Vol. I), testifies to it among the Kadiaks on the
Behring Straits, the Kadiaks near Alaska, and the Tinneh in the interior
of British North America; Letourneau compiled reports of it among the
Chippewa Indians, the Cucus in Chile, the Caribs, the Karens in Burma;
to say nothing of the stories told by the old Greeks and Romans about
the Parthians, Persians, Scythians, Huns, and so on. Before incest was
invented -- for incest is an invention, and a very valuable one, too --
sexual intercourse between parents and children did not arouse any more
repulsion than sexual intercourse between other persons of different
generations, and that occurs today even in the most philistine countries
without exciting any great horror; even "old maids" of over sixty, if
they are rich enough, sometimes marry young men in their thirties. But
if we consider the most primitive known forms of family apart from their
conceptions of incest -- conceptions which are totally different from
ours and frequently in direct contradiction to them-then the form of
sexual intercourse can only be described as promiscuous -- promiscuous
in so far as the restrictions later established by custom did not yet
exist. But in everyday practice that by no means necessarily implies
general mixed mating. Temporary pairings of one man with one woman were
not in any way excluded, just as in the cases of group marriages today
the majority of relationships are of this character. And when
Westermarck, the latest writer to deny the existence of such a primitive
state, applies the term "marriage" to every relationship in which the
two sexes remain mated until the birth of the offspring, we must point
out that this kind of marriage can very well occur under the conditions
of promiscuous intercourse without contradicting the principle of
promiscuity -- the absence of any restriction imposed by custom on
sexual intercourse. Westermarck, however, takes the standpoint that
promiscuity "involves a suppression of individual inclinations," and
that therefore "the most genuine form of it is prostitution." In my
opinion, any understanding of primitive society is impossible to people
who only see it as a brothel. We will return to this point when
discussing group marriage.

According to Morgan, from this primitive state of promiscuous
intercourse there developed, probably very early:

[]{#partI}\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. The Consanguine Family, The First Stage of the Family

[]{#2-3}

Here the marriage groups are separated according to generations: all the
grandfathers and grandmothers within the limits of the family are all
husbands and wives of one another; so are also their children, the
fathers and mothers; the latter's children will form a third circle of
common husbands and wives; and their children, the great-grandchildren
of the first group, will form a fourth. In this form of marriage,
therefore, only ancestors and progeny, and parents and children, are
excluded from the rights and duties (as we should say) of marriage with
one another. Brothers and sisters, male and female cousins of the first,
second, and more remote degrees, are all brothers and sisters of one
another, and *precisely for that reason* they are all husbands and wives
of one another. At this stage the relationship of brother and sister
also includes as a matter of course the practice of sexual intercourse
with one another. [[^\[2\]^](#2)]{.note} In its typical form, such a
family would consist of the descendants of a single pair, the
descendants of these descendants in each generation being again brothers
and sisters, and therefore husbands and wives, of one another.
[[^\[3\]^](#3)]{.note}

The consanguine family is extinct. Even the most primitive peoples known
to history provide no demonstrable instance of it. But that it *must*
have existed, we are compelled to admit: for the Hawaiian system of
consanguinity still prevalent today throughout the whole of Polynesia
expresses degrees of consanguinity which could only arise in this form
of family; and the whole subsequent development of the family
presupposes the existence of the consanguine family as a necessary
preparatory stage.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** Bachofen proves how little he understood his own
discovery, or rather his guess, by using the term \"hetaerism\" to
describe this primitive state. For the Greeks, when they introduced the
word, hetaerism meant intercourse of men, unmarried or living in
monogamy, with unmarried women, it always presupposes a definite form of
marriage outside which this intercourse takes place and includes at
least the possibility of prostitution. The word was never used in any
other sense, and it is in this sense that I use it with Morgan. Bachofen
everywhere introduces into his extremely important discoveries the most
incredible mystifications through his notion that in their historical
development the relations between men and women had their origin in
men\'s contemporary religious conceptions, not in their actual
conditions of life.

[]{#2}

**[\[2\]](#2-3)** In a letter written in the spring of 1882, Marx
expresses himself in the strongest terms about the complete
misrepresentation of primitive times in Wager\'s text to the Nibelangen:
" Have such things been heard, that brother embraced sister as a bride?"
To Wagner and his " lecherous gods" who, quite in the modern manner,
spice their love affairs with a little incest, Marx replies: " In
primitive times the sister was the wife, and that was moral."

\
[]{#3}

**[\[3\]](#2-3)** NOTE in Fourth edition: A French friend of mine who is
an admirer of Wagner is not in agreement with this note. He observes
that already in the Elder Edda, on which Wagner based his story, in the
*Oegisdrekka*, Loki makes the reproach to Freya: In the sight of the
gods thou didst embrace thine own brother.\" Marriage between brother
and sister, he argues, was therefore forbidden already at that time. The
*Oegisdrekka* is the expression of a time when belief in the old myths
had completely broken down; it is purely a satire on the gods, in the
style of Lucian. If Loki as Mephisto makes such a reproach to Freya, it
tells rather against Wagner. Loki also says some lines later to Niordhr:
" With thy sister didst thou breed son." (*vidh systur thinni gaztu
slikan mög*) Niordhr is not, indeed, an Asa, but a Vana, and says in the
Ynglinga saga that marriages between brothers and sisters are usual in
Vanaland, which was not the case among the Asas. This would seem to show
that the Vanas were more ancient gods the Asas. At any rate, Niordhr
lives among the OEgisdrekka is rather a proof that at the time when the
Norse sagas of the gods arose, marriages between brothers and sisters,
at any rate among the gods, did not yet excite any horror. If one wants
to find excuses for Wagner, it would perhaps be better to cite Goethe
instead of the Edda, for in his ballad of the God and the Bayadere
Goethe commits a similar mistake in regard to the religious surrender of
women, which he makes far too similar to modern prostitution.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter One](ch01.htm) \| [Chapter Two (Part II)](ch02b.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
