Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. The Iroquois Gens

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
\
[]{#1.1}

We now come to another discovery made by Morgan, which is at least as
important as the reconstruction of the family in its primitive form from
the systems of consanguinity. The proof that the kinship organizations
designated by animal names in a tribe of American Indians are
essentially identical with the *genea* of the Greeks and the *gentes* of
the Romans; that the American is the original form and the Greek and
Roman forms are later and derivative; that the whole social organization
of the primitive Greeks and Romans into gens, phratry, and tribe finds
its faithful parallel in that of the American Indians; that the gens is
an institution common to all barbarians until their entry into
civilization and even afterwards (so far as our sources go up to the
present) -- this proof has cleared up at one stroke the most difficult
questions in the most ancient periods of Greek and Roman history,
providing us at the same time with an unsuspected wealth of information
about the fundamental features of social constitution in primitive times
-- before the introduction of the *state*. Simple as the matter seems
once it is understood, Morgan only made his discovery quite recently. In
his previous work, published in 1871, [[\[1\]](#1)]{.note} he had not
yet penetrated this secret, at whose subsequent revelation the English
anthropologists, usually so self-confident, became for a time as quiet
as mice.

[]{#2.1}

The Latin word *gens*, which Morgan uses as a general term for such
kinship organizations, comes, like its Greek equivalent, *genos*, from
the common Aryan root *gan* (in German, where, following the law
[[\[2\]](#2)]{.note} Aryan *g* is regularly replaced by *k, kan*), which
means to beget. *Gens, Genos*, Sanscrit *jánas*, Gothic *kuni*
(following the same law as above), Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon *kyn*,
English *kin*, Middle High German *künne*, all signify lineage, descent.
*Gens* in Latin and *genos* in Greek are, however, used specifically to
denote the form of kinship organization which prides itself on its
common descent (in this case from a common ancestral father) and is
bound together by social and religious institutions into a distinct
community, though to all our historians its origin and character have
hitherto remained obscure.

We have already seen, in connection with the punaluan family, what is
the composition of a gens in its original form. It consists of all the
persons who in punaluan marriage, according to the conceptions
necessarily prevailing under it, form the recognized descendants of one
particular ancestral mother, the founder of the gens. In this form of
family, as paternity is uncertain, only the female line counts. Since
brothers may not marry their sisters but only women of different
descent, the children begotten by them with these alien women cannot,
according to mother-right, belong to the father\'s gens. Therefore only
the offspring of the *daughters* in each generation remain within the
kinship organization; the offspring of the sons go into the gentes of
their mothers. What becomes of this consanguine group when it has
constituted itself a separate group, distinct from similar groups within
the tribe?

As the classic form of this original gens, Morgan takes the gens among
the Iroquois, and especially in the Seneca tribe. In this tribe there
are eight gentes, named after animals: (1) Wolf, (2) Bear, (3) Turtle,
(4) Beaver, (5) Deer, (6) Snipe, (7) Heron, (8) Hawk. In every gens the
following customs are observed:

1\. The gens elects its sachem (head of the gens in peace) and its chief
(leader in war). The sachem had to be chosen from among the members of
the gens, and his office was hereditary within the gens, in the sense
that it had to be filled immediately as often as a vacancy occurred; the
military leader could be chosen from outside the gens, and for a time
the office might even be vacant. A son was never chosen to succeed his
father as sachem, since mother-right prevailed among the Iroquois and
the son consequently belonged to a different gens; but the office might
and often did pass to a brother of the previous sachem or to his
sister\'s son. All voted in the elections, both men and women. The
election, however, still required the confirmation of the seven
remaining gentes, and only then was the new sachem ceremonially invested
with his office by the common council of the whole Iroquois confederacy.
The significance of this will appear later. The authority of the sachem
within the gens was paternal, and purely moral in character; he had no
means of coercion. By virtue of his office he was also a member of the
tribal council of the Senecas and also of the federal council of all the
Iroquois. The war-chief could only give orders on military expeditions.

2\. The gens deposes the sachem and war-chief at will. This also is done
by men and women jointly. After a sachem or chief had been deposed, they
became simple braves, private persons, like the other members. The
tribal council also had the power to depose sachems, even against the
will of the gens.

3\. No member is permitted to marry within the gens. This is the
fundamental law of the gens, the bond which holds it together. It is the
negative expression of the very positive blood relationship, by virtue
of which the individuals it comprises become a gens. By his discovery of
this simple fact Morgan has revealed for the first time the nature of
the gens. How little the gens was understood before is obvious from the
earlier reports about savages and barbarians, in which the various
bodies out of which the gentile organization is composed are ignorantly
and indiscriminately referred to as tribe, clan, *thum*, and so forth,
and then sometimes designated as bodies within which marriage is
prohibited. Thus was created the hopeless confusion which gave Mr.
McLennan his chance to appear as Napoleon, establishing order by his
decree: All tribes are divided into those within which marriage is
prohibited (exogamous) and those within which it is permitted
(endogamous). Having now made the muddle complete, he could give himself
up to the profoundest inquiries as to which of his two absurd classes
was the older exogamy or endogamy. All this nonsense promptly stopped of
itself with the discovery of the gens and of its basis in consanguinity,
involving the exclusion of its members from intermarriage with one
another. It goes without saying that at the stage at which we find the
Iroquois the prohibition of marriage within the gens was stringently
observed.

4\. The property of deceased persons passed to the other members of the
gens; it had to remain in the gens. As an Iroquois had only things of
little value to leave, the inheritance was shared by his nearest gentile
relations; in the case of a man, by his own brothers and sisters and
maternal uncle; in the case of a woman, by her children and own sisters,
but not by her brothers. For this reason man and wife could not inherit
from one another, nor children from their father.

5\. The members of the gens owed each other help, protection, and
especially assistance in avenging injury by strangers. The individual
looked for his security to the protection of the gens, and could rely
upon receiving it; to wrong him was to wrong his whole gens. From the
bonds of blood uniting the gens sprang the obligation of blood revenge,
which the Iroquois unconditionally recognized. If any person from
outside the gens killed a gentile member, the obligation of blood
revenge rested on the entire gens of the slain man. First, mediation was
tried; the gens of the slayer sat in council, and made proposals of
settlement to the council of the gens of the slain, usually offering
expressions of regret and presents of considerable value. If these were
accepted, the matter was disposed of. In the contrary case, the wronged
gens appointed one or more avengers, whose duty it was to pursue and
kill the slayer. If this was accomplished, the gens of the slayer had no
ground of complaint; accounts were even and closed.

6\. The gens has special names or classes of names, which may not be
used by any other gens in the whole tribe, so that the name of the
individual indicates the gens to which he belongs. A gentile name
confers of itself gentile rights.

7\. The gens can adopt strangers and thereby admit them into the whole
tribe. Thus among the Senecas the prisoners of war who were not killed
became through adoption into a gens members of the tribe, receiving full
gentile and tribal rights. The adoption took place on the proposal of
individual members of the gens; if a man adopted, he accepted the
stranger as brother or sister; if a woman, as son or daughter. The
adoption had to be confirmed by ceremonial acceptance into the tribe.
Frequently a gens which was exceptionally reduced in numbers was
replenished by mass adoption from another gens, with its consent. Among
the Iroquois the ceremony of adoption into the gens was performed at a
public council of the tribe, and therefore was actually a religious
rite.

8\. Special religious ceremonies can hardly be found among the Indian
gentes; the religious rites of the Indians are, however, more or less
connected with the gens. At the six yearly religious festivals of the
Iroquois the sachems and war-chiefs of the different gentes were
included ex officio among the "Keepers of the Faith" and had priestly
functions.

9\. The gens has a common burial place. Among the Iroquois of New York
State, who are hedged in on all sides by white people, this has
disappeared, but it existed formerly. It exists still among other
Indians -- for example, among the Tuscaroras, who are closely related to
the Iroquois; although they are Christians, each gens has a separate row
in the cemetery; the mother is therefore buried in the same row as her
children, but not the father. And among the Iroquois also the whole gens
of the deceased attends the burial, prepares the grave, the funeral
addresses, etc.

10\. The gens has a council: the democratic assembly of all male and
female adult gentiles, all with equal votes. This council elected
sachems, war-chiefs and also the other \"Keepers of the Faith,\" and
deposed them; it took decisions regarding blood revenge or payment of
atonement for murdered gentiles; it adopted strangers into the gens. In
short, it was the sovereign power in the gens. Such were the rights and
privileges of a typical Indian gens.

[]{#3.1}

All the members of an Iroquois gens were personally free, and they were
bound to defend each other\'s freedom; they were equal in privileges and
in personal rights, the sachem and chiefs claiming no superiority; and
they were a brotherhood bound together by the ties of kin. Liberty,
equality, and fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal
principles of the gens. These facts are material, because the gens was
the unit of a social and governmental system, the foundation upon which
Indian society was organized \... It serves to explain that sense of
independence and personal dignity universally an attribute of Indian
character. [[\[3\]](#3)]{.note}

The Indians of the whole of North America at the time of its discovery
were organized in gentes under mother-right. The gentes had disappeared
only in some tribes, as among the Dakotas; in others, as among the
Ojibwas and the Omahas, they were organized according to father-right.

Among very many Indian tribes with more than five or six gentes, we find
every three, four, or more gentes united in a special group, which
Morgan, rendering the Indian name faithfully by its Greek equivalent,
calls a \"phratry\" (brotherhood). Thus the Senecas have two phratries:
the first comprises gentes 1 to 4, the second gentes 5 to 8. Closer
investigation shows that these phratries generally represent the
original gentes into which the tribe first split up; for since marriage
was prohibited within the gens, there had to be at least two gentes in
any tribe to enable it to exist independently.

In the measure in which the tribe increased, each gens divided again
into two or more gentes, each of which now appears as a separate gens,
while the original gens, which includes all the daughter gentes,
continues as the phratry. Among the Senecas and most other Indians, the
gentes within one phratry are brother gentes to one another, while those
in the other phratry are their cousin gentes-terms which in the American
system of consanguinity have, as we have seen, a very real and
expressive meaning. Originally no Seneca was allowed to marry within his
phratry, but this restriction has long since become obsolete and is now
confined to the gens. According to Senecan tradition, the Bear and the
Deer were the two original gentes, from which the others branched off.
After this new institution had once taken firm root, it was modified as
required; if the gentes in one phratry died out, entire gentes were
sometimes transferred into it from other phratries to make the numbers
even. Hence we find gentes of the same name grouped in different
phratries in different tribes.

Among the Iroquois, the functions of the phratry are partly social,
partly religious.

\(1\) In the ball game one phratry plays against another. Each phratry
puts forward its best players, while the other members, grouped
according to phratries, look on and bet against one another on the
victory of their players.

\(2\) In the tribal council the sachems and the war-chiefs of each
phratry sit together, the two groups facing one another; each speaker
addresses the representatives of each phratry as a separate body.

\(3\) If a murder had been committed in the tribe, and the slayer and
the slain belonged to different phratries, the injured gens often
appealed to its brother gentes; these held a council of the phratry and
appealed in a body to the other phratry that it also should assemble its
council to effect a settlement. Here the phratry reappears as the
original gens, and with greater prospect of success than the weaker
single gens, its offspring.

\(4\) At the death of prominent persons the opposite phratry saw to the
interment and the burial ceremonies, while the phratry of the dead
person attended as mourners. If a sachem died, the opposite phratry
reported to the federal council of the Iroquois that the office was
vacant.

\(5\) The council of the phratry also played a part in the election of a
sachem. That the election would be confirmed by the brother gentes was
more or less taken for granted, but the gentes of the opposite phratry
might raise an objection. In this case the council of the opposite
phratry was assembled; if it maintained the objection, the election was
void.

\(6\) The Iroquois formerly had special religious mysteries, called
medicine lodges by the white men. Among the Senecas, these mysteries
were celebrated by two religious brotherhoods, into which new members
were admitted by formal initiation; there was one such brotherhood in
each of the two phratries.

\(7\) If, as is almost certain, the four lineages occupying the four
quarters of Tlascala at the time of the conquest were four phratries, we
here have proof that the phratries were also military units, like the
phratries among the Greeks and similar kinship organizations among the
Germans; these four lineages went into battle as separate groups, each
with its own uniform and flag, and under its own leader.

As several gentes make up a phratry, so in the classic form several
phratries make up a tribe; in some cases, when tribes have been much
weakened, the intermediate form, the phratry, is absent. What
distinguishes an Indian tribe in America?

[1. Its own territory and name.]{.term} In addition to its actual place
of settlement, every tribe further possessed considerable territory for
hunting and lashing. Beyond that lay a broad strip of neutral land
reaching to the territory of the neighboring tribe; it was smaller
between tribes related in language, larger between tribes not so
related. It is the same as the boundary forest of the Germans, the waste
made by Caesar\'s Suevi around their territory, the isarnholt (in
Danish, jarnved, limes Danicus) between Danes and Germans, the
Sachsenwald (Saxon wood) and branibor (Slav, \"protecting wood\")
between Germans and Slavs, from which Brandenburg takes its name. The
territory delimited by these uncertain boundaries was the common land of
the tribe, recognized as such by neighboring tribes and defended by the
tribe itself against attacks. In most cases the uncertainty of the
boundaries only became a practical disadvantage when there had been a
great increase in population. The names of the tribes seem generally to
have arisen by chance rather than to have been deliberately chosen; in
the course of time it often happened that a tribe was called by another
name among the neighboring tribes than that which it used itself, just
as the Germans were first called Germans by the Celts.

[2. A distinct dialect peculiar to the tribe alone.]{.term} Tribe and
dialect are substantially coextensive; the formation through
segmentation of new tribes and dialects was still proceeding in America
until quite recently, and most probably has not entirely stopped even
today. When two weakened tribes have merged into one, the exceptional
case occurs of two closely related dialects being spoken in the same
tribe. The average strength of American tribes is under 2,000 members;
the Cherokees, however, number about 26,000, the greatest number of
Indians in the United States speaking the same dialect.

[3. The right to install into office the Sachems and war-chiefs elected
by the Gentes and the right to depose them]{.term}, even against the
will of their gens. As these sachems and war-chiefs are members of the
council of the tribe, these rights of the tribe in regard to them
explain themselves. Where a confederacy of tribes had been formed, with
all the tribes represented in a federal council, these rights were
transferred to the latter.

[]{#4.1}

[4. The possession of common religious conceptions (*mythology*) and
ceremonies.]{.term} "After the fashion of barbarians the American
Indians were a religious people." [[\[4\]](#4)]{.note} Their mythology
has not yet been studied at all critically. They already embodied their
religious ideas-spirits of every kind-in human form; but the lower stage
of barbarism, which they had reached, still knows no plastic
representations, so-called idols. Their religion is a cult of nature and
of elemental forces, in process of development to polytheism. The
various tribes had their regular festivals, with definite rites,
especially dances and games. Dancing particularly was an essential part
of all religious ceremonies; each tribe held its own celebration
separately.

[5. A tribal council for the common affairs of the tribe.]{.term} It was
composed of all the sachems and war-chiefs of the different gentes, who
were genuinely representative because they could be deposed at any time.
It held its deliberations in public, surrounded by the other members of
the tribe, who had the right to join freely in the discussion and to
make their views heard. The decision rested with the council. As a rule,
everyone was given a hearing who asked for it; the women could also have
their views expressed by a speaker of their own choice. Among the
Iroquois the final decision had to be unanimous, as was also the case in
regard to many decisions of the German mark communities. The tribal
council was responsible especially for the handling of relations with
other tribes; it received and sent embassies, declared war and made
peace. If war broke out, it was generally carried on by volunteers. In
principle, every tribe was considered to be in a state of war with every
other tribe with which it had not expressly concluded a treaty of peace.
Military expeditions against such enemies were generally organized by
prominent individual warriors; they held a war-dance, and whoever joined
in the dance announced thereby his participation in the expedition. The
column was at once formed, and started off. The defense of the tribal
territory when attacked was also generally carried out by volunteers.
The departure and return of such columns were always an occasion of
public festivities. The consent of the tribal council was not required
for such expeditions, and was neither asked nor given. They find their
exact counterpart in the private war expeditions of the German retinues
described by Tacitus, only with the difference that among the Germans
the retinues have already acquired a more permanent character, forming a
firm core already organized in peacetime to which the other volunteers
are attached in event of war. These war parties are seldom large; the
most important expeditions of the Indians, even to great distances, were
undertaken with insignificant forces. If several such parties united for
operations on a large scale, each was under the orders only of its own
leader. Unity in the plan of campaign was secured well or ill by a
council of these leaders. It is the same manner of warfare as we find
described by Ammianus Marcellinus among the Alemanni on the Upper Rhine
in the fourth century.

[6. Among some tribes we find a head chief, whose powers, however, are
very slight.]{.term} He is one of the sachems, and in situations
demanding swift action he has to take provisional measures, until the
council can assemble and make a definite decision. His function
represents the first feeble attempt at the creation of an official with
executive power, though generally nothing more came of it; as we shall
see, the executive official developed in most cases, if not in all, out
of the chief military commander.

The great majority of the American Indians did not advance to any higher
form of association than the tribe. Living in small tribes, separated
from one another by wide tracts between their frontiers, weakened by
incessant wars, they occupied an immense territory with few people. Here
and there alliances between related tribes came into being in the
emergency of the moment and broke up when the emergency had passed. But
in certain districts tribes which were originally related and had then
been dispersed, joined together again in permanent federations, thus
taking the first step towards the formation of nations. In the United
States we find the most developed form of such a federation among the
Iroquois. Emigrating from their homes west of the Mississippi, where
they probably formed a branch of the great Dakota family, they settled
after long wanderings in what is now the State of New York. They were
divided into five tribes: Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas and
Mohawks. They subsisted on fish, game, and the products of a crude
horticulture, and lived in villages, which were generally protected by a
stockade. Never more than twenty thousand strong, they had a number of
gentes common to all the five tribes, spoke closely related dialects of
the same language, and occupied a continuous stretch of territory which
was divided up among the five tribes. As they had newly conquered this
territory, these tribes were naturally accustomed to stand together
against the Inhabitants they had driven out. From this developed, at the
beginning of the fifteenth century at latest, a regular "everlasting
league," a sworn confederacy, which in the consciousness of its new
strength immediately assumed an aggressive character, and at the height
of its power, about 1675, conquered wide stretches of the surrounding
country, either expelling the inhabitants or making them pay tribute.
The Iroquois confederacy represents the most advanced social
organization achieved by any Indians still at the lower stage of
barbarism (excluding, therefore, the Mexicans, New Mexicans and
Peruvians).

The main provisions of the confederacy were as follows:

1\. Perpetual federation of the five consanguineous tribes on the basis
of complete equality and independence in all internal matters of the
tribe. This bond of kin represented the real basis of the confederacy.
Of the five tribes, three were known as father tribes and were brother
tribes to one another; the other two were known as son tribes, and were
likewise brother tribes to one another. Three gentes, the oldest, still
had their living representatives in all five tribes, and another three
in three tribes; the members of each of these gentes were all brothers
of one another throughout all the five tribes. Their common language, in
which there were only variations of dialect, was the expression and the
proof of their common descent.

2\. The organ of the confederacy was federal council of fifty sachems,
all equal in rank and authority; the decisions of this council were
final in all matters relating to the confederacy.

3\. The fifty sachems were distributed among the tribes and gentes at
the foundation of the confederacy to hold the new offices specially
created for federal purposes. They were elected by the respective gentes
whenever a vacancy occurred and could be deposed by the gentes at any
time; but the right of investing them with their office belonged to the
federal council.

4\. These federal sachems were also sachems in their respective tribes,
and had a seat and a vote in the tribal council.

5\. All decisions of the federal council had to be unanimous.

6\. Voting was by tribes, so that for a decision to be valid every tribe
and all members of the council in every tribe had to signify their
agreement.

7\. Each of the five tribal councils could convene the federal council,
but it could not convene itself.

8\. The meetings of the council were held in the presence of the
assembled people; every Iroquois could speak; the council alone decided.

9\. The confederacy had no official head or chief executive officer.

10\. On the other hand, the council had two principal war-chiefs, with
equal powers and equal authority (the two \"kings\" of the Spartans, the
two consuls in Rome).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

That was the whole public constitution under which the Iroquois lived
for over four hundred years and are still living today. I have described
it fully, following Morgan, because here we have the opportunity of
studying the organization of a society which still has no *state*. The
state presupposes a special public power separated from the body of the
people, and Maurer, who with a true instinct recognizes that the
constitution of the German mark is a purely social institution,
differing essentially from the state, though later providing a great
part of its basis, consequently investigates in all his writings the
gradual growth of the public power out of, and side by side with, the
primitive constitutions of marks, villages, homesteads, and towns. Among
the North American Indians we see how an originally homogeneous tribe
gradually spreads over a huge continent; how through division tribes
become nations, entire groups of tribes; how the languages change until
they not only become unintelligible to other tribes, but also lose
almost every trace of their original identity; how at the same time
within the tribes each gens splits up into several gentes, how the old
mother gentes are preserved as phratries, while the names of these
oldest gentes nevertheless remain the same in widely distant tribes that
have long been separated-the Wolf and the Bear are still gentile names
among a majority of all Indian tribes. And the constitution described
above applies in the main to them all, except that many of them never
advanced as far as the confederacy of related tribes.

But once the gens is given as the social unit, we also see how the whole
constitution of gentes, phratries, and tribes is almost necessarily
bound to develop from this unit, because the development is natural.
Gens, phratry, and tribe are all groups of different degrees of
consanguinity, each self-contained and ordering its own affairs, but
each supplementing the other. And the affairs which fall within their
sphere comprise all the public affairs of barbarians of the lower stage.
When we find a people with the gens as their social unit, we may
therefore also look for an organization of the tribe similar to that
here described; and when there are adequate sources, as in the case of
the Greeks and the Romans, we shall not only find it, but we shall also
be able to convince ourselves that where the sources fail us, comparison
with the American social constitution helps us over the most difficult
doubts and riddles.

And a wonderful constitution it is, this gentile constitution, in all
its childlike simplicity! No soldiers, no gendarmes or police, no
nobles, kings, regents, prefects, or judges, no prisons, no lawsuits --
and everything takes its orderly course. All quarrels and disputes are
settled by the whole of the community affected, by the gens or the
tribe, or by the gentes among themselves; only as an extreme and
exceptional measure is blood revenge threatened-and our capital
punishment is nothing but blood revenge in a civilized form, with all
the advantages and drawbacks of civilization. Although there were many
more matters to be settled in common than today -- the household is
maintained by a number of families in common, and is communistic, the
land belongs to the tribe, only the small gardens are allotted
provisionally to the households -- yet there is no need for even a trace
of our complicated administrative apparatus with all its ramifications.
The decisions are taken by those concerned, and in most cases everything
has been already settled by the custom of centuries. There cannot be any
poor or needy -- the communal household and the gens know their
responsibilities towards the old, the sick, and those disabled in war.
All are equal and free -- the women included. There is no place yet for
slaves, nor, as a rule, for the subjugation of other tribes. When, about
the year 1651, the Iroquois had conquered the Eries and the "Neutral
Nation," they offered to accept them into the confederacy on equal
terms; it was only after the defeated tribes had refused that they were
driven from their territory. And what men and women such a society
breeds is proved by the admiration inspired in all white people who have
come into contact with unspoiled Indians, by the personal dignity,
uprightness, strength of character, and courage of these barbarians.

We have seen examples of this courage quite recently in Africa. The
Zulus a few years ago and the Nubians a few months ago -- both of them
tribes in which gentile institutions have not yet died out -- did what
no European army can do. Armed only with lances and spears, without
firearms, under a hail of bullets from the breech-loaders of the English
infantry -- acknowledged the best in the world at fighting in close
order -- they advanced right up to the bayonets and more than once threw
the lines into disorder and even broke them, in spite of the enormous
inequality of weapons and in spite of the fact that they have no
military service and know nothing of drill. Their powers of endurance
and performance are shown by the complaint of the English that a Kaffir
travels farther and faster in twenty-four hours than a horse. His
smallest muscle stands out hard and firm like whipcord, says an English
painter.

That is what men and society were before the division into classes. And
when we compare their position with that of the overwhelming majority of
civilized men today, an enormous gulf separates the present-day
proletarian and small peasant from the free member of the old gentile
society.

[]{#5.1}

That is the one side. But we must not forget that this organization was
doomed. It did not go beyond the tribe. The confederacy of tribes
already marks the beginning of its collapse, as will soon be apparent,
and was already apparent in the attempts at subjugation by the Iroquois.
Outside the tribe was outside the law. Wherever there was not an
explicit treaty of peace, tribe was at war with tribe, and wars were
waged with the cruelty which distinguishes man from other animals, and
which was only mitigated later by self-interest. The gentile
constitution in its best days, as we saw it in America, presupposed an
extremely undeveloped state of production and therefore an extremely
sparse population over a wide area. Man's attitude to nature was
therefore one of almost complete subjection to a strange
incomprehensible power, as is reflected in his childish religious
conceptions. Man was bounded by his tribe, both in relation to strangers
from outside the tribe and to himself; the tribe, the gens, and their
institutions were sacred and inviolable, a higher power established by
nature, to which the individual subjected himself unconditionally in
feeling, thought, and action. However impressive the people of this
epoch appear to us, they are completely undifferentiated from one
another; as Marx says, they are still attached to the navel string of
the primitive community. [[\[5\]](#5)]{.note} The power of this
primitive community had to be broken, and it was broken. But it was
broken by influences which from the very start appear as a degradation,
a fall from the simple moral greatness of the old gentile society. The
lowest interests -- base greed, brutal appetites, sordid avarice,
selfish robbery of the common wealth -- inaugurate the new, civilized,
class society. It is by the vilest means -- theft, violence, fraud,
treason -- that the old classless gentile society is undermined and
overthrown. And the new society itself, during all the two and a half
thousand years of its existence, has never been anything else but the
development of the small minority at the expense of the great exploited
and oppressed majority; today it is so more than ever before.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human
Family, Smithsonian Publications, 1871.-Ed.

\
[]{#2}

**[\[2\]](#2.1)** Engels refers here to Grimm\'s law of the shifting of
consonants in the Indo-European languages.-Ed.

\
[]{#3}

**[\[3\]](#3.1)** Morgan, *Ancient Society*, pp. 85-86.-Ed.

\
[]{#4}

**[\[4\]](#4.1)** Ibid., p. 117 -Ed.

\
[]{#5}

**[\[5\]](#5.1)** "Those ancient social organisms of production are, as
compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and transparent. But
they are founded either on the immature development of man individually,
who has not yet severed the umbilical cord that unified him with his
fellow men in a primitive tribal community, or upon direct relations of
domination and subjection." -- (Karl Marx, [Capital Vol.
I](../../1867-c1/index.htm), p. 51, New York.) Ed.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter Two (IV)](ch02d.htm) \| [Chapter Four](ch04.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
