Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# IV. The Greek Gens

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

From prehistoric times Greeks and Pelasgians alike, and other peoples of
kindred stock, had been organized in the same organic series as the
Americans: gens, phratry, tribe, confederacy of tribes. The phratry
might be absent, as among the Dorians, and the confederacy of tribes was
not necessarily fully developed everywhere as yet; but in every case the
gens was the unit. At the time of their entry into history, the Greeks
are on the threshold of civilization; between them and the American
tribes, of whom we spoke above, lie almost two entire great periods of
development, by which the Greeks of the heroic age are ahead of the
Iroquois. The gens of the Greeks is therefore no longer the archaic gens
of the Iroquois; the impress of group marriage is beginning to be a good
deal blurred. Mother-right has given way to father-right; increasing
private wealth has thus made its first breach in the gentile
constitution. A second breach followed naturally from the first. After
the introduction of father-right the property of a rich heiress would
have passed to her husband and thus into another gens on her marriage,
but the foundation of all gentile law was now violated and in such a
case the girl was not only permitted but *ordered* to marry within the
gens, in order that her property should be retained for the gens.

According to Grote\'s *History of Greece*, the Athenian gens, in
particular, was held together by the following institutions and customs:

1\. Common religious rites, and the exclusive privilege of priesthood in
honor of a particular god, the supposed ancestral father of the gens,
who in this attribute was designated by a special surname.

2\. A common burial place (cf. Demosthenes\' *Eubulides*).

3\. Mutual right of inheritance.

4\. Mutual obligations of help, protection, and assistance in case of
violence.

5\. Mutual right and obligation to marry within the gens in certain
cases, especially for orphan girls and heiresses.

6\. Possession, at least in some cases, of common property, with a
special archon (head man or president) and treasurer.

Next, several gentes were united in the phratry, but less closely;
though here also we find mutual rights and obligations of a similar
kind, particularly the common celebration of certain religious
ceremonies and the right to avenge the death of a phrator. Similarly,
all the phratries of a tribe held regularly recurring religious
festivals in common, at which a leader of the tribe (*phylobasileus*),
elected from the nobility (*Eupatridai*), officiated.

Thus far Grote. And Marx adds:

"In the Greek gens, the savage (e.g. Iroquois) shows through
unmistakably." He becomes still more unmistakable when we investigate
further.

For the Greek gens has also the following characteristics:

7\. Descent in the male line.

8\. Prohibition of marriage within the gens except in the case of
heiresses. This exception, and its formulation as an ordinance, prove
the old rule to be valid. This is further substantiated by the
universally accepted principle that at her marriage the woman renounced
the religious rites of her gens and went over to those of her husband,
being also inscribed in his phratry. This custom and a famous passage in
Diccarchus both show that marriage outside the gens was the rule, and
Becker in *Charicles* directly assumes that nobody might marry within
his own gens.

9\. The right of adoption into the gens. This was exercised through
adoption into the family, but required public formalities and was
exceptional.

10\. The right to elect chieftains and to depose them. We know that
every gens had its archon; but it is nowhere stated that the office was
hereditary in certain families. Until the end of barbarism the
probability is always against strict heredity, which is quite
incompatible with conditions in which rich and poor had completely equal
rights within the gens.

Not only Grote, but also Niebuhr, Mommsen and all the other historians
of classical antiquity, have come to grief over the gens. Though they
correctly noted many of its characteristics, they always took it to be a
*group of families*, thus making it impossible for themselves to
understand the nature and origin of the gens. Under the gentile
constitution, the family was never an organizational unit, and could not
be so, for man and wife necessarily belonged to two different gentes.
The whole gens was incorporated within the phratry, and the whole
phratry within the tribe; but the family belonged half to the gens of
the man and half to the gens of the woman. In public law the state also
does not recognize the family; up to this day, the family only exists
for private law. And yet all our histories have hitherto started from
the absurd assumption, which, since the eighteenth century in
particular, has become inviolable, that the monogamous single family,
which is hardly older than civilization, is the core around which
society and state have gradually crystallized.

Mr. Grote will also please note \[Marx throws in\] that though the
Greeks derive their gentes from mythology, the gentes are older than the
mythology which *they themselves* created with all its gods and
demigods.

Morgan prefers to quote Grote because he is not only an impressive but
also a trustworthy witness. Grote goes on to say that every Athenian
gens had a name derived from its supposed ancestor; that it was the
general custom before Solon, and even after Solon, in the absence of a
will, for the property of a deceased person to pass to the members of
his gens (*gennetai*), and that in the case of a murder it was the light
and the duty, first of the relatives of the murdered man, then of the
members of his gens, and lastly of his phratry, to prosecute the
criminal before the tribunals: "All that we hear of the most ancient
Athenian laws is based upon the gentile and phratric divisions."
(Grote.)

The descent of the gentes from common ancestors has caused the "pedantic
philistines," as Marx calls them, a lot of brain-racking. As they of
course declare the common ancestors to be pure myths, they are at an
utter loss to explain how the gens originated out of a number of
separate and originally quite unrelated families; yet they have to
perform this feat in order to explain how the gentes exist at all. So
they argue in circles, with floods of words, never getting any further
than the statement: the ancestral tree is a fairy tale, but the gens is
a reality. And finally Grote declares (interpolations by Marx):

We hear of this genealogy but rarely, because it is only brought before
the public in certain cases pre-eminent and venerable. But the humbler
gentes had their common rites \[this is strange, Mr. Grote!\], and
common superhuman ancestor and genealogy, as well as the more celebrated
\[this is most strange, Mr. Grote, among *humbler* gentes!\]: the scheme
and ideal basis \[my good sir, not *ideal*, but carnal, germanice
*fleishlich*!\] was the same in all. \[Quoted by Morgan, op. cit., p.
239. -- Ed.\]

Marx summarizes Morgan\'s reply to this as follows:

"The system of consanguinity corresponding to the original form of the
gens -- and the Greeks, like other mortals, once possessed such a gens
-- preserved the knowledge of the mutual relations between all members
of a gens to each other. They learned this, for them decisively
important, fact by practice from early childhood. This fell into
desuetude with the rise of the monogamian family. The gentile name
created a pedigree beside which that of the individual family was
insignificant. This name was now to preserve the fact of the common
descent of those who bore it; but the lineage of the gens went so far
that its members could no longer prove the actual relationship existing
between them, except in a limited number of cases through recent common
ancestors. The name itself was the evidence of a common descent, and
conclusive proof, except in cases of adoption. The actual denial of all
kinship between gentiles à la Grote and Neibuhr, which transforms the
gens into a purely fictitious, fanciful creation of the brain, is, on
the other hand, worthy of 'ideal' scientists, that is, of cloistered
bookworms. Because concatention of the generations, especially with the
incipience of monogamy, is removed into the distance, and the reality of
the past seems reflected in mythological fantasy, the good old
Philistines concluded, and still conclude, that the fancied genealogy
created real gentes!"

As among the Americans, the *phratry* was a mother gens, split up into
several daughter gentes, and uniting them, often tracing them all to a
common ancestor. Thus, according to Grote,

"all the contemporary members of the phratry of Hekataeus had a common
god for their ancestor at the sixteenth degree."

Hence, all the gentes of this phratry were literally brother gentes. The
phratry still occurs in Homer as a military unit in that famous passage
where Nestos advises Agamemnon: Draw up people by tribes and by
phratries so that phratry may support phratry, and tribe tribe. The
phratry has further the right and the duty of prosecuting for
blood-guilt incurred against a phrator; hence in earlier times it also
had the obligation of blood revenge. Further, it had common shrines and
festivals; in fact the elaboration of the whole Greek mythology out of
the traditional old Aryan nature-cult was essentially conditioned by the
phratries and gentes, and took place within them. The phratry also had a
chief (the *phratriarchos*) and, according to de Coulanges, assemblies.
It could pass binding resolutions, and act as a judicial and
administrative body. Even the later state, while it ignored the gens,
left certain public offices in the hands of the phratry.

Several related phratries form a tribe. In Attica there were four
tribes, each consisting of three phratries, each phratry numbering
thirty gentes. Such a rounded symmetry of groups presupposes conscious,
purposeful interference with the naturally developed order. As to how,
when, and why this occurred,. Greek history is silent; the historical
memory of the Greeks only went back to the heroic age.

As the Greeks were crowded together in a relatively small territory,
differences of dialect were less developed than in the wide American
forests; yet in Greece also it was only tribes of the same main dialect
that united in a larger organization, and even Attica, small as it was,
had a dialect of its own, which later, through its general use as the
language of prose, became the dominant dialect.

In the Homeric poems we find most of the Greek tribes already united
into small nations, within which, however, gentes, phratries, and tribes
retained their full independence. They already lived in towns fortified
with walls; the population increased with the increase of the herds, the
extension of agriculture and the beginnings of handicraft. The
differences in wealth thus became more pronounced, and with them the
aristocratic element within the old primitive democracy. The various
small nations waged incessant wars for the possession of the best land
and doubtless also for booty; the use of prisoners of war as slaves was
already a recognized institution.

The constitution of these tribes and small nations was as follows:

\(1\) The permanent authority was the council (*boulè*), probably
composed originally of all the chiefs of the gentes; later, when their
number became too large, of a selection, whose choice provided an
opportunity of extending and strengthening the aristocratic element.
Dionysius actually speaks of the council in the heroic age as composed
of nobles (*kratistoi*). The ultimate decision in important matters
rested with the council. Thus in Æschylus the council of Thebes makes
what is in the circumstances the vital decision to give Eteocles an
honorable burial, but to throw out the corpse of Polynices to be
devoured by dogs. When the state was established, this council was
merged into the senate.

\(2\) The assembly of the people (*agora*). We saw among the Iroquois
how the people, men and women, stood round the council when it was
holding its meetings, intervening in an orderly manner in its
deliberations and thus influencing its decisions. Among the Homeric
Greeks, this *Umstand* (standing round), to use an old German legal
expression, had already developed into a regular assembly of the people,
as was also the case among the Germans in primitive times. It was
convened by the council to decide important questions; every man bad the
right to speak. The decision was given by a show of hands (AEschylus,
*The Suppliants*) or by acclamation. The decision of the assembly was
supreme and final, for, says Schomann, in *Griechische Altertumer*,

"if the matter was one requiring the co-operation of the people for its
execution, Homer does not indicate any means by which the people could
be forced to co-operate against their will."

For at this time, when every adult male member of the tribe was a
warrior, there was as yet no public power separate from the people which
could have been used against the people. Primitive democracy was still
in its full strength, and it is in relation to that fact that the power
and the position both of the council and of the *basileus* must first be
judged.

\(3\) The leader of the army (*basileus*). Marx makes the following
comment:

European scholars, born lackeys most of them, make the *basileus* into a
monarch in the modern sense. Morgan, the Yankee republican, protests.
Very ironically, but truly, he says of the oily-tongued Gladstone and
his Juventus Mundi:

"Mr. Gladstone, who presents to his readers the Grecian chiefs of the
heroic age as kings and princes, with the superadded qualities of
gentlemen, is forced to admit that 'on the whole we seem to have the
custom or law of primogeniture sufficiently, but not oversharply
defined.'"

\[Morgan, op. cit., p. 255 -- Ed.\]

Mr. Gladstone will probably agree that such an ambiguous law of
primogeniture may be "sufficiently, but not oversharply defined" as
being just as good as none at all.

In what sense the offices of sachem and chieftain were hereditary among
the Iroquois and other Indians, we have already seen. All offices were
elective, generally within a gens, and to that extent hereditary to the
gens. In the course of time, preference when filling vacancies was given
to the nearest gentile relation-brother or sister\'s son -- unless there
were reasons for passing him over. The fact that among the Greeks, under
father-right, the office of *basileus* generally passed to the son, or
one of the sons, only proves that the probabilities were in favor of the
sons succeeding to the office by popular election; it is no proof at all
of legal hereditary succession without popular election. All that we
have here is the first beginnings among the Iroquois and Greeks of
distinct noble families within the gentes and, in the case of the
Greeks, the first beginnings also of a future hereditary leadership or
monarchy. The probability is, therefore, that among the Greeks the
*basileus* had either to be elected by the people or at least confirmed
in his office by the recognized organs of the people, the council or
*agora*, as was the case with the Roman "king" (*rex*)[.]{#art}

 

In the *Iliad*, Agamemnon, the ruler of men, does not appear as the
supreme king of the Greeks, but as supreme commander of a federal army
before a besieged town. It is to this supremacy of command that
Odysseus, after disputes had broken out among the Greeks, refers in a
famous passage: "Evil is the rule of many; let one be commander," etc.
(The favorite line about the scepter is a later addition.)

Odysseus is here not giving a lecture on a form of government, but
demanding obedience to the supreme commander in war. Since they are
appearing before Troy only as an army, the proceedings in the *agora*
secure to the Greeks all necessary democracy. When Achilles speaks of
presents -- that is, the division of the booty -- he always leaves the
division, not to Agamemnon or any other *basileus*, but to the "sons of
the Achacans," that is, the people. Such epithets as "descended from
Zeus," "nourished by Zeus," prove nothing, for *every* gens is descended
from a god, that of the leader of the tribe being already descended from
a "superior" god, in this case Zeus. Even those without personal
freedom, such as the swineherd Eumaecus and others, are "divine" (*dioi*
and *theioi*), and that too in the *Odyssey*, which is much later than
the *Iliad*; and again in the *Odyssey* the name *Heros* is given to the
herald Mulius as well as to the blind bard Demodocus. Since, in short,
council and assembly of the people function together with the
*basileus*, the word *basileia*, which Greek writers employ to denote
the so-called Homeric kingship (chief command in the army being the
principal characteristic of the office), only means -- military
democracy. (Marx.)

[]{#1.1}

In addition to his military functions, the *basileus* also held those of
priest and judge, the latter not clearly defined, the former exercised
in his capacity as supreme representative of the tribe or confederacy of
tribes. There is never any mention of civil administrative powers; he
seems, however, to be a member of the council *ex officio*. It is there
fore quite correct etymologically to translate basileus as king, since
king (*kuning*) is derived from *kuni, kunne*, and means head of a gens.
But the old Greek *basileus* does not correspond in any way to the
present meaning of the word "king." Thucydides expressly refers to the
old *basileia* as *patrike*, i.e. derived from gentes, and says it had
strictly defined, and therefore limited, functions. And Aristotle says
that the *basileia* of the heroic age was a leadership over free men and
that the *basileus* was military leader, judge and high priest; he thus
had no governmental power in the later sense. [^\[1\]^](#1)

Thus in the Greek constitution of the heroic age we see the old gentile
order as still a living force. But we also see the beginnings of its
disintegration: father-right, with transmission of the property to the
children, by which accumulation of wealth within the family was favored
and the family itself became a power as against the gens; reaction of
the inequality of wealth on the constitution by the formation of the
first rudiments of hereditary nobility and monarchy; slavery, at first
only of prisoners of war, but already preparing the way for the
enslavement of fellow-members of the tribe and even of the gens; the old
wars between tribe and tribe already degenerating into systematic
pillage by land and sea for the acquisition of cattle, slaves and
treasure, and becoming a regular source of wealth; in short, riches
praised and respected as the highest good and the old gentile order
misused to justify the violent seizure of riches. Only one thing was
wanting: an institution which not only secured the newly acquired riches
of individuals against the communistic traditions of the gentile order,
which not only sanctified the private property formerly so little
valued, and declared this sanctification to be the highest purpose of
all human society; but an institution which set the seal of general
social recognition on each new method of acquiring property and thus
amassing wealth at continually increasing speed; an institution which
perpetuated, not only this growing cleavage of society into classes, but
also the right of the possessing class to exploit the non-possessing,
and the rule of the former over the latter.

And this institution came. The *state* was invented.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** Like the Greek basileus, so also the Aztec military
chief has been made out to be a modern prince. The reports of the
Spaniards, which were at first misinterpretations and exaggerations, and
later actual lies, were submitted for the first time to historical
criticism by Morgan. He proves that the Mexicans were at the middle
stage of barbarism, though more advanced than the New Mexican Pueblo
Indians, and that their constitution, so far as it can be recognized in
the distorted reports, corresponded to this stage: a confederacy of
three tribes, which had subjugated a number of other tribes and exacted
tribute from them, and which was governed by a federal council and a
federal military leader, out of whom the Spaniards made an "emperor."

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter Three](ch03.htm) \| [Chapter Five](ch05.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
