Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# V. The Rise of the Athenian State

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

How the state developed, how the organs of the gentile constitution were
partly transformed in this development, partly pushed aside by the
introduction of new organs, and at last superseded entirely by real
state authorities, while the true "people in arms," organized for its
self-defense in its gentes, phratries, and tribes, was replaced by an
armed "public force" in the service of these state authorities and
therefore at their command for use also against the people -- this
process, at least in its first stages, can be followed nowhere better
than in ancient Athens. The changes in form have been outlined by
Morgan, but their economic content and cause must largely be added by
myself.

In the Heroic age the four tribes of the Athenians were still settled in
Attica in separate territories; even the twelve phratries composing them
seem still to have had distinct seats in the twelve towns of Cecrops.
The constitution was that of the heroic age: assembly of the people,
council of the people, *basileus*. As far as written history takes us
back, we find the land already divided up and privately owned, which is
in accordance with the relatively advanced commodity production and the
corresponding trade in commodities developed towards the end of the
upper stage of barbarism. In addition to grain, wine and oil were
produced; to a continually increasing extent, the sea trade in the
Aegean was captured from the Phoenicians, and most of it passed into
Athenian hands. Through the sale and purchase of land, and the
progressive division of labor between agriculture and handicraft, trade,
and shipping, it was inevitable that the members of the different
gentes, phratries, and tribes very soon became intermixed, and that into
the districts of the phratry and tribe moved inhabitants, who, although
fellow countrymen, did not belong to these bodies and were therefore
strangers in their own place of domicile. For when times were quiet,
each tribe and each phratry administered its own affairs without sending
to Athens to consult the council of the people or the *basileus*. But
anyone not a member of the phratry or tribe was, of course, excluded
from taking any part in this administration, even though living in the
district.

The smooth functioning of the organs of the gentile constitution was
thus thrown so much out of gear that even in the heroic age remedies had
to be found. The constitution ascribed to Theseus was introduced. The
principal change which it made was to set up a central authority in
Athens -- that is, part of the affairs hitherto administered by the
tribes independently were declared common affairs and entrusted to the
common council sitting in Athens. In taking this step, the Athenians
went further than any native people of America had ever done: instead of
neighboring tribes forming a simple confederacy, they fused together
into one single nation. Hence arose a common Athenian civil law, which
stood above the legal customs of the tribes and gentes.

The Athenian citizen, as such, acquired definite rights and new
protection in law even on territory which was not that of his tribe. The
first step had been taken towards undermining the gentile constitution;
for this was the first step to the later admission of citizens who did
not belong to any tribe in all Attica, but were, and remained,
completely outside the Athenian gentile constitution. By a second
measure ascribed to Theseus, the entire people, regardless of gens,
phratry or tribe, was divided into three classes: *eupatridai*, or
nobles, *geomoroi*, or farmers, and *demiourgoi*, or artisans, and the
right to hold office was vested exclusively in the nobility. Apart from
the tenure of offices by the nobility, this division remained
inoperative, as it did not create any other legal distinctions between
the classes. It is, however, important because it reveals the new social
elements which had been developing unobserved. It shows that the
customary appointment of members of certain families to the offices of
the gens had already grown into an almost uncontested right of these
families to office; it shows that these families, already powerful
through their wealth, were beginning to form groupings outside their
gentes as a separate, privileged class, and that the state now taking
form sanctioned this presumption. It shows further that the division of
labor between peasants and artisans was now firmly enough established in
its social importance to challenge the old grouping of gentes and
tribes. And, finally, it proclaims the irreconcilable opposition between
gentile society and the state; the first attempt at forming a state
consists in breaking up the gentes by dividing their members into those
with privileges and those with none, and by further separating the
latter into two productive classes and thus setting them one against the
other.

The further political history of Athens up to the time of Solon is only
imperfectly known. The office of basileus fell into disuse; the
positions at the head of the state were occupied *by* archons elected
from the nobility. The power of the nobility continuously increased,
until about the year 600 B.C. it became insupportable. And the principal
means for suppressing the common liberty were -- money and usury. The
nobility had their chief seat in and around Athens, whose maritime
trade, with occasional piracy still thrown in, enriched them and
concentrated in their hands the wealth existing in the form of money.
From here the growing money economy penetrated like corrosive acid into
the old traditional life of the rural communities founded on natural
economy. The gentile constitution is absolutely irreconcilable with
money economy; the ruin of the Attic small farmers coincided with the
loosening of the old gentile bonds which embraced and protected them.
The debtorA's bond and the lien on property (for already the Athenians
had invented the mortgage also) respected neither gens nor phratry,
while the old gentile constitution, for its part, knew neither money nor
advances of money nor debts in money. Hence the money rule of the
aristocracy now in full flood of expansion also created a new customary
law to secure the creditor against the debtor and to sanction the
exploitation of the small peasant by the possessor of money. All the
fields of Attica were thick with mortgage columns bearing inscriptions
stating that the land on which they stood was mortgaged to such and such
for so and so much. The fields not so marked had for the most part
already been sold on account of unpaid mortgages or interest, and had
passed into the ownership of the noble usurer; the peasant could count
himself lucky if he was allowed to remain on the land as a tenant and
live on *one-sixth* of the produce of his labor, while he paid
*five-sixths* to his new master as rent. And that was not all. If the
sale of the land did not cover the debt, or if the debt had been
contracted without any security, the debtor, in order to meet his
creditor\'s claims, had to sell his children into slavery abroad.
Children sold by their father -- such was the first fruit of
father-right and monogamy! And if the blood-sucker was still not
satisfied, he could sell the debtor himself as a slave. Thus the
pleasant dawn of civilization began for the Athenian people.

Formerly, when the conditions of the people still corresponded to the
gentile constitution, such an upheaval was impossible; now it had
happened -- nobody knew how. Let us go back for a moment to our
Iroquois, amongst whom the situation now confronting the Athenians,
without their own doing, so to speak, and certainly against their will,
was inconceivable. Their mode of producing the necessities of life,
unvarying from year to year, could never generate such conflicts as were
apparently forced on the Athenians from without; it could never create
an opposition of rich and poor, of exploiters and exploited. The
Iroquois were still very far from controlling nature, but within the
limits imposed on them by natural forces they did control their own
production. Apart from bad harvests in their small gardens, the
exhaustion of the stocks of fish in their lakes and rivers or of the
game in their woods, they knew what results they could expect, making
their living as they did. The certain result was a livelihood, plentiful
or scanty; but one result there could never be -- social upheavals that
no one had ever intended, sundering of the gentile bonds, division of
gens and tribe into two opposing and warring classes. Production was
limited in the extreme, but -- the producers controlled their product.
That was the immense advantage of barbarian production, which was lost
with the coming of civilization; to reconquer it, but on the basis of
the gigantic control of nature now achieved by man and of the free
association now made possible, will be the task of the next generations.

Not so among the Greeks. The rise of private property in herds and
articles of luxury led to exchange between individuals, to the
transformation of products into *commodities*. And here lie the seeds of
the whole subsequent upheaval. When the producers no longer directly
consumed their product themselves, but let it pass out of their hands in
the act of exchange, they lost control of it. They no longer knew what
became of it; the possibility was there that one day it would be used
against the producer to exploit and oppress him. For this reason no
society can permanently retain the mastery of its own production and the
control over the social effects of its process of production unless it
abolishes exchange between individuals.

But the Athenians were soon to learn how rapidly the product asserts its
mastery over the producer when once exchange between individuals has
begun and products have been transformed into commodities. With the
coming of commodity production, individuals began to cultivate the soil
on their own account, which soon led to individual ownership of land.
Money followed, the general commodity with which all others 101 were
exchangeable. But when men invented money, they did not think that they
were again creating a new social power, the one general power before
which the whole of society must bow. And it was this new power, suddenly
sprung to life without knowledge or will of its creators, which now, in
all the brutality of its youth, gave the Athenians the first taste of
its might.

What was to be done? The old gentile constitution had not only shown
itself powerless before the triumphal march of money; it was absolutely
incapable of finding any place within its framework for such things as
money, creditors, debtors, and forcible collection of debts. But the new
social power was there; pious wishes, and yearning for the return of the
good old days would not drive money and usury out of the world. Further,
a number of minor breaches had also been made in the gentile
constitution. All over Attica, and especially in Athens itself, the
members of the different gentes and phratries became still more
indiscriminately mixed with every generation, although even now an
Athenian was only allowed to sell land outside his gens, not the house
in which he lived. The division of labor between the different branches
of production -- agriculture, handicrafts (in which there were again
innumerable subdivisions), trade, shipping, and so forth -- had been
carried further with every advance of industry and commerce; the
population was now divided according to occupation into fairly permanent
groups, each with its new common interests; and since the gens and the
phratry made no provision for dealing with them, new offices had to be
created. The number of slaves had increased considerably, and even at
that time must have far exceeded the number of free Athenians; the
gentile constitution originally knew nothing of slavery and therefore
had no means of keeping these masses of bondsmen in order. Finally,
trade had brought to Athens a number of foreigners who settled there on
account of the greater facilities of making money; they also could claim
no rights or protection under the old constitution; and, though they
were received with traditional tolerance, they remained a disturbing and
alien body among the people.

In short, the end of the gentile constitution was approaching. Society
was outgrowing it more every day; even the worst evils that had grown up
under its eyes were beyond its power to check or remove. But in the
meantime the state had quietly been developing. The new groups formed by
the division of labor, first between town and country, then between the
different branches of town labor, had created new organs to look after
their interests; official posts of all kinds had been set up. And above
everything else the young state needed a power of its own, which in the
case of the seafaring Athenians could at first only be a naval power,
for the purpose of carrying on small wars and protecting its merchant
ships. At some unknown date before Solon, the *naukrariai* were set up,
small territorial districts, twelve to each tribe; each *naukraria* had
to provide, equip and man a warship and also contribute two horsemen.
This institution was a twofold attack on the gentile constitution. In
the first place, it created a public force which was now no longer
simply identical with the whole body of the armed people; secondly, for
the first time it divided the people for public purposes, not by groups
of kinship, but *by common place of residence*. We shall see the
significance of this.

The gentile constitution being incapable of bringing help to the
exploited people, there remained only the growing state. And the state
brought them its help in the form of the constitution of Solon, thereby
strengthening itself again at the expense of the old constitution. Solon
-- the manner in which his reform, which belongs to the year 594 B.C.,
was carried through does not concern us here -- opened the series of
so-called political revolutions; and he did so with an attack on
property. All revolutions hitherto have been revolutions to protect one
kind of property against another kind of property. They cannot protect
the one without violating the other. In the great French Revolution
feudal property was sacrificed to save bourgeois property; in that of
Solon, the property of the creditors had to suffer for the benefit of
the property of the debtors. The debts were simply declared void. We do
not know the exact details, but in his poems Solon boasts of having
removed the mortgage columns from the fields and brought back all the
people who had fled or been sold abroad on account of debt. This was
only possible by open violation of property. And, in fact, from the
first to the last, all so-called political revolutions have been made to
protect property -- of *one* kind; and they have been carried out by
confiscating, also called stealing, property -- of *another* kind. The
plain truth is that for two and a half thousand years it has been
possible to preserve private property only by violating property.

But now the need was to protect the free Athenians against the return of
such slavery. The first step was the introduction of general measures --
for example, the prohibition of debt contracts pledging the person of
the debtor. Further, in order to place at least some check on the
nobles' ravening hunger for the land of the peasants, a maximum limit
was fixed for the amount of land that could be owned by one individual.
Then changes were made in the constitution, of which the most important
for us are the following:

The council was raised to four hundred members, one hundred for each
tribe; here, therefore, the tribe was still taken as basis. But that was
the one and only feature of the new state incorporating anything from
the old constitution. For all other purposes Solon divided the citizens
into four classes according to their property in land and the amount of
its yield: five hundred, three hundred and one hundred fifty *medimni*
of grain (one *medimnus* equals about 1.16 bushels) were the minimum
yields for the first three classes; those who owned less land or none at
all were placed in the fourth class. All offices could be filled only
from the three upper classes, and the highest offices only from the
first. The fourth class only had the right to speak and vote in the
assembly of the people; but it was in this assembly that all officers
were elected, here they had to render their account, here all laws were
made; and here the fourth class formed the majority. The privileges of
the aristocracy were partially renewed in the form of privileges of
wealth, but the people retained the decisive power. Further, the four
classes formed the basis of a new military organization. The first two
classes provided the cavalry; the third had to serve as heavy infantry;
the fourth served either as light infantry without armor or in the
fleet, for which they probably received wages.

A completely new element is thus introduced into the constitution:
private ownership. According to the size of their property in land, the
rights and duties of the citizens of the state are now assessed, and in
the same degree to which the classes based on property gain influence,
the old groups of blood relationship lose it; the gentile constitution
had suffered a new defeat.

However, the assessment of political rights on a property basis was not
an institution indispensable to the existence of the state. In spite of
the great part it has played in the constitutional history of states,
very many states, and precisely those most highly developed, have not
required it. In Athens also its role was only temporary; from the time
of Aristides all offices were open to every citizen.

During the next eighty years Athenian society gradually shaped the
course along which it developed in the following centuries. Usury on the
security of mortgaged land, which had been rampant in the period before
Solon, had been curbed, as had also the inordinate concentration of
property in land. Commerce and handicrafts, including artistic
handicrafts, which were being increasingly developed on a large scale by
the use of slave labor, became the main occupations. Athenians were
growing more enlightened. Instead of exploiting their fellow citizens in
the old brutal way, they exploited chiefly the slaves and the
non-Athenian customers. Movable property, wealth in the form of money,
of slaves and ships, continually increased, but it was no longer a mere
means to the acquisition of landed property, as in the old slow days: it
had become an end in itself. On the one hand the old power of the
aristocracy now had to contend with successful competition from the new
class of rich industrialists and merchants; but, on the other hand, the
ground was also cut away from beneath the last remains of the old
gentile constitution. The gentes, phratries, and tribes, whose members
were now scattered over all Attica and thoroughly intermixed, had thus
become useless as political bodies; numbers of Athenian citizens did not
belong to any gens at all; they were immigrants, who had indeed acquired
rights of citizenship, but had not been adopted into any of the old
kinship organizations; in addition, there was the steadily increasing
number of foreign immigrants who only had rights of protection.

Meanwhile, the fights went on between parties; the nobility tried to win
back their former privileges and for a moment regained the upper hand,
until the revolution of Cleisthenes (509 B.C.) overthrew them finally,
but with them also the last remnants of the gentile constitution.

In his new constitution, Cleisthenes ignored the four old tribes founded
on gentes and phratries. In their place appeared a completely new
organization on the basis of division of the citizens merely according
to their place of residence, such as had been already attempted in the
*naukrariai*. Only domicile was now decisive, not membership of a
kinship group. Not the people, but the territory was now divided: the
inhabitants became a mere political appendage of the territory.

The whole of Attica was divided into one hundred communal districts,
called "demes," each of which was self-governing. The citizens resident
in each deme (*demotes*) elected their president (demarch) and
treasurer, as well as thirty judges with jurisdiction in minor disputes.
They were also given their own temple and patron divinity or hero, whose
priests they elected. Supreme power in the deme was vested in the
assembly of the *demotes*. As Morgan rightly observes, here is the
prototype of the self-governing American township. The modern state, in
its highest development, ends in the same unit with which the rising
state in Athens began.

Ten of these units (demes) formed a tribe, which, however, is now known
as a local tribe to distinguish it from the old tribe of kinship. The
local tribe was not only a self-governing political body, but also a
military body; it elected its phylarch, or tribal chief, who commanded
the cavalry, the taxiarch commanding the infantry, and the *strategos*,
who was in command over all the forces raised in the tribal area. It
further provided five warships with their crews and commanders, and
received as patron deity an Attic hero, after whom it was named. Lastly,
it elected fifty councilors to the Athenian council.

At the summit was the Athenian state, governed by the council composed
of the five hundred councilors elected by the ten tribes, and in the
last instance by the assembly of the people, at which every Athenian
citizen had the right to attend and to vote; archons and other officials
managed the various departments of administration and justice. In Athens
there was no supreme official with executive power.

Through this new constitution and the admission to civil rights of a
very large number of protected persons, partly immigrants, partly freed
slaves, the organs of the gentile constitution were forced out of public
affairs; they sank to the level of private associations and religious
bodies. But the moral influence of the old gentile period and its
traditional ways of thought were still handed down for a long time to
come, and only died out gradually. We find evidence of this in another
state institution.

We saw that an essential characteristic of the state is the existence of
a public force differentiated from the mass of the people. At this time,
Athens still had only a people's army and a fleet provided directly by
the people; army and fleet gave protection against external enemies and
kept in check the slaves, who already formed the great majority of the
population. In relation to the citizens, the public power at first
existed only in the form of the police force, which is as old as the
state itself; for which reason the naive French of the eighteenth
century did not speak of civilized peoples, but of policed peoples
(*nations policées*). The Athenians then instituted a police force
simultaneously with their state, a veritable gendarmerie of bowmen, foot
and mounted *Landjäger* [\[the country\'s hunters\]]{.context} as they
call them in South Germany and Switzerland. But this gendarmerie
consisted of *slaves*. The free Athenian considered police duty so
degrading that he would rather be arrested by an armed slave than
himself have any hand in such despicable work. That was still the old
gentile spirit. The state could not exist without police, but the state
was still young and could not yet inspire enough moral respect to make
honorable an occupation which, to the older members of the gens,
necessarily appeared infamous.

Now complete in its main features, the state was perfectly adapted to
the new social conditions of the Athenians, as is shown by the rapid
growth of wealth, commerce, and industry. The class opposition on which
the social and political institutions rested was no longer that of
nobility and common people, but of slaves and free men, of protected
persons and citizens. At the time of their greatest prosperity, the
entire free-citizen population of Athens, women and children included,
numbered about ninety thousand; besides them there were three hundred
and sixty-five thousand slaves of both sexes and forty-five thousand
protected persons -- aliens and freedmen. There were therefore at least
eighteen slaves and more than two protected persons to every adult male
citizen. The reason for the large number of slaves was that many of them
worked together in manufactories, in large rooms, under overseers. But
with the development of commerce and industry wealth was accumulated and
concentrated in a few hands, and the mass of the free citizens were
impoverished. Their only alternatives were to compete against slave
labor with their own labor as handicraftsman, which was considered base
and vulgar and also offered very little prospect of success, or to
become social scrap. Necessarily, in the circumstances, they did the
latter, and, as they formed the majority, they thereby brought about the
downfall of the whole Athenian state. The downfall of Athens was not
caused by democracy, as the European lickspittle historians assert to
flatter their princes, but by slavery, which banned the labor of free
citizens.

The rise of the state among the Athenians is a particularly typical
example of the formation of a state; first, the process takes place in a
pure form, without any interference through use of violent force, either
from without or from within (the usurpation by Pisistratus left no trace
of its short duration); second, it shows a very highly developed form of
state, the democratic republic, arising directly out of gentile society;
and lastly we are sufficiently acquainted with all the essential
details.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter Four](ch04.htm) \| [Chapter Six](ch06.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
