Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# VI. The Gens and the State in Rome

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
[]{#1.1}

According to the legendary account of the foundation of Rome, the first
settlement was established by a number of Latin *gentes*
[[\[1\]](#1)]{.NOTE} (one hundred, says the legend), who were united in
a tribe; these were soon joined by a Sabellian tribe, also said to have
numbered a hundred gentes, and lastly by a third tribe of mixed
elements, again said to have been composed of a hundred gentes. The
whole account reveals at the first glance that very little was still
primitive here except the gens, and that even it was in some cases only
an offshoot from a mother gens still existing in its original home. The
tribes clearly bear the mark of their artificial composition, even
though they are generally composed out of related elements and after the
pattern of the old tribe, which was not made but grew; it is, however,
not an impossibility that the core of each of the three tribes was a
genuine old tribe. The intermediate group, the phratry, consisted of ten
gentes and was called a *curia*; there were therefore thirty *curiae*.

The Roman gens is recognized to be the same institution as the Greek
gens; and since the Greek gens is a further development of the social
unit whose original form is found among the American Indians, this, of
course, holds true of the Roman gens also. Here therefore we can be more
brief.

The Roman gens, at least in the earliest times of Rome, had the
following constitution:

1\. Mutual right of inheritance among gentile members; the property
remained within the gens. Since father-right already prevailed in the
Roman gens as in the Greek, descendants in the female line were
excluded. According to the Law of the Twelve Tables, the oldest written
Roman law known to us, the children, as natural heirs, had the first
title to the estate; in default of children, then the agnates
(descendants in the *male* line); in default of agnates, the gentiles.
In all cases the property remained within the gens. Here we see gentile
custom gradually being penetrated by the new legal provisions springing
from increased wealth and monogamy: the original equal right of
inheritance of all members of the gens is first restricted in practice
to the agnates -- probably very early, as already mentioned -- finally,
to the children and their issue in the male line; in the Twelve Tables
this appears, of course, in the reverse order.

2\. Possession of a common burial place. On their immigration to Rome
from Regilli, the patrician gens of the Claudii received a piece of land
for their own use and also a common burial place in the town. Even in
the time of Augustus, the head of Varus, who had fallen in the battle of
the Teutoburg Forest, was brought to Rome and interred in the
*gentilitius tumulus* (mound of the gens); the gens (Quinctilia)
therefore still had its own burial mound.

3\. Common religious rites. These, the *sacra gentilitia*, are well
known.

4\. Obligation not to marry within the gens. This seems never to have
become written law in Rome, but the custom persisted. Of all the
countless Roman married couples whose names have been preserved, there
is not one where husband and wife have the same gentile name. The law of
inheritance also proves the observance of this rule. The woman loses her
agnatic rights on marriage and leaves her gens; neither she nor her
children can inherit from her father or his brothers, because otherwise
the inheritance would be lost to the father's gens. There is no sense in
this rule unless a woman may not marry a member of her own gens.

5\. Common land. In primitive times the gens had always owned common
land, ever since the tribal land began to be divided up. Among the Latin
tribes, we find the land partly in the possession of the tribe, partly
of the gens, and partly of the households, which at that time can hardly
have been single families. Romulus is said to have made the first
allotments of land to individuals, about two and one-half acres (two
*jugera*) to a person. But later we still find land owned by the gentes,
to say nothing of the state land, round which the whole internal history
of the republic centers.

6\. Obligation of mutual protection and help among members of the gens.
Only vestiges remain in written history; from the very start the Roman
state made its superior power so manifest that the right of protection
against injury passed into its hands. When Appius Claudius was arrested,
the whole of his gens, even those who were his personal enemies, put on
mourning. At the time of the second Punic war the gentes joined together
to ransom their members who had been taken prisoner; the senate
prohibited them from doing so.

7\. Right to bear the gentile name. Persisted till the time of the
emperors; freedmen were allowed to use the gentile name of their former
master, but without gentile rights.

8\. Right to adopt strangers into the gens. This was done through
adoption into a family (as among the Indians), which carried with it
acceptance into the gens.

9\. The right to elect the chief and to depose him is nowhere mentioned.
But since in the earliest days of Rome all offices were filled by
election or nomination, from the elected king downwards, and since the
priests of the *curiae* were also elected by the *curiae* themselves, we
may assume the same procedure for the presidents (*principes*) of the
gentes -- however firmly established the election from one and the same
family within the gens may have already become.

Such were the rights of a Roman gens. Apart from the already completed
transition to father-right, they are the perfect counterpart of the
rights and duties in an Iroquois gens; here again "the Iroquois shows
through unmistakably" (p. 90).

The confusion that still exists today, even among our leading
historians, on the subject of the Roman gens, may be illustrated by one
example. In his paper on Roman family names in the period of the
Republic and of Augustus (*Romische Forschungen*, Berlin, 1864, Vol. I,
pp. 8-11) Mommsen writes:

The gentile name belongs to all the male members of the gens, excluding,
of course, the slaves, but including adopted and protected persons; it
belongs also to the women \... The tribe \[as Mommsen here translates
*gens*\] is\... a communal entity, derived from common lineage (real,
supposed or even pretended) and united by communal festivities, burial
rites and laws of inheritance; to it all personally free individuals,
and therefore all women also, may and must belong. But it is difficult
to determine what gentile name was borne by married women. So long as
the woman may only marry a member of her own gens, this problem does not
arise; and there is evidence that for a long period it was more
difficult for women to marry outside than inside the gens; for instance,
so late as the sixth century \[B.C.\] the right of *gentis enuptio*
(marriage outside the gens) was a personal privilege, conceded as a
reward \... But when such marriages outside the tribe took place, the
wife, in earliest times, must thereby have gone over to her husband\'s
tribe. Nothing is more certain than that the woman, in the old religious
marriage, enters completely into the legal and sacramental bonds of her
husband\'s community and leaves her own. Everyone knows that the married
woman forfeits the right of inheritance and bequest in relation to
members of her own gens but shares rights of inheritance with her
husband and children and the members of their gens. And if she is
adopted by her husband and taken into his family, how can she remain
apart from his gens?

Mommsen therefore maintains that the Roman women who belonged to a gens
had originally been permitted to marry only *within* the gens, that the
gens had therefore been endogamous, not exogamous. This view, which is
in contradiction to all the evidence from other peoples, rests chiefly,
if not exclusively, on one much disputed passage from Livy (Book XXXIX,
Ch. 19), according to which the senate in the year 568 after the
foundation of the city, or 186 B.C., decreed: "*Uti Feceniae Hispallae
datio, deminutio, gentis enuptio, tutoris optio item esset quasi ei vir
testamento dedisset; utique ei ingenuo nubere liceret, neu quid ei qui
eam duxisset ob id fraudi ignominiaeve esset*" -- that Fecenia Hispala
shall have the right to dispose of her property, to decrease it, to
marry outside the gens, and to choose for herself a guardian, exactly as
if her (deceased) husband had conferred this right on her by testament;
that she may marry a freeman, and that the man who takes her to wife
shall not be considered to have committed a wrongful or shameful act
thereby.

Without a doubt, Fecenia, a freedwoman, is here granted the right to
marry outside the gens. And equally without a doubt the husband
possessed the right, according to this passage, to bequeath to his wife
by will the right to marry outside the gens after his death. But outside
*which* gens?

If the woman had to marry within her gens, as Mommsen assumes, she
remained within this gens also after her marriage. But in the first
place the endogamous character of the gens which is here asserted is
precisely what has to be proved. And, secondly, if the wife had to marry
within the gens, then, of course, so had the man, for otherwise he could
not get a wife. So we reach the position that the man could bequeath to
his wife by will a right which he himself, and for himself, did not
possess; we arrive at a legal absurdity. Mommsen also feels this, and
hence makes the assumption: "For a lawful marriage outside the gens, it
was probably necessary to have the consent, not only of the chief, but
of all members of the gens." That is a very bold assumption in the first
place, and, secondly, it contradicts the clear wording of the passage.
The senate grants her this right *in the place of her husband*; it
grants her expressly neither more nor less than her husband could have
granted her, but what it grants her is an *absolute* right, conditional
upon no other restriction. Thus it is provided that if she makes use of
this right, her new husband also shall not suffer any disability. The
senate even directs the present and future consuls and praetors to see
to it that no injurious consequences to her follow. Mommsen's assumption
therefore seems to be completely inadmissible.

Or assume that the woman married a man from another gens, but herself
remained in the gens into which she had been born. Then, according to
the above passage, the man would have had the right to allow his wife to
marry outside her own gens. That is, he would have had the right to make
dispositions in the affairs of a gens to which he did not even belong.
The thing is so patently absurd that we need waste no more words on it.

Hence there only remains the assumption that in her first marriage the
woman married a man from another gens, and thereby immediately entered
the gens of her husband, which Mommsen himself actually admits to have
been the practice when the woman married outside her gens. Then
everything at once becomes clear. Severed from her old gens by her
marriage and accepted into the gentile group of her husband, the woman
occupies a peculiar position in her new gens. She is, indeed, a member
of the gens, but not related by blood. By the mere manner of her
acceptance as a gentile member, she is entirely excluded from the
prohibition against marrying within the gens, for she has just married
into it; further, she is accepted as one of the married members of the
gens, and on her husband's death inherits from his property, the
property of a gentile member. What is more natural than that this
property should remain within the gens and that she should therefore be
obliged to marry a member of her husband's gens and nobody else? And if
an exception is to be made, who is so competent to give her the
necessary authorization as the man who has bequeathed her this property,
her first husband? At the moment when he bequeaths to her a part of his
property and at the same time allows her to transfer it into another
gens through marriage or in consequence of marriage, this property still
belongs to him and he is therefore literally disposing of his own
property. As regards the woman herself and her relation to her
husband\'s gens, it was he who brought her into the gens by a free act
of will - the marriage; hence it also seems natural that he should be
the proper person to authorize her to leave this gens by a second
marriage. In a word, the matter appears simple and natural as soon as we
abandon the extraordinary conception of the endogamous Roman gens and
regard it, with Morgan, as originally exogamous.

There still remains one last assumption which has also found adherents,
and probably the most numerous. On this view, the passage only means
that "freed servants (*libertae*) could not without special permission
*e gente enubere* (marry out of the gens) or perform any of the acts,
which, involving loss of rights (*capitis deminutio minima*), would have
resulted in the *liberta* leaving the gens." (Lange, *Römische
Altertumer*, Berlin 1856, I, 195, where Huschke is cited in connection
with our passage from Livy.) If this supposition is correct, the passage
then proves nothing at all about the position of free Roman women, and
there can be even less question of any obligation resting on them to
marry within the gens.

The expression *enuptio gentis* only occurs in this one passage and
nowhere else in the whole of Latin literature; the word *enubere*, to
marry outside, only occurs three times, also in Livy, and then not in
reference to the gens. The fantastic notion that Roman women were only
allowed to marry within their gens owes its existence solely to this one
passage. But it cannot possibly be maintained. For either the passage
refers to special restrictions for freedwomen, in which case it proves
nothing about free women (*ingenuae*), or it applies also to free women;
and then it proves, on the contrary, that the woman married as a rule
outside her gens, but on her marriage entered into the gens of her
husband; which contradicts Mommsen and supports Morgan.

Almost three centuries after the foundation of Rome, the gentile groups
were still so strong that a patrician gens, that of the Fabii, was able
to undertake an independent campaign, with the permission of the senate,
against the neighboring town of Veii; three hundred and six Fabii are
said to have set out and to have been killed to a man, in an ambush;
according to the story, only one boy who had remained behind survived to
propagate the gens.

As we have said, ten gentes formed a phratry, which among the Romans was
called a *curia* and had more important public functions than the Greek
phratry. Every *curia* had its own religious rites, shrines and priests;
the latter, as a body, formed one of the Roman priestly colleges. Ten
*curiae* formed a tribe, which probably, like the rest of the Latin
tribes, originally had an elected president-military leader and high
priest. The three tribes together formed the Roman people, the *Populus
Romanus*.

[]{#2.1}

Thus no one could belong to the Roman people unless he was a member of a
gens and through it of a *curia* and a tribe. The first constitution of
the Roman people was as follows: Public affairs were managed in the
first instance by the senate, which, as Niebuhr first rightly saw, was
composed of the presidents of the three hundred gentes; it was because
they were the elders of the gens that they were called fathers,
*patres*, and their body, the senate (council of the elders, from
*senex*, old). Here again the custom of electing always from the same
family in the gens brought into being the first hereditary nobility;
these families called themselves "patricians," and claimed for
themselves exclusive right of entry into the senate and tenure of all
other offices. The acquiescence of the people in this claim, in course
of time, and its transformation into an actual right, appear in legend
as the story that Romulus conferred the patriciate and its privileges on
the first senators and their descendants. The senate, like the Athenian
*boulè*, made final decisions in many matters and held preparatory
discussions on those of greater importance, particularly new laws. With
regard to these, the decision rested with the assembly of the people,
called the *comitia curiata* (assembly of the *curiae*). The people
assembled together, grouped in *curiae*, each *curia* probably grouped
in gentes; each of the thirty *curiae* had one vote in the final
decision. The assembly of the *curiae* accepted or rejected all laws,
elected all higher officials, including the *rex* (so-called king),
declared war (the senate, however, concluded peace), and, as supreme
court, decided, on the appeal of the parties concerned, all cases
involving death sentence on a Roman citizen. Lastly, besides the senate
and the assembly of the people, there was the *rex*, who corresponded
exactly to the Greek *basileus* and was not at all the almost absolute
king which Mommsen made him out to be. [[^\[2\]^](#2)]{.NOTE} He also
was military leader, high priest, and president of certain courts. He
had no civil authority whatever, nor any power over the life, liberty,
or property of citizens, except such as derived from his disciplinary
powers as military leader or his executive powers as president of a
court. The office of *rex* was not hereditary; on the contrary, he was
first elected by the assembly of the *curiae*, probably on the
nomination of his predecessor, and then at a second meeting solemnly
installed in office. That he could also be deposed is shown by the fate
of Tarquinius Superbus.

Like the Greeks of the heroic age, the Romans in the age of the
so-called kings lived in a military democracy founded on gentes,
phratries, and tribes and developed out of them. Even if the *curiae*
and tribes were to a certain extent artificial groups, they were formed
after the genuine, primitive models of the society out of which they had
arisen and by which they were still surrounded on all sides. Even if the
primitive patrician nobility had already gained ground, even if the
*reges* were endeavoring gradually to extend their power, it does not
change the original, fundamental character of the constitution, and that
alone matters.

Meanwhile, Rome and the Roman territory, which had been enlarged by
conquest, increased in population, partly through immigration, partly
through the addition of inhabitants of the subjugated, chiefly Latin,
districts. All these new citizens of the state (we leave aside the
question of the clients) stood outside the old gentes, *curiae*, and
tribes, and therefore formed no part of the *populus Romanus*, the real
Roman people. They were personally free, could own property in land, and
had to pay taxes and do military service. But they could not hold any
office, nor take part in the assembly of the *curiae*, nor share in the
allotment of conquered state lands. They formed the class that was
excluded from all public rights, the *plebs*. Owing to their continually
increasing numbers, their military training and their possession of
arms, they became a powerful threat to the old *populus*, which now
rigidly barred any addition to its own ranks from outside. Further,
landed property seems to have been fairly equally divided between
*populus* and *plebs*, while the commercial and industrial wealth,
though not as yet much developed, was probably for the most part in the
hands of the *plebs*.

The great obscurity which envelops the completely legendary primitive
history of Rome -- an obscurity considerably deepened by the
rationalistically pragmatical interpretations and accounts given of the
subject by later authors with legalistic minds -- makes it impossible to
say anything definite about the time, course, or occasion of the
revolution which made an end of the old gentile constitution. All that
is certain is that its cause lay in the struggles between *plebs* and
*populus*.

The new constitution, which was attributed to the *rex* Servius Tullius
and followed the Greek model, particularly that of Solon, created a new
assembly of the people, in which *populus* and plebeians without
distinction were included or excluded according to whether they
performed military service or not. The whole male population liable to
bear arms was divided on a property basis into six classes. The lower
limit in each of the five classes was: (1) 100,000 asses; (2) 75,000
asses; (3) 50,000 asses; (4) 25,000 asses; (5) 11,000 asses; according
to Dureau de la Malle, the equivalent to about 14,000; 10,500; 7,000;
3,600; and 1,570 marks respectively. The sixth class, the proletarians,
consisted of those with less property than the lower class and those
exempt from military service and taxes. In the new popular assembly of
the centuries (*comitia centuriata*) the citizens appeared in military
formation, arranged by companies in their centuries of a hundred men,
each century having one vote. Now the first class put eighty centuries
in the field, the second twenty-two, the third twenty, the fourth
twenty-two, the fifth thirty, and the sixth also on century for the sake
of appearances. In addition, there was the cavalry, drawn from the
wealthiest men, with eighteen centuries; total, 193; ninety-seven votes
were thus required for a clear majority. But the cavalry and the first
class alone had together ninety-eight votes, an therefore the majority;
if they were agreed, they did not ask the others; they made their
decision, and it stood.

This new assembly of the centuries now took over all political rights of
the former assembly of the *curiae*, with the exception of a few nominal
privileges. The *curiae* and the gentes of which they were composed were
thus degraded, as in Athens, to mere private and religious associations
and continued to vegetate as such for a long period while the assembly
of the *curiae* soon became completely dormant. In order that the three
old tribes of kinship should also be excluded from the state, four local
tribes were instituted, each of which inhabited one quarter of the city
and possessed a number of political rights.

Thus in Rome also, even before the abolition of the so-called monarchy,
the old order of society based on personal ties of blood was destroyed
and in its place was set up a new and complete state constitution based
on territorial division and difference of wealth. Here the public power
consisted of the body of citizens liable to military service, in
opposition not only to the slaves, but also to those excluded from
service in the army and from possession of arms, the so-called
proletarians.

The banishment of the last *rex*, Tarquinius Superbus, who usurped real
monarchic power, and the replacement of the office of *rex* by two
military leaders (consuls) with equal powers (as among the Iroquois) was
simply a further development of this new constitution. Within this new
constitution, the whole history of the Roman Republic runs its course,
with all the struggles between patricians and plebeians for admission to
office and share in the state lands, and the final merging of the
patrician nobility in the new class of the great land and money owners,
who, gradually swallowing up all the land of the peasants ruined by
military service, employed slave labor to cultivate the enormous estates
thus formed, depopulated Italy and so threw open the door, not only to
the emperors, but also to their successors, the German barbarians.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** As gentes is here the Latin word used by the Romans,
it is printed in italics to distinguish it from the general term
\"gens\" used throughout the book -- Ed.

\
[]{#2}

**[\[2\]](#2.1)** The Latin rex is the same as the Celtic-Irish righ
(tribal chief) and the Gothic reiks; that reiks signified head of the
gens or tribe, as did also originally the German word Furst (meaning
\"first\" -- cf. English first and Danish forste), is shown by the fact
that already in the fourth century the Goths had a special word for the
later \"king,\" the military leader of the whole people: thiudans. In
Ulfilas' translation of the Bible, Artaxerxes and Herod are never called
reiks, but thiudans, and the empire of the Emperor Tiberius is not
called reiki, but thiudinassus. In the name of the Gothic thiodans or,
as we inaccurately translate, \"king,\" Thiudareik (Theodorich, i.e.
Dietrich), both titles coalesce.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter Five](ch05.htm) \| [Chapter Seven](ch07.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
