Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# IX. Barbarism and Civilization

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

We have now traced the dissolution of the gentile constitution in the
three great instances of the Greeks, the Romans, and the Germans. In
conclusion, let us examine the general economic conditions which already
undermined the gentile organization of society at the upper stage of
barbarism and with the coming of civilization overthrew it completely.
Here we shall need Marx\'s *Capital* as much as Morgan's book.

Arising in the middle stage of savagery, further developed during its
upper stage, the gens reaches its most flourishing period, so far as our
sources enable us to judge, during the lower stage of barbarism. We
begin therefore with this stage.

Here -- the American Indians must serve as our example -- we find the
gentile constitution fully formed. The tribe is now grouped in several
gentes, generally two. With the increase in population, each of these
original gentes splits up into several daughter gentes, their mother
gens now appearing as the phratry. The tribe itself breaks up into
several tribes, in each of which we find again, for the most part, the
old gentes. The related tribes, at least in some cases, are united in a
confederacy. This simple organization suffices completely for the social
conditions out of which it sprang. It is nothing more than the grouping
natural to those conditions, and it is capable of settling all conflicts
that can arise within a society so organized. War settles external
conflicts; it may end with the annihilation of the tribe, but never with
its subjugation. It is the greatness, but also the limitation, of the
gentile constitution that it has no place for ruler and ruled. Within
the tribe there is as yet no difference between rights and duties; the
question whether participation in public affairs, in blood revenge or
atonement, is a right or a duty, does not exist for the Indian; it would
seem to him just as absurd as the question whether it was a right or a
duty to sleep, eat, or hunt. A division of the tribe or of the gens into
different classes was equally impossible. And that brings us to the
examination of the economic basis of these conditions.

[]{#1.1}

The population is extremely sparse; it is dense only at the tribe's
place of settlement, around which lie in a wide circle first the hunting
grounds and then the protective belt of neutral forest, which separates
the tribe from others. The division of labor is purely primitive,
between the sexes only. The man fights in the wars, goes hunting and
fishing, procures the raw materials of food and the tools necessary for
doing so. The woman looks after the house and the preparation of food
and clothing, cooks, weaves, sews. They are each master in their own
sphere: the man in the forest, the woman in the house. Each is owner of
the instruments which he or she makes and uses: the man of the weapons,
the hunting and fishing implements, the woman of the household gear. The
housekeeping is communal among several and often many families.
[[^\[1\]^](#1)]{.note} What is made and used in common is common
property -- the house, the garden, the long-boat. Here therefore, and
here alone, there still exists in actual fact that "property created by
the owner's labor" which in civilized society is an ideal fiction of the
jurists and economists, the last lying legal pretense by which modern
capitalist property still bolsters itself up.

But humanity did not everywhere remain at this stage. In Asia they found
animals which could be tamed and, when once tamed, bred. The wild
buffalo-cow had to be hunted; the tame buffalo-cow gave a calf yearly
and milk as well. A number of the most advanced tribes -- the Aryans,
Semites, perhaps already also the Turanians -- now made their chief work
first the taming of cattle, later their breeding and tending only.
Pastoral tribes separated themselves from the mass of the rest of the
barbarians: *the first great social division of labor*. The pastoral
tribes produced not only more necessities of life than the other
barbarians, but different ones. They possessed the advantage over them
of having not only milk, milk products and greater supplies of meat, but
also skins, wool, goat-hair, and spun and woven fabrics, which became
more common as the amount of raw material increased. Thus for the first
time regular exchange became possible. At the earlier stages only
occasional exchanges can take place; particular skill in the making of
weapons and tools may lead to a temporary division of labor. Thus in
many places undoubted remains of workshops for the making of stone tools
have been found, dating from the later Stone Age. The artists who here
perfected their skill probably worked for the whole community, as each
special handicraftsman still does in the gentile communities in India.
In no case could exchange arise at this stage except within the tribe
itself, and then only as an exceptional event. But now, with the
differentiation of pastoral tribes, we find all the conditions ripe for
exchange between branches of different tribes and its development into a
regular established institution. Originally tribes exchanged with tribe
through the respective chiefs of the gentes; but as the herds began to
pass into private ownership, exchange between individuals became more
common, and, finally, the only form. Now the chief article which the
pastoral tribes exchanged with their neighbors was cattle; cattle became
the commodity by which all other commodities were valued and which was
everywhere willingly taken in exchange for them -- in short, cattle
acquired a money function and already at this stage did the work of
money. With such necessity and speed, even at the very beginning of
commodity exchange, did the need for a money commodity develop.

Horticulture, probably unknown to Asiatic barbarians of the lower stage,
was being practiced by them in the middle stage at the latest, as the
forerunner of agriculture. In the climate of the Turanian plateau,
pastoral life is impossible without supplies of fodder for the long and
severe winter. Here, therefore, it was essential that land should be put
under grass and corn cultivated. The same is true of the steppes north
of the Black Sea. But when once corn had been grown for the cattle, it
also soon became food for men. The cultivated land still remained tribal
property; at first it was allotted to the gens, later by the gens to the
household communities and finally to individuals for use. The users may
have had certain rights of possession, but nothing more.

Of the industrial achievements of this stage, two are particularly
important. The first is the loom, the second the smelting of metal ores
and the working of metals. Copper and tin and their alloy, bronze, were
by far the most important. Bronze provided serviceable tools and
weapons, though it could not displace stone tools; only iron could do
that, and the method of obtaining iron was not yet understood. Gold and
silver were beginning to be used for ornament and decoration, and must
already have acquired a high value as compared with copper and bronze.

The increase of production in all branches -- cattle-raising,
agriculture, domestic handicrafts -- gave human labor-power the capacity
to produce a larger product than was necessary for its maintenance. At
the same time it increased the daily amount of work to be done by each
member of the gens, household community or single family. It was now
desirable to bring in new labor forces. War provided them; prisoners of
war were turned into slaves. With its increase of the productivity of
labor, and therefore of wealth, and its extension of the field of
production, the first great social division of labor was bound, in the
general historical conditions prevailing, to bring slavery in its train.
From the first great social division of labor arose the first great
cleavage of society into two classes: masters and slaves, exploiters and
exploited.

As to how and when the herds passed out of the common possession of the
tribe or the gens into the ownership of individual heads of families, we
know nothing at present. But in the main it must have occurred during
this stage. With the herds and the other new riches, a revolution came
over the family. To procure the necessities of life had always been the
business of the man; he produced and owned the means of doing so. The
herds were the new means of producing these necessities; the taming of
the animals in the first instance and their later tending were the man's
work. To him, therefore, belonged the cattle, and to him the commodities
and the slaves received in exchange for cattle. All the surplus which
the acquisition of the necessities of life now yielded fell to the man;
the woman shared in its enjoyment, but had no part in its ownership. The
"savage" warrior and hunter had been content to take second place in the
house, after the woman; the "gentler" shepherd, in the arrogance of his
wealth, pushed himself forward into the first place and the woman down
into the second. And she could not complain. The division of labor
within the family had regulated the division of property between the man
and the woman. That division of labor had remained the same; and yet it
now turned the previous domestic relation upside down, simply because
the division of labor outside the family had changed. The same cause
which had ensured to the woman her previous supremacy in the house --
that her activity was confined to domestic labor -- this same cause now
ensured the man\'s supremacy in the house: the domestic labor of the
woman no longer counted beside the acquisition of the necessities of
life by the man; the latter was everything, the former an unimportant
extra. We can already see from this that to emancipate woman and make
her the equal of the man is and remains an impossibility so long as the
woman is shut out from social productive labor and restricted to private
domestic labor. The emancipation of woman will only be possible when
woman can take part in production on a large, social scale, and domestic
work no longer claims anything but an insignificant amount of her time.
And only now has that become possible through modern large-scale
industry, which does not merely permit of the employment of female labor
over a wide range, but positively demands it, while it also tends
towards ending private domestic labor by changing it more and more into
a public industry.

The man now being actually supreme in the house, the last barrier to his
absolute supremacy had fallen. This autocracy was confirmed and
perpetuated by the overthrow of mother-right, the introduction of
father-right, and the gradual transition of the pairing marriage into
monogamy. But this tore a breach in the old gentile order; the single
family became a power, and its rise was a menace to the gens.

The next step leads us to the upper stage of barbarism, the period when
all civilized peoples have their Heroic Age: the age of the iron sword,
but also of the iron plowshare and ax. Iron was now at the service of
man, the last and most important of all the raw materials which played a
historically revolutionary role -- until the potato. Iron brought the
tillage of large areas, the clearing of wide tracts of virgin forest;
iron gave to the handicraftsman tools so hard and sharp that no stone,
no other known metal could resist them. All this came gradually; the
first iron was often even softer than bronze. Hence stone weapons only
disappeared slowly; not merely in the *Hildebrandslied*, but even as
late as Hastings in 1066, stone axes were still used for fighting. But
progress could not now be stopped; it went forward with fewer checks and
greater speed. The town, with its houses of stone or brick, encircled by
stone walls, towers and ramparts, became the central seat of the tribe
or the confederacy of tribes -- an enormous architectural advance, but
also a sign of growing danger and need for protection. Wealth increased
rapidly, but as the wealth of individuals. The products of weaving,
metal-work and the other handicrafts, which were becoming more and more
differentiated, displayed growing variety and skill. In addition to
corn, leguminous plants and fruit, agriculture now provided wine and
oil, the preparation of which had been learned. Such manifold activities
were no longer within the scope of one and the same individual; the
*second great division of labor* took place: handicraft separated from
agriculture. The continuous increase of production and simultaneously of
the productivity of labor heightened the value of human labor-power.
Slavery, which during the preceding period was still in its beginnings
and sporadic, now becomes an essential constituent part of the social
system; slaves no longer merely help with production -- they are driven
by dozens to work in the fields and the workshops. With the splitting up
of production into the two great main branches, agriculture and
handicrafts, arises production directly for exchange, commodity
production; with it came commerce, not only in the interior and on the
tribal boundaries, but also already overseas. All this, however, was
still very undeveloped; the precious metals were beginning to be the
predominant and general money commodity, but still uncoined, exchanging
simply by their naked weight.

The distinction of rich and poor appears beside that of freemen and
slaves -- with the new division of labor, a new cleavage of society into
classes. The inequalities of property among the individual heads of
families break up the old communal household communities wherever they
had still managed to survive, and with them the common cultivation of
the soil by and for these communities. The cultivated land is allotted
for use to single families, at first temporarily, later permanently. The
transition to full private property is gradually accomplished, parallel
with the transition of the pairing marriage into monogamy. The single
family is becoming the economic unit of society.

The denser population necessitates closer consolidation both for
internal and external action. The confederacy of related tribes becomes
everywhere a necessity, and soon also their fusion, involving the fusion
of the separate tribal territories into one territory of the nation. The
military leader of the people -- *rex, basileus, thiudans* -- becomes an
indispensable, permanent official. The assembly of the people takes
form, wherever it did not already exist. Military leader, council,
assembly of the people are the organs of gentile society developed into
military democracy -- military, since war and organization for war have
now become regular functions of national life. Their neighbors\' wealth
excites the greed of peoples who already see in the acquisition of
wealth one of the main aims of life. They are barbarians: they think it
more easy and in fact more honorable to get riches by pillage than by
work. War, formerly waged only in revenge for injuries or to extend
territory that had grown too small, is now waged simply for plunder and
becomes a regular industry. Not without reason the bristling battlements
stand menacingly about the new fortified towns; in the moat at their
foot yawns the grave of the gentile constitution, and already they rear
their towers into civilization. Similarly in the interior. The wars of
plunder increase the power of the supreme military leader and the
subordinate commanders; the customary election of their successors from
the same families is gradually transformed, especially after the
introduction of father-right, into a right of hereditary succession,
first tolerated, then claimed, finally usurped; the foundation of the
hereditary monarchy and the hereditary nobility is laid. Thus the organs
of the gentile constitution gradually tear themselves loose from their
roots in the people, in gens, phratry, tribe, and the whole gentile
constitution changes into its opposite: from an organization of tribes
for the free ordering of their own affairs it becomes an organization
for the plundering and oppression of their neighbors; and
correspondingly its organs change from instruments of the will of the
people into independent organs for the domination and oppression of the
people. That, however, would never have been possible if the greed for
riches had not split the members of the gens into rich and poor, if "the
property differences within one and the same gens had not transformed
its unity of interest into antagonism between its members" (Marx), if
the extension of slavery had not already begun to make working for a
living seem fit only for slaves and more dishonorable than pillage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have now reached the threshold of civilization. Civilization opens
with a new advance in the division of labor. At the lowest stage of
barbarism men produced only directly for their own needs; any acts of
exchange were isolated occurrences, the object of exchange merely some
fortuitous surplus. In the middle stage of barbarism we already find
among the pastoral peoples a possession in the form of cattle which,
once the herd has attained a certain size, regularly produces a surplus
over and above the tribe's own requirements, leading to a division of
labor between pastoral peoples and backward tribes without herds, and
hence to the existence of two different levels of production side by
side with one another and the conditions necessary for regular exchange.
The upper stage of barbarism brings us the further division of labor
between agriculture and handicrafts, hence the production of a
continually increasing portion of the products of labor directly for
exchange, so that exchange between individual producers assumes the
importance of a vital social function. Civilization consolidates and
intensifies all these existing divisions of labor, particularly by
sharpening the opposition between town and country (the town may
economically dominate the country, as in antiquity, or the country the
town, as in the middle ages), and it adds a third division of labor,
peculiar to itself and of decisive importance: it creates a class which
no longer concerns itself with production, but only with the exchange of
the products -- the *merchants*. Hitherto whenever classes had begun to
form, it had always been exclusively in the field of production; the
persons engaged in production were separated into those who directed and
those who executed, or else into large-scale and small-scale producers.
Now for the first time a class appears which, without in any way
participating in production, captures the direction of production as a
whole and economically subjugates the producers; which makes itself into
an indispensable middleman between any two producers and exploits them
both. Under the pretext that they save the producers the trouble and
risk of exchange, extend the sale of their products to distant markets
and are therefore the most useful class of the population, a class of
parasites comes into being, "genuine social ichneumons," who, as a
reward for their actually very insignificant services, skim all the
cream off production at home and abroad, rapidly amass enormous wealth
and correspondingly social influence, and for that reason receive under
civilization ever higher honors and ever greater control of production,
until at last they also bring forth a product of their own -- the
periodical trade crises.

At our stage of development, however, the young merchants had not even
begun to dream of the great destiny awaiting them. But they were growing
and making themselves indispensable, which was quite sufficient. And
with the formation of the merchant class came also the development of
*metallic money*, the minted coin, a new instrument for the domination
of the non-producer over the producer and his production. The commodity
of commodities had been discovered, that which holds all other
commodities hidden in itself, the magic power which can change at will
into everything desirable and desired. The man who had it ruled the
world of production--and who had more of it than anybody else? The
merchant. The worship of money was safe in his hands. He took good care
to make it clear that, in face of money, all commodities, and hence all
producers of commodities, must prostrate themselves in adoration in the
dust. He proved practically that all other forms of wealth fade into
mere semblance beside this incarnation of wealth as such. Never again
has the power of money shown itself in such primitive brutality and
violence as during these days of its youth. After commodities had begun
to sell for money, loans and advances in money came also, and with them
interest and usury. No legislation of later times so utterly and
ruthlessly delivers over the debtor to the usurious creditor as the
legislation of ancient Athens and ancient Rome--and in both cities it
arose spontaneously, as customary law, without any compulsion other than
the economic.

Alongside wealth in commodities and slaves, alongside wealth in money,
there now appeared wealth in land also. The individuals' rights of
possession in the pieces of land originally allotted to them by gens or
tribe had now become so established that the land was their hereditary
property. Recently they had striven above all to secure their freedom
against the rights of the gentile community over these lands, since
these rights had become for them a fetter. They got rid of the fetter --
but soon afterwards of their new landed property also. Full, free
ownership of the land meant not only power, uncurtailed and unlimited,
to possess the land; it meant also the power to alienate it. As long as
the land belonged to the gens, no such power could exist. But when the
new landed proprietor shook off once and for all the fetters laid upon
him by the prior right of gens and tribe, he also cut the ties which had
hitherto inseparably attached him to the land. Money, invented at the
same time as private property in land, showed him what that meant. Land
could now become a commodity; it could be sold and pledged. Scarcely had
private property in land been introduced than the mortgage was already
invented (see Athens). As hetaerism and prostitution dog the heels of
monogamy, so from now onwards mortgage dogs the heels of private land
ownership. You asked for full, free alienable ownership of the land and
now you have got it -- "*tu l\'as voulu, Georges Dandin*." [\[It\'s your
fault, Georges Dandin, from Molière's play\].]{.context}

[]{#2.1}

With trade expansion, money and usury, private property in land and
mortgages, the concentration and centralization of wealth in the hands
of a small class rapidly advanced, accompanied by an increasing
impoverishment of the masses and an increasing mass of impoverishment.
The new aristocracy of wealth, in so far as it had not been identical
from the outset with the old hereditary aristocracy, pushed it
permanently into the background (in Athens, in Rome, among the Germans).
And simultaneous with this division of the citizens into classes
according to wealth there was an enormous increase, particularly in
Greece, in the number of slaves, [[\[2\]](#2)]{.note} whose forced labor
was the foundation on which the superstructure of the entire society was
reared.

Let us now see what had become of the gentile constitution in this
social upheaval. Confronted by the new forces in whose growth it had had
no share, the gentile constitution was helpless. The necessary condition
for its existence was that the members of a gens or at least of a tribe
were settled together in the same territory and were its sole
inhabitants. That had long ceased to be the case. Every territory now
had a heterogeneous population belonging to the most varied gentes and
tribes; everywhere slaves, protected persons and aliens lived side by
side with citizens. The settled conditions of life which had only been
achieved towards the end of the middle stage of barbarism were broken up
by the repeated shifting and changing of residence under the pressure of
trade, alteration of occupation and changes in the ownership of the
land. The members of the gentile bodies could no longer meet to look
after their common concerns; only unimportant matters, like the
religious festivals, were still perfunctorily attended to. In addition
to the needs and interests with which the gentile bodies were intended
and fitted to deal, the upheaval in productive relations and the
resulting change in the social structure had given rise to new needs and
interests, which were not only alien to the old gentile order, but ran
directly counter to it at every point. The interests of the groups of
handicraftsmen which had arisen with the division of labor, the special
needs of the town as opposed to the country, called for new organs. But
each of these groups was composed of people of the most diverse gentes,
phratries, and tribes, and even included aliens. Such organs had
therefore to be formed outside the gentile constitution, alongside of
it, and hence in opposition to it. And this conflict of interests was at
work within every gentile body, appearing in its most extreme form in
the association of rich and poor, usurers and debtors, in the same gens
and the same tribe. Further, there was the new mass of population
outside the gentile bodies, which, as in Rome, was able to become a
power in the land and at the same time was too numerous to be gradually
absorbed into the kinship groups and tribes. In relation to this mass,
the gentile bodies stood opposed as closed, privileged corporations; the
primitive natural democracy had changed into a malign aristocracy.
Lastly, the gentile constitution had grown out of a society which knew
no internal contradictions, and it was only adapted to such a society.
It possessed no means of coercion except public opinion. But here was a
society which by all its economic conditions of life had been forced to
split itself into freemen and slaves, into the exploiting rich and the
exploited poor; a society which not only could never again reconcile
these contradictions, but was compelled always to intensify them. Such a
society could only exist either in the continuous open fight of these
classes against one another, or else under the rule of a third power,
which, apparently standing above the warring classes, suppressed their
open conflict and allowed the class struggle to be fought out at most in
the economic field, in so-called legal form. The gentile constitution
was finished. It had been shattered by the division of labor and its
result, the cleavage of society into classes. It was replaced by the
*state*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#3.1}

The three main forms in which the state arises on the ruins of the
gentile constitution have been examined in detail above. Athens provides
the purest, classic form; here the state springs directly and mainly out
of the class oppositions which develop within gentile society itself. In
Rome, gentile society becomes a closed aristocracy in the midst of the
numerous plebs who stand outside it, and have duties but no rights; the
victory of plebs breaks up the old constitution based on kinship, and
erects on its ruins the state, into which both the gentile aristocracy
and the plebs are soon completely absorbed. Lastly, in the case of the
German conquerors of the Roman Empire, the state springs directly out of
the conquest of large foreign territories, which the gentile
constitution provides no means of governing. But because this conquest
involves neither a serious struggle with the original population nor a
more advanced division of labor; because conquerors and conquered are
almost on the same level of economic development, and the economic basis
of society remains therefore as before--for these reasons the gentile
constitution is able to survive for many centuries in the altered,
territorial form of the mark constitution and even for a time to
rejuvenate itself in a feebler shape in the later noble and patrician
families, and indeed in peasant families, as in Ditmarschen.
[[^\[3\]^](#3)]{.note}

The state is therefore by no means a power imposed on society from
without; just as little is it "the reality of the moral idea," "the
image and the reality of reason," as Hegel maintains. Rather, it is a
product of society at a particular stage of development; it is the
admission that this society has involved itself in insoluble
self-contradiction and is cleft into irreconcilable antagonisms which it
is powerless to exorcise. But in order that these antagonisms, classes
with conflicting economic interests, shall not consume themselves and
society in fruitless struggle, a power, apparently standing above
society, has become necessary to moderate the conflict and keep it
within the bounds of "order"; and this power, arisen out of society, but
placing itself above it and increasingly alienating itself from it, is
the state.

In contrast to the old gentile organization, the state is distinguished
firstly by the grouping of its members *on a territorial basis*. The old
gentile bodies, formed and held together by ties of blood, had, as we
have seen, become inadequate largely because they presupposed that the
gentile members were bound to one particular locality, whereas this had
long ago ceased to be the case. The territory was still there, but the
people had become mobile. The territorial division was therefore taken
as the starting point and the system introduced by which citizens
exercised their public rights and duties where they took up residence,
without regard to gens or tribe. This organization of the citizens of
the state according to domicile is common to all states. To us,
therefore, this organization seems natural; but, as we have seen, hard
and protracted struggles were necessary before it was able in Athens and
Rome to displace the old organization founded on kinship.

The second distinguishing characteristic is the institution of a *public
force* which is no longer immediately identical with the people's own
organization of themselves as an armed power. This special public force
is needed because a self-acting armed organization of the people has
become impossible since their cleavage into classes. The slaves also
belong to the population: as against the 365,000 slaves, the 90,000
Athenian citizens constitute only a privileged class. The people's army
of the Athenian democracy confronted the slaves as an aristocratic
public force, and kept them in check; but to keep the citizens in check
as well, a police-force was needed, as described above. This public
force exists in every state; it consists not merely of armed men, but
also of material appendages, prisons and coercive institutions of all
kinds, of which gentile society knew nothing. It may be very
insignificant, practically negligible, in societies with still
undeveloped class antagonisms and living in remote areas, as at times
and in places in the United States of America. But it becomes stronger
in proportion as the class antagonisms within the state become sharper
and as adjoining states grow larger and more populous. It is enough to
look at Europe today, where class struggle and rivalry in conquest have
brought the public power to a pitch that it threatens to devour the
whole of society and even the state itself.

In order to maintain this public power, contributions from the state
citizens are necessary -- *taxes*. These were completely unknown to
gentile society. We know more than enough about them today. With
advancing civilization, even taxes are not sufficient; the state draws
drafts on the future, contracts loans -- *state debts*. Our old Europe
can tell a tale about these, too.

In possession of the public power and the right of taxation, the
officials now present themselves as organs of society standing above
society. The free, willing respect accorded to the organs of the gentile
constitution is not enough for them, even if they could have it.
Representatives of a power which estranges them from society, they have
to be given prestige by means of special decrees, which invest them with
a peculiar sanctity and inviolability. The lowest police officer of the
civilized state has more "authority" than all the organs of gentile
society put together; but the mightiest prince and the greatest
statesman or general of civilization might envy the humblest of the
gentile chiefs the unforced and unquestioned respect accorded to him.
For the one stands in the midst of society; the other is forced to pose
as something outside and above it.

As the state arose from the need to keep class antagonisms in check, but
also arose in the thick of the fight between the classes, it is normally
the state of the most powerful, economically ruling class, which by its
means becomes also the politically ruling class, and so acquires new
means of holding down and exploiting the oppressed class. The ancient
state was, above all, the state of the slave-owners for holding down the
slaves, just as the feudal state was the organ of the nobility for
holding down the peasant serfs and bondsmen, and the modern
representative state is the instrument for exploiting wage-labor by
capital. Exceptional periods, however, occur when the warring classes
are so nearly equal in forces that the state power, as apparent
mediator, acquires for the moment a certain independence in relation to
both. This applies to the absolute monarchy of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, which balances the nobility and the bourgeoisie
against one another; and to the Bonapartism of the First and
particularly of the Second French Empire, which played off the
proletariat against the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie against the
proletariat. The latest achievement in this line, in which ruler and
ruled look equally comic, is the new German Empire of the Bismarckian
nation; here the capitalists and the workers are balanced against one
another and both of them fleeced for the benefit of the decayed Prussian
cabbage Junkers. [\[German:Krautjunker, translated as 'country squire',
but with pejorative overtones.\]]{.context}

Further, in most historical states the rights conceded to citizens are
graded on a property basis, whereby it is directly admitted that the
state is an organization for the protection of the possessing class
against the non-possessing class. This is already the case in the
Athenian and Roman property classes. Similarly in the medieval feudal
state, in which the extent of political power was determined by the
extent of landownership. Similarly, also, in the electoral
qualifications in modern parliamentary states. This political
recognition of property differences is, however, by no means essential.
On the contrary, it marks a low stage in the development of the state.
The highest form of the state, the democratic republic, which in our
modern social conditions becomes more and more an unavoidable necessity
and is the form of state in which alone the last decisive battle between
proletariat and bourgeoisie can be fought out -- the democratic republic
no longer officially recognizes differences of property. Wealth here
employs its power indirectly, but all the more surely. It does this in
two ways: by plain corruption of officials, of which America is the
classic example, and by an alliance between the government and the stock
exchange, which is effected all the more easily the higher the state
debt mounts and the more the joint-stock companies concentrate in their
hands not only transport but also production itself, and themselves have
their own center in the stock exchange. In addition to America, the
latest French republic illustrates this strikingly, and honest little
Switzerland has also given a creditable performance in this field. But
that a democratic republic is not essential to this brotherly bond
between government and stock exchange is proved not only by England, but
also by the new German Empire, where it is difficult to say who scored
most by the introduction of universal suffrage, Bismarck or the
Bleichroder bank. And lastly the possessing class rules directly by
means of universal suffrage. As long as the oppressed class -- in our
case, therefore, the proletariat -- is not yet ripe for its
self-liberation, so long will it, in its majority, recognize the
existing order of society as the only possible one and remain
politically the tail of the capitalist class, its extreme left wing. But
in the measure in which it matures towards its self-emancipation, in the
same measure it constitutes itself as its own party and votes for its
own representatives, not those of the capitalists. Universal suffrage is
thus the gauge of the maturity of the working class. It cannot and never
will be anything more in the modern state; but that is enough. On the
day when the thermometer of universal suffrage shows boiling-point among
the workers, they as well as the capitalists will know where they stand.

The state, therefore, has not existed from all eternity. There have been
societies which have managed without it, which had no notion of the
state or state power. At a definite stage of economic development, which
necessarily involved the cleavage of society into classes, the state
became a necessity because of this cleavage. We are now rapidly
approaching a stage in the development of production at which the
existence of these classes has not only ceased to be a necessity, but
becomes a positive hindrance to production. They will fall as inevitably
as they once arose. The state inevitably falls with them. The society
which organizes production anew on the basis of free and equal
association of the producers will put the whole state machinery where it
will then belong -- into the museum of antiquities, next to the spinning
wheel and the bronze ax.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Civilization is, therefore, according to the above analysis, the stage
of development in society at which the division of labor, the exchange
between individuals arising from it, and the commodity production which
combines them both, come to their full growth and revolutionizes the
whole of previous society.

At all earlier stages of society production was essentially collective,
just as consumption proceeded by direct distribution of the products
within larger or smaller communistic communities. This collective
production was very limited; but inherent in it was the producers'
control over their process of production and their product. They knew
what became of their product: they consumed it; it did not leave their
hands. And so long as production remains on this basis, it cannot grow
above the heads of the producers nor raise up incorporeal alien powers
against them, as in civilization is always and inevitably the case.

But the division of labor slowly insinuates itself into this process of
production. It undermines the collectivity of production and
appropriation, elevates appropriation by individuals into the general
rule, and thus creates exchange between individuals -- how it does so,
we have examined above. Gradually commodity production becomes the
dominating form.

With commodity production, production no longer for use by the producers
but for exchange, the products necessarily change hands. In exchanging
his product, the producer surrenders it; he no longer knows what becomes
of it. When money, and with money the merchant, steps in as intermediary
between the producers, the process of exchange becomes still more
complicated, the final fate of the products still more uncertain. The
merchants are numerous, and none of them knows what the other is doing.
The commodities already pass not only from hand to hand; they also pass
from market to market; the producers have lost control over the total
production within their own spheres, and the merchants have not gained
it. Products and production become subjects of chance.

But chance is only the one pole of a relation whose other pole is named
"necessity." In the world of nature, where chance also seems to rule, we
have long since demonstrated in each separate field the inner necessity
and law asserting itself in this chance. But what is true of the natural
world is true also of society. The more a social activity, a series of
social processes, becomes too powerful for men\'s conscious control and
grows above their heads, and the more it appears a matter of pure
chance, then all the more surely within this chance the laws peculiar to
it and inherent in it assert themselves as if by natural necessity. Such
laws also govern the chances of commodity production and exchange. To
the individuals producing or exchanging, they appear as alien, at first
often unrecognized, powers, whose nature Must first be laboriously
investigated and established. These economic laws of commodity
production are modified with the various stages of this form of
production; but in general the whole period of civilization is dominated
by them. And still to this day the product rules the producer; still to
this day the total production of society is regulated, not by a jointly
devised plan, but by blind laws, which manifest themselves with
elemental violence, in the final instance in the storms of the
periodical trade crises.

We saw above how at a fairly early stage in the development of
production, human labor-power obtains the capacity of producing a
considerably greater product than is required for the maintenance of the
producers, and how this stage of development was in the main the same as
that in which division of labor and exchange between individuals arise.
It was not long then before the great "truth" was discovered that man
also can be a commodity; that human energy can be exchanged and put to
use by making a man into a slave. Hardly had men begun to exchange than
already they themselves were being exchanged. The active became the
passive, whether the men liked it or not.

With slavery, which attained its fullest development under civilization,
came the first great cleavage of society into an exploiting and an
exploited class. This cleavage persisted during the whole civilized
period. Slavery is the first form of exploitation, the form peculiar to
the ancient world; it is succeeded by serfdom in the middle ages, and
wage-labor in the more recent period. These are the three great forms of
servitude, characteristic of the three great epochs of civilization;
open, and in recent times disguised, slavery always accompanies them.

[]{#4.1}

The stage of commodity production with which civilization begins is
distinguished economically by the introduction of (1) metal money, and
with it money capital, interest and usury; (2) merchants, as the class
of intermediaries between the producers; (3) private ownership of land,
and the mortgage system; (4) slave labor as the dominant form of
production The form of family corresponding to civilization and coming
to definite supremacy with it is monogamy, the domination of the man
over the woman, and the single family as the economic unit of society.
The central link in civilized society is the state, which in all typical
periods is without exception the state of the ruling class, and in all
cases continues to be essentially a machine for holding down the
oppressed, exploited class. Also characteristic of civilization is the
establishment of a permanent opposition between town and country as
basis of the whole social division of labor; and, further, the
introduction of wills, whereby the owner of property is still able to
dispose over it even when he is dead. This institution, which is a
direct affront to the old gentile constitution, was unknown in Athens
until the time of Solon; in Rome it was introduced early, though we do
not know the date; [[\[4\]](#4)]{.note} among the Germans it was the
clerics who introduced it, in order that there might be nothing to stop
the pious German from leaving his legacy to the Church.

With this as its basic constitution, civilization achieved things of
which gentile society was not even remotely capable. But it achieved
them by setting in motion the lowest instincts and passions in man and
developing them at the expense of all his other abilities. From its
first day to this, sheer greed was the driving spirit of civilization;
wealth and again wealth and once more wealth, wealth, not of society,
but of the single scurvy individual -- here was its one and final aim.
If at the same time the progressive development of science and a
repeated flowering of supreme art dropped into its lap, it was only
because without them modern wealth could not have completely realized
its achievements.

Since civilization is founded on the exploitation of one class by
another class, its whole development proceeds in a constant
contradiction. Every step forward in production is at the same time a
step backwards in the position of the oppressed class, that is, of the
great majority. Whatever benefits some necessarily injures the others;
every fresh emancipation of one class is necessarily a new oppression
for another class. The most striking proof of this is provided by the
introduction of machinery, the effects of which are now known to the
whole world. And if among the barbarians, as we saw, the distinction
between rights and duties could hardly be drawn, civilization makes the
difference and antagonism between them clear even to the dullest
intelligence by giving one class practically all the rights and the
other class practically all the duties.

[]{#5.1}

But that should not be: what is good for the ruling class must also be
good for the whole of society, with which the ruling-class identifies
itself. Therefore the more civilization advances, the more it is
compelled to cover the evils it necessarily creates with the cloak of
love and charity, to palliate them or to deny them -- in short, to
introduce a conventional hypocrisy which was unknown to earlier forms of
society and even to the first stages of civilization, and which
culminates in the pronouncement: the exploitation of the oppressed class
is carried on by the exploiting class simply and solely in the interests
of the exploited class itself; and if the exploited class cannot see it
and even grows rebellious, that is the basest ingratitude to its
benefactors, the exploiters. [[^\[5\]^](#5)]{.note}

And now, in conclusion, Morgan's judgment of civilization:

Since the advent of civilization, the outgrowth of property has been so
immense, its forms so diversified, its uses so expanding and its
management so intelligent in the interests of its owners, that it has
become, on the part of the people, *an unmanageable power. The human
mind stands bewildered in the presence of its own creation*. The time
will come, nevertheless, when human intelligence will rise to the
mastery over property, and define the relations of the state to the
property it protects, as well as the obligations and the limits of the
rights of its owners. The interests of society are paramount to
individual interests, and the two must be brought into just and
harmonious relations. A mere property career is not the final destiny of
mankind, if progress is to be the law of the future as it has been of
the past. The time which has passed away since civilization began is but
a fragment of the past duration of man's existence; and but a fragment
of the ages yet to come. The dissolution of society bids fair to become
the termination of a career of which property is the end and aim;
because such a career contains the elements of self-destruction.
Democracy in government, brotherhood in society, equality in rights and
privileges, and universal education, foreshadow the next higher plane of
society to which experience, intelligence and knowledge are steadily
tending. *It will be a revival, in a higher form, of the liberty,
equality and fraternity of the ancient gentes.*

[\[Morgan, op. cit., p. 562.--Ed.\] ]{.inote}

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** Especially on the north-west coast of America -- see
Bancroft. Among the Haidahs on Queen Charlotte Islands there are
households with as many as 700 persons under one roof. Among the Nootkas
whole tribes used to live under one roof.

[]{#2}

**[\[2\]](#2.1)** For the number of slaves in Athens, see above, page
107. In Corinth, at the height of its power, the number of slaves was
460,000; in Ægina, 470,000. In both cases, ten times the population of
free citizens.

[]{#3}

**[\[3\]](#3.1)** The first historian who had at any rate an approximate
conception of the nature of the gens was Niebuhr, and for this he had to
thank his acquaintance with the Ditmarechen families, though he was
overhasty in transferring their characteristics to the gens.

[]{#4}

**[\[4\]](#4.1)** The second part of Lassalle's *System der erworbenen
Rechte (System of Acquired Rights)* turns chiefly on the proposition
that the Roman testament is as old as Rome itself, that there was never
in Roman history "a time when there were no testaments"; that, on the
contrary, the testament originated in pre-Roman times out of the cult of
the dead. Lassalle, as a faithful Hegelian of the old school, derives
the provisions of Roman law not from the social relations of the Romans,
but from the "speculative concept" of the human will, and so arrives at
this totally unhistorical conclusion. This is not to be wondered at in a
book which comes to the conclusion, on the ground of the same
speculative concept, that the transfer of property was a purely
secondary matter in Roman inheritance. Lassalle not only believes in the
illusions of the Roman jurists, particularly of the earlier periods; he
outdoes them.

[]{#5}

**[\[5\]](#5.1)** I originally intended to place the brilliant criticism
of civilization which is found scattered through the work of Charles
Fourier beside that of Morgan and my own. Unfortunately, I have not the
time. I will only observe that Fourier already regards monogamy and
private property in land as the chief characteristics of civilization,
and that he calls civilization a war of the rich against the poor. We
also find already in his work the profound recognition that in all
societies which are imperfect and split into antagonisms single families
(les families incohérentes) are the economic units.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Chapter Eight](ch08.htm) \| [Appendix](appen.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
