Works of Frederick Engels 1884

# The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} March-May, 1884;\
[First Published:]{.info} October 1884, in Hottingen-Zurich;\
[Source:]{.info} Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three;\
[Translation:]{.info} The text is essentially the English translation by
Alick West published in 1942, but it has been revised against the German
text as it appeared in *MEW* [\[Marx-Engels Werke\]]{.context} Volume
21, Dietz Verlag 1962, and the spelling of names and other terms has
been modernised;\
[Transcription/Markup:]{.info} Zodiac/[Brian
Baggins](../../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm#emeritus);\
[Online Version:]{.info} Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org)
1993, 1999, 2000.\
[Proofed and corrected:]{.info} Mark Harris 2010; Martin Swayne 2021
(based on a comparison with the [Wellred Books 2020
edition](https://www.marxist.com/classics-the-origin-of-the-family-private-property-and-the-state.htm))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![cover of origins pamphlet](introb.gif){align="right" hspace="10"
vspace="1" border="0"}

Table of Contents:

[Introduction](#intro)

[Preface to the First Edition](preface.htm)

[Preface to the Fourth Edition](preface2.htm)

[Stages of Prehistoric Culture](ch01.htm)

[The Family](ch02.htm)

[The Consanguine Family (The First Stage of the
Family)](ch02.htm#partI)\
[The Punaluan Family](ch02b.htm)\
[The Pairing Family](ch02c.htm)\
[The Monogamous Family](ch02d.htm)

[The Iroquois Gens](ch03.htm)

[The Greek Gens \[The Rise of Private Property\]](ch04.htm)

[The Rise of the Athenian State](ch05.htm)

[The Gens and the State in Rome](ch06.htm)

[The Gens Among Celts and Germans](ch07.htm)

[The Formation of the State Among the Germans](ch08.htm)

[Barbarism and Civilization](ch09.htm)

Appendix: [A Recently Discovered Case of Group Marriage](appen.htm)

\
[]{#intro}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Introduction

[A]{.cap}fter Marx's death, in rummaging through Marx's manuscripts,
Engels came upon [Marx's precis](marx-conspectus.htm) of *[Ancient
Society](../../../../../reference/archive/morgan-lewis/ancient-society/index.htm)*
-- a book by progressive US scholar [Lewis Henry
Morgan](../../../../../glossary/people/m/o.htm#morgan-henry) and
published in London 1877. The precis was written between 1880-81 and
contained Marx's numerous remarks on Morgan as well as passages from
other sources.

After reading the precis, Engels set out to write a special treatise --
which he saw as fulfilling Marx's will. Working on the book, he used
Marx's precis, and some of Morgan's factual material and conclusions. He
also made use of many and diverse data gleaned in his own studies of the
history of Greece, Rome, Old Ireland, and the Ancient Germans.

It would, of course, become *The Origin of the Family, Private Property
and the State* -- the first edition of which was published October 1884
in Hottingen-Zurich.

Engels wrote *The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State*
in just two months -- beginning toward the end of March 1884 and
completing it by the end of May. It focuses on early human history,
following the disintegration of the primitive community and the
emergence of a class society based on private property. Engels looks
into the origin and essence of the state, and concludes it is bound to
wither away leaving a classless society.

Engels: "Along with \[the classes\] the state will inevitably fall.
Society, which will reorganise production on the basis of a free and
equal association of the producers, will put the whole machinery of
state where it will then belong: into the museum of antiquity, by the
side of the spinning-wheel and the bronze axe."

In 1890, having gathered new material on the history of primitive
society, Engels set about preparing a new edition of his book. He
studied the latest books on the subject -- including those of Russian
historian Maxim Kovalevsky. (The fourth edition, Stuttgart, 1892, was
dedicated to Kovalevsky.) As a result, he introduced a number of changes
in his original text and also considerable insertions.

In 1894, Engels's book appeared in Russian translation. It was the first
of Engels's works published legally in Russia. Lenin would later
describe it as "one of the fundamental works of modern socialism."

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Ancient
Society](../../../../../reference/archive/morgan-lewis/ancient-society/index.htm){target="_top"}
by Lewis Henry Morgan, 1877\
[Study Guide](guide.htm) \| [Original Cover](introb.htm) \| [Marx/Engels
Works Archive](../../../index.htm)
