Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# Preface to the First Edition, 1884

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\
[]{#1.1}

[T]{.cap}he following chapters are, in a sense, the execution of a
bequest. No less a man than Karl Marx had made it one of his future
tasks to present the results of Morgan's researches in the light of the
conclusions of his own --- within certain limits, I may say our ---
materialistic examination of history, and thus to make clear their full
significance. For Morgan in his own way had discovered afresh in America
the materialistic conception of history discovered by Marx forty years
ago, and in his comparison of barbarism and civilization it had led him,
in the main points, to the same conclusions as Marx. And just as the
professional economists in Germany were for years as busy in
plagiarizing Capital as they were persistent in attempting to kill it by
silence, so Morgan\'s Ancient Society [[^\[1\]^](#1)]{.note} received
precisely the same treatment from the spokesmen of "prehistoric" science
in England. My work can only provide a slight substitute for what my
departed friend no longer had the time to do. But I have the critical
notes which he made to his extensive extracts from Morgan, and as far as
possible I reproduce them here.

According to the materialistic conception, the determining factor in
history is, in the final instance, the production and reproduction of
the immediate essentials of life. This, again, is of a twofold
character. On the one side, the production of the means of existence, of
articles of food and clothing, dwellings, and of the tools necessary for
that production; on the other side, the production of human beings
themselves, the propagation of the species. The social organization
under which the people of a particular historical epoch and a particular
country live is determined by both kinds of production: by the stage of
development of labor on the one hand and of the family on the other.

The lower the development of labor and the more limited the amount of
its products, and consequently, the more limited also the wealth of the
society, the more the social order is found to be dominated by kinship
groups. However, within this structure of society based on kinship
groups the productivity of labor increasingly develops, and with it
private property and exchange, differences of wealth, the possibility of
utilizing the labor power of others, and hence the basis of class
antagonisms: new social elements, which in the course of generations
strive to adapt the old social order to the new conditions, until at
last their incompatibility brings about a complete upheaval. In the
collision of the newly-developed social classes, the old society founded
on kinship groups is broken up; in its place appears a new society, with
its control centered in the state, the subordinate units of which are no
longer kinship associations, but local associations; a society in which
the system of the family is completely dominated by the system of
property, and in which there now freely develop those class antagonisms
and class struggles that have hitherto formed the content of all
*written* history.

It is Morgan's great merit that he has discovered and reconstructed in
its main lines this prehistoric basis of our written history, and that
in the kinship groups of the North American Indians he has found the key
to the most important and hitherto insoluble riddles of earliest Greek,
Roman and German history. His book is not the work of a day. For nearly
forty years he wrestled with his material, until he was completely
master of it. But that also makes his book one of the few epoch-making
works of our time.

In the following presentation, the reader will in general easily
distinguish what comes from Morgan and what I have added. In the
historical sections on Greece and Rome I have not confined myself to
Morgan's evidence, but have added what was available to me. The sections
on the Celts and the Germans are in the main my work; Morgan had to rely
here almost entirely on secondary sources, and for German conditions ---
apart from Tacitus --- on the worthless and liberalistic falsifications
of Mr. Freeman. The treatment of the economic aspects, which in Morgan's
book was sufficient for his purpose but quite inadequate for mine, has
been done afresh by myself. And, finally, I am, of course, responsible
for all the conclusions drawn, in so far as Morgan is not expressly
cited.

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human
Progress from Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilization, by Lewis H.
Morgan, London, Macmillan & Co., 1877. The book was printed in America
and is peculiarly difficult to obtain in London. The author died some
years ago. [\[For the purposes of this edition, all references to
Ancient Society are from the Charles H. Kerr edition, Chicago. ---
Ed.\]]{.context}

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Preface (1891)](preface2.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
