Frederick Engels\
Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State

# Preface to the Fourth Edition, 1891

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

The earlier large editions of this work have been out of print now for
almost half a year, and for some time the publisher has been asking me
to prepare a new edition. Until now, more urgent work kept me from doing
so. Since the appearance of the first edition seven years have elapsed,
during which our knowledge of the primitive forms of the family has made
important advances. There was, therefore, plenty to do in the way of
improvements and additions; all the more so as the proposed stereotyping
of the present text will make any further alterations impossible for
some time.

I have accordingly submitted the whole text to a careful revision and
made a number of additions which, I hope, take due account of the
present state of knowledge. I also give in the course of this preface a
short review of the development of the history of the family from
Bachofen to Morgan; I do so chiefly because the chauvinistically
inclined English anthropologists are still striving their utmost to kill
by silence the revolution which Morgan's discoveries have effected in
our conception of primitive history, while they appropriate his results
without the slightest compunction. Elsewhere also the example of England
is in some cases followed only too closely.

My work has been translated into a number of other languages. First,
Italian: *L'origine delta famiglia, delta proprieta privata e dello
stato, versions riveduta dall'autore, di Pasquale Martignetti*,
Benevento, 1885. Then, Rumanian: *Origina famdei, proprietatei private
si a statului, traducere de Joan Nadeide*, in the Yassy periodical
*Contemporanul*, September, 1885, to May, 1886. Further, Danish:
*Familjens, Privatejendommens og Statens Oprindelse, Dansk, af
Forfattern gennemgaaet Udgave, besorget af Gerson Trier*, Kobenhavn,
1888. A French translation by Henri Rave, based on the present German
edition, is on the press.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the beginning of the sixties, one cannot speak of a history of
the family. In this field, the science of history was still completely
under the influence of the five books of Moses. The patriarchal form of
the family, which was there described in greater detail than anywhere
else, was not only assumed without question to be the oldest form, but
it was also identified -- minus its polygamy -- with the bourgeois
family of today, so that the family had really experienced no historical
development at all; at most it was admitted that in primitive times
there might have been a period of sexual promiscuity. It is true that in
addition to the monogamous form of the family, two other forms were
known to exist -- polygamy in the Orient and polyandry in India and
Tibet; but these three forms could not be arranged in any historical
order and merely appeared side by side without any connection. That
among some peoples of ancient history, as well as among some savages
still alive today, descent was reckoned, not from the father, but from
the mother, and that the female line was therefore regarded as alone
valid; that among many peoples of the present day in every continent
marriage is forbidden within certain large groups which at that time had
not been closely studied -- these facts were indeed known and fresh
instances of them were continually being collected. But nobody knew what
to do with them, and even as late as E. B. Tylor's *Researches into the
Early History of Mankind, etc.* (1865) they are listed as mere "curious
customs", side by side with the prohibition among some savages against
touching burning wood with an iron tool and similar religious
mumbo-jumbo.

The history of the family dates from 1861, from the publication of
Bachofen's *Mutterrecht*. \[Mother-right, matriarchate -- Ed.\] In this
work the author advances the following propositions:

\(1\) That originally man lived in a state of sexual promiscuity, to
describe which Bachofen uses the mistaken term "hetaerism";

\(2\) that such promiscuity excludes any certainty of paternity, and
that descent could therefore be reckoned only in the female line,
according to mother-right, and that this was originally the case amongst
all the peoples of antiquity;

\(3\) that since women, as mothers, were the only parents of the younger
generation that were known with certainty, they held a position of such
high respect and honor that it became the foundation, in Bachofen's
conception, of a regular rule of women (gynaecocracy);

\(4\) that the transition to monogamy, where the woman belonged to one
man exclusively, involved a violation of a primitive religious law (that
is, actually a violation of the traditional right of the other men to
this woman), and that in order to expiate this violation or to purchase
indulgence for it the woman had to surrender herself for a limited
period[.]{#art}

Bachofen finds the proofs of these assertions in innumerable passages of
ancient classical literature, which he collected with immense industry.
According to him, the development from "hetaerism" to monogamy and from
mother-right to father-right is accomplished, particularly among the
Greeks, as the consequence of an advance in religious conceptions,
introducing into the old hierarchy of the gods, representative of the
old outlook, new divinities, representative of the new outlook, who push
the former more and more into the background. Thus, according to
Bachofen, it is not the development of men's actual conditions of life,
but the religious reflection of these conditions inside their heads,
which has brought about the historical changes in the social position of
the sexes in relation to each other. In accordance with this view,
Bachofen interprets the *Oresteia* of Aschylus as the dramatic
representation of the conflict between declining mother-right and the
new father-right that arose and triumphed in the heroic age. For the
sake of her paramour, Ægisthus, Clytemnestra slays her husband,
Agamemnon, on his return from the Trojan War; but Orestes, the son of
Agamemnon and herself, avenges his father's murder by slaying his
mother. For this act he is pursued by the Furies, the demonic guardians
of mother-right, according to which matricide is the gravest and most
inexpiable crime. But Apollo, who by the voice of his oracle had
summoned Orestes to this deed, and Athena, who is called upon to give
judgment -- the two deities who here represent the new patriarchal order
-- take Orestes under their protection; Athena hears both sides. The
whole matter of the dispute is briefly summed up in the debate which now
takes place between Orestes and the Furies. Orestes contends that
Clytemnestra has committed a double crime; she has slain *her* husband
and thus she has also slain *his* father. Why should the Furies pursue
him, and not her, seeing that she is by far the more guilty? The answer
is striking: "She was not kin by blood to the man she slew."

The murder of a man not related by blood, even if he be the husband of
the murderess, is expiable and does not concern the Furies; their office
is solely to punish murder between blood relations, and of such murders
the most grave and the most inexpiable, according to mother-right, is
matricide. Apollo now comes forward in Orestes' defense; Athena calls
upon the Areopagites -- the Athenian jurors -- to vote; the votes for
Orestes' condemnation and for his acquittal are equal; Athena, as
president, gives her vote for Orestes and acquits him. Father-right has
triumphed over mother-right, the "gods of young descent," as the Furies
themselves call them, have triumphed over the Furies; the latter then
finally allow themselves to be persuaded to take up a new office in the
service of the new order.

This new but undoubtedly correct interpretation of the *Oresteia* is one
of the best and finest passages in the whole book, but it proves at the
same time that Bachofen believes at least as much as Æschylus did in the
Furies, Apollo, and Athena; for, at bottom, he believes that the
overthrow of mother-right by father-right was a miracle wrought during
the Greek heroic age by these divinities. That such a conception, which
makes religion the lever of world history, must finally end in pure
mysticism, is clear. It is therefore a tough and by no means always a
grateful task to plow through Bachofen's solid tome. But all that does
not lessen his importance as a pioneer. He was the first to replace the
vague phrases about some unknown primitive state of sexual promiscuity
by proofs of the following facts: that abundant traces survive in old
classical literature of a state prior to monogamy among the Greeks and
Asiatics when not only did a man have sexual intercourse with several
women, but a woman with several men, without offending against morality;
that this custom did not disappear without leaving its traces in the
limited surrender which was the price women had to pay for the right to
monogamy; that therefore descent could originally be reckoned only in
the female line, from mother to mother; that far into the period of
monogamy, with its certain or at least acknowledged paternity, the
female line was still alone recognized; and that the original position
of the mothers, as the only certain parents of their children, secured
for them, and thus for their whole sex, a higher social position than
women have ever enjoyed since. Bachofen did not put these statements as
clearly as this, for he was hindered by his mysticism. But he proved
them; and in 1861 that was a real revolution.

Bachofen's massive volume was written in German, the language of the
nation which at that time interested itself less than any other in the
prehistory of the modern family. Consequently, he remained unknown. His
first successor in the same field appeared in 1865, without ever having
heard of Bachofen.

This successor was J. F. McLennan, the exact opposite of his
predecessor. Instead of a mystic of genius, we have the dry-as-dust
jurist; instead of the exuberant imagination of a poet, the plausible
arguments of a barrister defending his brief. McLennan finds among many
savage, barbarian, and even civilized peoples of ancient and modern
times a form of marriage in which the bridegroom, alone or with his
friends, must carry off the bride from her relations by a show of force.
This custom must be the survival of an earlier custom when the men of
one tribe did in fact carry off their wives by force from other tribes.
What was the origin of this "marriage by capture"? So long as men could
find enough women in their own tribe, there was no reason whatever for
it. We find, however, no less frequently that among undeveloped peoples
there are certain groups (which in 1865 were still often identified with
the tribes themselves) within which marriage is forbidden, so that the
men are obliged to take their wives, and women their husbands, from
outside the group; whereas among other peoples the custom is that the
men of one group must take their wives only from within their own group.
McLennan calls the first peoples "exogamous" and the second
"endogamous"; he then promptly proceeds to construct a rigid opposition
between exogamous and endogamous "tribes." And although his own
investigations into exogamy force the fact under his nose that in many,
if not in most or even in all, cases, this opposition exists only in his
own imagination, he nevertheless makes it the basis of his whole theory.
According to this theory, exogamous tribes can only obtain their wives
from other tribes; and since in savagery there is a permanent state of
war between tribe and tribe, these wives could only be obtained by
capture. McLennan then goes on to ask: Whence this custom of exogamy?
The conception of consanguinity and incest could not have anything to do
with it, for these things only came much later. But there was another
common custom among savages--the custom of killing female children
immediately after birth. This would cause a surplus of men in each
individual tribe, of which the inevitable and immediate consequence
would be that several men possessed a wife in common: polyandry. And
this would have the further consequence that it would be known who was
the mother of a child, but not who its father was: hence relationship
only in the female line, with exclusion of the male line --
mother-right. And a second consequence of the scarcity of women within a
tribe -- a scarcity which polyandry mitigated, but did not remove -- was
precisely this systematic, forcible abduction of women from other
tribes.

As exogamy and polyandry are referable to one and the same cause -- a
want of balance between the sexes--we are forced to regard *all the
exogamous races as having originally been polyandrous* \... Therefore we
must hold it to be beyond dispute that among exogamous races the first
system of kinship was that which recognized blood-ties through mothers
only.

(McLennan, *Studies in Ancient History*, 1886. *Primitive Marriage*, p.
124)

It is McLennan's merit to have directed attention to the general
occurrence and great importance of what he calls exogamy. He did not by
any means *discover* the existence of exogamous groups; still less did
he understand them. Besides the early, scattered notes of many observers
(these were McLennan's sources), Latham (*Descriptive Ethnology*, 1859)
had given a detailed and accurate description of this institution among
the Indian Magars, and had said that it was very widespread and occurred
in all parts of the world -- a passage which McLennan himself cites.
Morgan, in 1847, in his letters on the Iroquois (*American Review*) and
in 1851 in *The League of the Iroquois*, had already demonstrated the
existence of exogamous groups among this tribe and had given an accurate
account of them; whereas McLennan, as we shall see, wrought greater
confusion here with his legalistic mind than Bachofen wrought in the
field of mother-right with his mystical fancies. It is also a merit of
McLennan that he recognized matrilineal descent as the earlier system,
though he was here anticipated by Bachofen, as he later acknowledged.
But McLennan is not clear on this either; he always speaks of "kinship
through females only," and this term, which is correct for an earlier
stage, he continually applies to later stages of development when
descent and inheritance were indeed still traced exclusively through the
female line, but when kinship on the male side was also recognized and
expressed. There you have the pedantic mind of the jurist, who fixes on
a rigid legal term and goes on applying it unchanged when changed
conditions have made it applicable no longer.

Apparently McLennan's theory, plausible though it was, did not seem any
too well established even to its author. At any rate, he himself is
struck by the fact that "it is observable that the form of capture is
now most distinctly marked and impressive just among those races which
have *male* kinship" (should be "descent in the male line"). (Ibid., p.
140) And again: "It is a curious fact that nowhere now, that we are
aware of, is infanticide *a system* where exogamy and the earliest form
of kinship co-exist." (Ibid., p. 146.) Both these facts flatly
contradict his method of explanation, and he can only meet them with new
and still more complicated hypotheses.

Nevertheless, his theory found great applause and support in England.
McLennan was here generally regarded as the founder of the history of
the family and the leading authority on the subject. However many
exceptions and variations might be found in individual cases, his
opposition of exogamous and endogamous tribes continued to stand as the
recognized foundation of the accepted view, and to act as blinders,
obstructing any free survey of the field under investigation and so
making any decisive advance impossible. Against McLennan's exaggerated
reputation in England -- and the English fashion is copied elsewhere --
it becomes a duty to set down the fact that he has done more harm with
his completely mistaken antithesis between exogamous and endogamous
"tribes" than he has done good by his research.

Facts were now already coming to light in increasing number which did
not fit into his neat framework. McLennan knew only three forms of
marriage: polygyny, polyandry and monogamy. But once attention had been
directed to the question, more and more proofs were found that there
existed among undeveloped peoples forms of marriage in which a number of
men possessed a number of women in common, and Lubbock (*The Origin of
Civilization*, 1870) recognized this group marriage ("communal
marriage") as a historical fact.

Immediately afterwards, in 1871, Morgan came forward with new and in
many ways decisive evidence. He had convinced himself that the peculiar
system of consanguinity in force among the Iroquois was common to all
the aboriginal inhabitants of the United States and therefore extended
over a whole continent, although it directly contradicted the degrees of
relationship arising out of the system of marriage as actually practiced
by these peoples. He then induced the Federal government to collect
information about the systems of consanguinity among the other peoples
of the world and to send out for this purpose tables and lists of
questions prepared by himself. He discovered from the replies: (1) that
the system of consanguinity of the American Indians was also in force
among numerous peoples in Asia and, in a somewhat modified form, in
Africa and Australia; (2) that its complete explanation was to be found
in a form of group marriage which was just dying out in Hawaii and other
Australasian islands; and (3) that side by side with this form of
marriage a system of consanguinity was in force in the same islands
which could only be explained through a still more primitive, now
extinct, form of group marriage. He published the collected evidence,
together with the conclusions he drew from it, in his *Systems of
Consanguinity and Affinity*, 1871, and thus carried the debate on to an
infinitely wider field. By starting from the systems of consanguinity
and reconstructing from them the corresponding forms of family, he
opened a new line of research and extended our range of vision into the
prehistory of man. If this method proved to be sound, McLennan's pretty
theories would be completely demolished.

McLennan defended his theory in a new edition of Primitive Marriage
(*Studies in Ancient History*, 1876). Whilst he himself constructs a
highly artificial history of the family out of pure hypotheses, he
demands from Lubbock and Morgan not merely proofs for every one of their
statements, but proofs as indisputably valid as if they were to be
submitted in evidence in a Scottish court of law. And this is the man
who, from Tacitus' report on the close relationship between maternal
uncle and sister's son among the Germans (*Germania*, Chap. 20), from
Caesar's report that the Britons in groups of ten or twelve possessed
their wives in common, from all the other reports of classical authors
on community of wives among barbarians, calmly draws the conclusion that
all these peoples lived in a state of polyandry! One might be listening
to a prosecuting counsel who can allow himself every liberty in arguing
his own case, but demands from defending counsel the most formal,
legally valid proof for his every word.

He maintains that group marriage is pure imagination, and by so doing
falls far behind Bachofen. He declares that Morgan's systems of
consanguinity are mere codes of conventional politeness, the proof being
that the Indians also address a stranger or a white man as brother or
father. One might as well say that the terms "father," "mother,"
"brother," "sister" are mere meaningless forms of address because
Catholic priests and abbesses are addressed as "father" and "mother,"
and because monks and nuns, and even freemasons and members of English
trade unions and associations at their full sessions are addressed as
"brother" and "sister." In a word, McLennan's defense was miserably
feeble.

But on one point he had still not been assailed. The opposition of
exogamous and endogamous "tribes" on which his whole system rested not
only remained unshaken, but was even universally acknowledged as the
keystone of the whole history of the family. McLennan's attempt to
explain this opposition might be inadequate and in contradiction with
his own facts. But the antithesis itself, the existence of two mutually
exclusive types of self-sufficient and independent tribes, of which the
one type took their wives from within the tribe, while the other type
absolutely forbade it -- that was sacred gospel. Compare, for example,
Giraud-Teulon's *Origines de la Famille* (1874) and even Lubbock's
*Origin of Civilization* (fourth edition, 1882).

Here Morgan takes the field with his main work, *Ancient Society*
(1877), the work that underlies the present study. What Morgan had only
dimly guessed in 1871 is now developed in full consciousness. There is
no antithesis between endogamy and exogamy; up to the present, the
existence of exogamous "tribes" has not been demonstrated anywhere. But
at the time when group marriage still prevailed -- and in all
probability it prevailed everywhere at some time -- the tribe was
subdivided into a number of groups related by blood on the mother's
side, gentes, within which it was strictly forbidden to marry, so that
the men of a gens, though they could take their wives from within the
tribe and generally did so, were compelled to take them from outside
their gens. Thus while each gens was strictly exogamous, the tribe
embracing all the gentes was no less endogamous. Which finally disposed
of the last remains of McLennan's artificial constructions.

But Morgan did not rest here. Through the gens of the American Indians,
he was enabled to make his second great advance in his field of
research. In this gens, organized according to mother-right, he
discovered the primitive form out of which had developed the later gens
organized according to father-right, the gens as we find it among the
ancient civilized peoples. The Greek and Roman gens, the old riddle of
all historians, now found its explanation in the Indian gens, and a new
foundation was thus laid for the whole of primitive history.

This rediscovery of the primitive matriarchal gens as the earlier stage
of the patriarchal gens of civilized peoples has the same importance for
anthropology as Darwin's theory of evolution has for biology and Marx's
theory of surplus value for political economy. It enabled Morgan to
outline for the first time a history of the family in which for the
present, so far as the material now available permits, at least the
classic stages of development in their main outlines are now determined.
That this opens a new epoch in the treatment of primitive history must
be clear to everyone. The matriarchal gens has become the pivot on which
the whole science turns; since its discovery we know where to look and
what to look for in our research, and how to arrange the results. And,
consequently, since Morgan's book, progress in this field has been made
at a far more rapid speed.

Anthropologists, even in England, now generally appreciate, or rather
appropriate, Morgan's discoveries. But hardly one of them has the
honesty to admit that it is to Morgan that we owe this revolution in our
ideas. In England they try to kill his book by silence, and dispose of
its author with condescending praise for his *earlier* achievements;
they niggle endlessly over details and remain obstinately silent about
his really great discoveries. The original edition of *Ancient Society*
is out of print; in America there is no sale for such things; in
England, it seems, the book was systematically suppressed, and the only
edition of this epochmaking work still circulating in the book trade is
-- the German translation.

Why this reserve? It is difficult not to see in it a conspiracy of
silence; for politeness' sake, our recognized anthropologists generally
pack their writings with quotations and other tokens of camaraderie. Is
it, perhaps, because Morgan is an American, and for the English
anthropologists it goes sorely against the grain that, despite their
highly creditable industry in collecting material, they should be
dependent for their general points of view in the arrangement and
grouping of this material, for their ideas in fact, on two foreigners of
genius, Bachofen and Morgan? They might put up with the German -- but
the American? Every Englishman turns patriotic when he comes up against
an American, and of this I saw highly entertaining instances in the
United States. Moreover, McLennan was, so to speak, the officially
appointed founder and leader of the English school of anthropology. It
was almost a principle of anthropological etiquette to speak of his
artificially constructed historical series -- child-murder, polygyny,
marriage by capture, matriarchal family -- in tones only of profoundest
respect. The slightest doubt in the existence of exogamous and
endogamous "tribes" of absolute mutual exclusiveness was considered rank
heresy. Morgan had committed a kind of sacrilege in dissolving all these
hallowed dogmas into thin air. Into the bargain, he had done it in such
a way that it only needed saying to carry immediate conviction; so that
the McLennanites, who had hitherto been helplessly reeling to and fro
between exogamy and endogamy, could only beat their brows and exclaim:
"How could we be such fools as not to think of that for ourselves long
ago?"

As if these crimes had not already left the official school with the
option only of coldly ignoring him, Morgan filled the measure to
overflowing by not merely criticizing civilization, the society of
commodity production, the basic form of present-day society, in a manner
reminiscent of Fourier, but also by speaking of a future transformation
of this society in words which Karl Marx might have used. He had
therefore amply merited McLennan's indignant reproach that "the
historical method is antipathetical to Mr. Morgan's mind," and its echo
as late as 1884 from Mr. Professor Giraud-Teulon of Geneva. In 1874
(*Origines de la Famille*) this same gentleman was still groping
helplessly in the maze of the McLennanite exogamy, from which Morgan had
to come and rescue him!

[]{#1.1}

Of the other advances which primitive anthropology owes to Morgan, I do
not need to speak here; they are sufficiently discussed in the course of
this study. The fourteen years which have elapsed since the publication
of his chief work have greatly enriched the material available for the
study of the history of primitive human societies. The anthropologists,
travelers and primitive historians by profession have now been joined by
the comparative jurists, who have contributed either new material or new
points of view. As a result, some of Morgan's minor hypotheses have been
shaken or even disproved. But not one of the great leading ideas of his
work has been ousted by this new material. The order which he introduced
into primitive history still holds in its main lines today. It is, in
fact, winning recognition to the same degree in which Morgan's
responsibility for the great advance is carefully concealed.
[[^\[1\]^](#1)]{.note}

Frederick Engels\
London, June 16, 1891

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

### Footnotes

\
[]{#1}

**[\[1\]](#1.1)** On the voyage back from New York in September, 1888, I
met a former member of Congress for the district of Rochester, who had
known Lewis Morgan. Unfortunately, he could not tell me very much about
him. He said that Morgan had lived in Rochester as a private individual,
occupied only with his studies. His brother was a colonel, and had held
a post in the War Department in Washington; it was through him that
Morgan had managed to interest the Government in his researches and to
get several of his works published at public expense. While he was a
member of Congress, my informant had also on more than one occasion used
his influence on Morgan's behalf.

\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Preface (1884)](preface.htm) \| [Chapter One](ch01.htm)

[Origins of the Family](index.htm)
