---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# A New Labour Policy

### (1910)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Harp**, January, 1910.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, July 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

With this issue of **The Harp** we begin a new edition -- and a new
epoch of our existence. For the past two years this journal has been
printed and published in America as the official journal of the Irish
Socialist Federation of the United States. Many circumstances -- chief
among them being the cheering news of the reorganisation of the forces
of Socialism in Ireland on a basis wide enough for all the activities of
all its adherents -- have induced us to transfer the office of
publication to Dublin.

Socialism in Ireland needs a representative in the press devoted to its
cause, and unhampered by any other affiliation. That representative we
propose to be. It shall be our aim to place our columns and our poor
abilities at the service of all the brave and unselfish men and women
who are battling for social righteousness against the forces of iniquity
which control and poison human life today. We shall not demand that the
man or woman whose hand or voice is raised in protest or rebellion
against tyranny must be at one with us upon the means to be taken to
build the new social order; let us but agree that the social order must
be built anew to serve the ends of righteousness, and built upon a
recognition of our common heirship and ownership, and, we believe, the
incidents of the struggle against the common enemy will, in itself,
force the necessary tactics upon the mind of all. Therefore we can wait,
and we ask those socialists who differ from us in our conception of what
the tactics of the army of revolution should be, to wait also. Let us
have patience with one another; let us remember the truth that Irishmen
are ever ready to forget, viz., that we must tolerate one another or
else be compelled to tolerate the common enemy. This does not mean that
we have altered or abandoned, or propose to alter or abandon, our belief
in the correctness of the principles for which we stood in Ireland from
1896 onward. We still believe that those principles contain the
salvation of Ireland, socially and nationally, we still believe that the
struggle of Ireland for freedom is a part of the worldwide upward
movement of the toilers of the earth, and we still believe that the
emancipation of the working class carries within it the end of all
tyranny - national, political and social.

But we have come to the opinion that in the struggle for freedom the
theoretical clearness of a few socialists is not as important as the
aroused class instincts and consciousness of the mass of the workers.
Therefore we are willing to work and cooperate heartily with any one who
will aid us in arousing the slumbering giant of labour to a knowledge of
its rights and duties. Whilst we are as firm as ever in our belief that
the only hope for Ireland, as for the rest of the world, lies in a
revolutionary reconstruction of society, and that the working class is
the only one historically fitted for that great achievement, we are
prepared to cooperate with all who will help forward the industrial and
political organisation of labour, even should the aim they set for such
organisation be far less ambitious than our own. We invite the
cooperation of all who will work with us toward that end. **The Harp**
shall be a free platform from which every friend of freedom can voice
his aspirations without fear, favour or affection; this paper will not
muzzle its readers, and will not allow itself to be muzzled. We scorn
the puny weapons in the intellectual armoury of the capitalist enemy,
and we shall welcome the criticisms of our friends.

In conclusion then, let us state the work that, in our opinion, lies
before the socialists of Ireland as the more immediately pressing, after
the inculcation of the principles of socialism. That work is the proper
organisation of the working class of Ireland as a coherent whole, under
one direction and in one organisation. That the workers of Ireland be
organised on the industrial field not as plumbers, painters,
bricklayers, dock labourers, printers, agricultural labourers, carters,
shoemakers, etc., but that all these various unions be encouraged to
become sub-divisions of one great whole whose aim it should be to
perfect an organisation in which the interests of all should be the
interests of each - in which the right of membership should rest not in
proficiency at a craft or trade, but in the fact of being a member of
the working class. Such a welding together of all the forces of
organised labour in Ireland would make it possible to effect a
settlement of most, if not all, of the questions which today are the
stock-in-trade of every quack reformer and politician, as indeed they
have also been for fifty years and more. A militant organisation of the
working class of Ireland, in town and country, would have as dominant
and controlling an effect upon the fortunes of the Irish working class
as the Land League had upon the fortunes of the Irish farmer.

It would enable labour to dictate terms to the employing class, to raise
wages and to give greater possibilities of life and happiness to all, to
shorten hours and to give the parent more time to spend in the bosom of
his family, and give the working boy and girl more time to
self-improvement and study. It would create a force which could at any
time settle the question of supporting Irish manufacture by refusing to
handle all goods whose use or sale in Ireland tended to deprive Irish
men and women of a chance to earn their living in their own country, and
it would tend to create in the Irish working class the spirit of
self-reliance which comes from grappling with problems affecting a whole
class, as distinguished from the sectional selfish spirit which is bred
by our present system of independent trade unions.

It would do more. The feeling of power, the consciousness of strength
which would follow upon this unification of the forces of labour, would
develop in our working class an ambition to do and dare greater things,
to march forward to the achievement of their emancipation. The spectacle
of the whole force of organised labour in Ireland acting as a unit in
the enforcement of any demand made by any of the unions in the
organisation would make in the least thoughtful a newer, brighter, more
hopeful conception of human relations than is to be found in the ranks
of any unions which accept the capitalist idea of individualism.
Capitalism teaches the people the moral conceptions of cannibalism --
the strong devouring the weak; its theory of the world of men and women
is that of a glorified pig-trough where the biggest swine gets the most
swill. The idea of human relations which would grow out of the working
class of Ireland solidifying and concentrating their forces for their
common benefit -- and their abandonment of the idea behind the English
system of trade unions which has hitherto cramped and dwarfed their mind
and powers would make for human brotherhood and a conception of the
universe worthy of a really civilised people.

It shall be our purpose in **The Harp** to work for such a
reorganisation of the forces of organised labour in Ireland -- the
organisation of all who work for wages into one body of national
dimensions and scope, under one executive head, elected by the vote of
all the unions, and directing the power of such unions in united efforts
in any needed direction.

At present we shall do no more than suggest the idea to the trade
unionists of Ireland, reserving a fuller outline of the principles of
organisation involved until a future date. It is to be hoped that those
who are to-day loyally working for the benefit of organised labour,
under the hampering conditions of old style trade unionism, will
seriously consider the great advantages which this new style would give
to their organisations, and bring the subject of a national organisation
of labour in Ireland up for discussion in their unions. And let them
remember that the system of organisation we suggest is that which has
enabled the Industrial Workers of the World in America (the I.W.W.) to
defeat the Steel Trust, the most powerful Trust in the world -- to
defeat it in the very hour of its victory over the old style trade
unions; it has enabled the French Confederation of Labour to win last
year eighty-three per cent of its strikes; and it gave victory to the
agricultural labourers of Parma, Italy, despite all the military power
of the Government which aided the landlords and used the military as
scabs in the harvest field.

One other question we propose to drop here as a seed in the minds of the
toilers of Ireland, to germinate and fructify until the time comes to
harvest it. It is this; We have often heard our fellowworkers in the
ranks of organised labour in Ireland complain about City Councils, Poor
Law Guardians, Rural and Urban Councils, Catholic and Protestant
Churches, Railroads, Dock and Harbour Boards, and other public bodies,
as well as private capitalists, importing into Ireland articles which
could be produced as well in Ireland, and the production of which on
Irish soil would keep at home many thousands who are now compelled to
flee to the moral abyss of American or British cities. Now, suppose you
had a national organisation of Irish workers controlling all the
building and transport trades, as well as the others, and suppose the
executive of this union were issuing an order to its members to refuse
to handle transport, or work beside anyone engaged in handling or
transporting such imported articles, and suppose the toilers of Ireland
responded to such a call -- as the farmers of Ireland had responded to
similar calls in the Land League days -- how long do you suppose such
importation would continue?

Some socialists will accuse us of being chauvinistic. We are not. But we
believe that the toilers of each country should control the industries
of their country and they cannot do so if these industries have their
location for manufacturing purposes in another country. Therefore, after
long and mature deliberation upon the matter in all its aspects we
affirm it as our belief that the working class of Ireland should
prevent, by united action, the conquest of the Irish market by any
capitalist or merchant whose factories or workshops are not manned by
members of their organisation.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
