---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE A.F. OF L., WHAT IT SAYS AND WHAT IT DOES

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
August 28, 1910\

T he A.F. of L. claims to "unite" the workers; nay, more, in its "open
letter to ministers of the Gospel," it says: "Our mission is the
redemption of the workers from the bondage of industrial slavery."

Nice sounding phrases are these, and satisfying to some, but how do they
work out in their application?

In the first place, it is a well-known fact that the A.F. of L. does not
unite the workers. Granting the wildest claims of The A.F. of L.
officers as to membership, only a minority of the workers are organized.

The A.F. of L., as at present constituted, could not organize the
workers even if it would. It's scheme of organization makes no provision
for the *reserve army of labor*. Hence it organizes, not the men, but
the jobs, in certain lines of production, the lines in which the wages
permit the paying of dues and assessments.

Nor does it organize, nor desire to organize, *all* the workers even in
the trades "organized." It has so many jobs, hence it wants only so many
men. It has no use for jobless men. It discourages them, should they
seek admission, by its high initiation fees and other disheartening
conditions.

When it comes to "redemption of the workers from the bondage of
industrial slavery," the words are used as so much claptrap. The A.F. of
L., far from abolishing "industrial slavery," is committed to the
capitalist system"the system of wage slavery. It promulgates the theory
that the capitalist and the worker are brothers; it justifies its own
existence as the arbiter of the brothers, when they have spats, as
brothers will.

The A.F. of L., except when Sammy Gompers makes a little incursion into
the field of partisan politics, is nonpartisan. That alone proves the
nonlabor character of the A.F. of L. A union, worth anything at all,
would be a strict partisan of labor. Its politics would logically have
to be the classconscious politics of the working class, socialist
politics, because it is clear that no other politics could, or ever
would, promote the interests of labor.

It is clear to those who look beyond their noses that the A.F. of L. can
never make good its claim to be the labor movement. Its economic and
sociologic groundwork is false. It ignores the class struggle. The word
"capital" is Greek to it. It knows of the nature of the merchandise
"labor" only in the sense that it does a brokerage business in it.

Even with "good" men, such a falsely constructed body would go wrong at
nearly every step. Engineered by men who know that they stand on a false
basis, insofar as the interests of the workers are concerned, the thing
must go wrong at every step.

A labor organization, to be effective, must get away from the capitalist
idea of cornering the merchandise labor power. It must bend its efforts
toward overthrowing the system of industrial slavery.

The A.F. of L. is really an upholder of the very system from which it
declares it is going to redeem the workers.

It is, therefore, just what *The Wall Street Journal* acclaimed it \-- a
bulwark of the existing order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
