---
layout: default
title: 
---
![](../thepeople.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Vol. IV, No. 24.   NEW YORK, Sunday, September 9, 1894.   Price 3 Cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Daniel De Leon

# Social Character of Machinery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} *The People* , September 9, 1894.[Provided by:]{.info}
The Socialist Labor Party of America's Daniel De Leon Library.\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [Robert
Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org) of the [The Socialist Labor Party of
America](http://slp.org), Editor of *The People* &
[DavidWalters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm)\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive (DDLIA)
presents this work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of
America. For more information on reproducing these works, please contact
the [SLP](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T]{.cap}he only manner in which man can act upon nature is by motion.
In this respect John Stuart Mill observed: "Man moves a seed into the
ground; he moves an axe through a tree; he moves a spark to fuel; he
moves water into a boiler over a fire; the properties of matter do the
rest." In other words, "This one operation of putting things into fit
places for being acted upon each other by their own internal forces is
all that man does, or can do, with matter."

This is a statement of fundamental import, and John Stuart Mill so
highly valued it that he claimed the credit of having first made it.
Yet, with the usual shortsightedness of political economists, bounded in
their views by their narrow, middle-class environment, he utterly fails
to draw from it the only possible conclusion, viz., the social character
of machinery and the stupendous wrong done to man, a social being, by
the private ownership of the mechanical organs of motion.

Confined to the use of his own physical power, man is one of the most
helpless animals. In proportion to his size and requirements, he is
unquestionably very weak and slow. But the superiority of his organism
consists precisely in the aptitude of his brain and the fitness of his
hands for the contrivance and use of mechanical devices, through which
he may take from nature, by artifice, those forces in which he is
naturally wanting. Every such contrivance is to him like a new organ by
which his power of motion is increased. But the point is soon reached in
the development of these artificial organs, where a single individual
can {can not?} produce or use them. Beyond the most primitive of
hunting, fishing and cultivating implements, every tool, not to speak of
the more complex machine, requires in its make {making?}, or in its
handling, or in the purpose for which it is handled, the co-operation of
several individuals. In other words, all the benefit of machinery lies
in its social, co-operative use. Give a man all the knowledge and
machinery of this age, and place him on the richest land in a country
isolated from the rest of the world. Of what benefit will all that be to
him, as compared with the welfare which he can obtain among his fellows
in exchange for what he can produce with an infinitesimal part of that
knowledge and of that machinery? Mark, furthermore, that every tool,
like every form or product of knowledge, is, in fact, a social growth,
requiring the co-operation of successive generations. Show me a machine
to-day whose patentee can claim freedom of indebtedness to some
predecessors. From Archimedes to Watt; nay, from the first savage who
made use of a stone axe to the most eminent of modern inventors, the
social chain of observation, discovery and co-operation is unbroken.

From the comparative physical impotency of man in his natural state, and
from his inability to invent, make and use, unaided by his fellows, all
the tools he needs to multiply his power of motion in the degree
required for his safety and welfare, comes the social state, in which
the tool is necessarily a social organ; social in its origin, social in
its growth, social in its purpose, social in its incorporation of
natural forces which of right belong to all; set in motion by human
muscles, for the good of the social body, under the direction of the
social will. Hence the tendency of society itself to develop into a
constantly higher organism as the differentiation, power and
socialization of tools becomes more complete; while the social will,
enlightened by a better knowledge of the requirements of the body in all
its parts, becomes less uncertain, less undecided, less erratic, and,
therefore, less arbitrary or tyrannical.

More evidence might be adduced to show the social character of
machinery. Upon what precedes we may, however, safely rest the following
generalization: "Each man has an equal social right to multiply his
power of motion by all the social factors of civilization. Private
property in any of these factors is inconsistent with this fundamental
right; it must, obviously, prove a source of economic despotism and
industrial slavery."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
