---
layout: default
title: 
---
George V. Plekhanov 1899

### Historical Materialism and the Arts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written]{.info}: 1899\
[Source]{.info}: *Art and Society & Other Papers in Historical
Materialism*, 1974 Oriole Editions;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: Harrison Fluss for marxists.org, February 2008.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We shall state frankly at the outset that we intend to view art from the
standpoint of the materialist conception of history). What is the
materialist conception of history?

We shall first define the idealist view of history, and then show
wherein the materialist conception differs from it.

The idealist view of history in its pure form maintains that the
fundamental factor in the historical development of mankind is the
development of thought and knowledge. This view reigned supreme in the
eighteenth century and continued into the nineteenth. Even Saint-Simon
and Auguste Comte, whose views were in certain respects in direct
opposition to those of the philosophers of the eighteenth century, both
strongly upheld it. For instance Saint-Simon, who was interested in the
origin of the social organization of the Greeks ^[\[1\]](#n1)^,
concluded: "Their religious system served as a foundation for their
political system\... . The former was taken as a model for the creation
of the latter." As proof of this he cites the fact that the Greek
Olympus was a republican gathering; no matter how varied the
constitutions of the different Greek states, they had one thing in
common-they were all republican. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ This is not all. The
Greek religious system, which according to Saint-Simon underlay their
political system, was itself a product of their scientific knowledge,
their scientific conception of the universe. It was these scientific
conceptions which formed the very foundation of their social life; and
the development of those ideas was the mainspring of the historical
development of their social life, the principal factor in changing the
historical forms of their mode of existence.

Likewise Auguste Comte believed that "the entire social mechanism rests
in the final analysis on opinions."^[\[3\]](#n3)^ This is clearly a
repetition of the view of the Encyclopaedists, according to whom
"opinion rules the world."

Another variety of idealism found expression in Hegel's absolute
idealism. How does Hegel explain the historical development of mankind?
An example will suffice. Hegel asks: Why did Greece fall? After
mentioning many causes, he states that the main cause, according to his
philosophy, is that Greece was simply a manifestation of one stage in
the development of the absolute Idea, and it had to fall when this stage
was passed.

Hegel, while realizing that "Lacedaemon fell because of inequalities of
property," nevertheless maintains that social relations, as well as the
historical development of mankind in general, are determined in the last
analysis by the laws of logic, by the development of thought.

The materialist conception of history is diametrically opposed to the
above view. Whereas Saint-Simon, regarding history from the idealist
standpoint, declares that the social relations of the Greeks are to be
explained in terms of their religious beliefs, from the materialist
standpoint we maintain that the republican Olympus of the Greeks
reflects their social system. And whereas Saint-Simon, asked how the
religious views of the Greeks originated, replies that they are the
result of their scientific views, we, on the contrary, hold that the
historical development of these scientific views was determined by the
rise and decline of the productive forces which the people of Iliad had
at their disposal.^[\[4\]](#n4)^

This is our method of interpreting history. Is it correct? This is not
the place to ascertain whether it is or not. All we ask here is that you
grant us its correctness and join us in our study of art from this point
of departure. It is clear that the examination of a specific problem,
the problem of art, will be at the same time a test of our general
theory of history. If this general theory is wrong, then we shall
explain very little indeed of the evolution of art. If, however, we find
that this approach explains the evolution of art better than any other
theory, then that will in itself be a new and strong proof of the
soundness of our method.

But here we foresee an objection: Darwin, in his famous book, *The
Descent of Man,* brought together many observations to prove that the
sense of beauty plays an important role in the lives of animals. Our
attention will be drawn to these facts, and we will be told that the
origin of the sense of beauty must be explained biologically; it will
also be remarked that the evolution of the sense of beauty in man cannot
be explained merely in terms of the economic basis of society. Since
Darwin's view of the development of species is undoubtedly
materialistic, it will be urged that biological materialism offers
excellent material for criticism of one-sided historical (economic)
materialism.

This objection is a serious one and we shall reply to it. We shall do so
the more gladly because our reply to this objection will be at the same
time a reply to a series of similar objections based upon researches
into the psychic lives of animals.

First of all we shall attempt to summarize as clearly as possible the
conclusions to which we must come on the basis of the facts brought out
by Darwin. Let us see what his own conclusions are.

In the second chapter of the first part of his book, we read:

*Sense of Beauty --* This sense has been declared to be peculiar to man.
But when we behold male birds elaborately displaying their plumes and
splendid colors before the females, whilst other birds, not thus
decorated make no such display, it is impossible to doubt that the
females admire the beauty of their male partners. As women everywhere
deck themselves with these plumes, the beauty of such ornaments cannot
be disputed. The Bower-birds, by tastefully ornamenting their
playing-passages with gaily-colored objects, as do certain humming-birds
their nests, offer additional evidence that they possess a sense of
beauty. So with the song of birds, the sweet strains poured forth by the
males during the season of love are certainly admired by the females, of
which fact evidence will hereafter be given. If females birds had been
incapable of appreciating the beautiful colors, the ornaments, and
voices of their male partners, all the labor and anxiety exhibited by
them in displaying their charms before the females would have been
thrown away; and this it is impossible to admit. Why certain bright
colors should excite pleasure, when in harmony, cannot, I presume, be
explained any more than why certain flavors and scents are agreeable;
but assuredly the same colors and the same sounds are admired by us and
by many of the lower animals.^[\[5\]](#n5)^

Thus the facts given by Darwin indicate that lower animals have
aesthetic tastes which coincide closely with those of man.
^[\[6\]](#n6)^ This, however, does not explain the origin of these
tastes; if biology does not explain the origin of our aesthetic tastes,
it can even less explain their historical development. But let Darwin
speak for himself:

The taste for the beautiful, at least as far as female beauty is
concerned, is not of a special nature in the human mind; for it differs
widely in the different races of man, and is not quite the same even in
the different nations of the same race. Judging from the hideous
ornaments and the equally hideous music admired by most savages, it
might be urged that their aesthetic faculty was not so highly developed
as in certain animals, for instance, in birds. ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

If the taste for the beautiful differs with different nations of the
same race, it is clear that we cannot look for the causes of these
differences in biology. Darwin himself tells us that we must carry our
search in another direction. In the second English edition of his book,
*The Descent of Man,* we read the following:

With cultivated men such \[aesthetic\] sensations are intimately
associated with complex ideas and trains of thought. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

This is very important. It leads us from *biology* to *sociology,* as it
is obvious, according to Darwin, that social causes determine civilized
man's aesthetic sensations and the complex association of ideas
connected with them. But is Darwin right in assuming that such
associations exist only for civilized people? No, he is not, as we can
easily prove. It is known that an important role in the ornamentation of
primitive man is played by skins, claws and teeth. How is this to be
explained? By the combination of the colors and lines of these objects?
No. The savage, attiring himself in the skins, paws and teeth of a
tiger, for instance, or the skin and horns of a bison, exalts his own
skill and strength. He who conquers the skillful is himself skilled, he
who conquers the strong is himself strong. It is quite possible that
there is also some superstition intermingled with this idea. Schoolcraft
relates that "An ornament made of the claws of the grizzly bear, the
most ferocious beast of the West, is much coveted by warriors, who fancy
themselves, when carrying such a symbol, as being endowed with that
animal's courage and ferocity. It is in this sense an amulet as well as
an ornament. Indeed, there are but few of the ornaments of the Indians
that have not this two-fold character.\"^[\[9\]](#n9)^ Surely in this
instance it cannot be assumed that the Indians like the skins, claws and
teeth of animals merely because of the combinations of color and line.
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ No, the opposite is far more probable, i.e., that these
things were first worn merely as signs of bravery, skill and strength,
*and* only afterwards did they begin to call forth aesthetic feelings
and become ornamental. From this it follows that not only are aesthetic
feelings among savages associated with complex ideas, but they
occasionally arise under the influence of such ideas.

Another instance: It is known that the women of certain African races
wear iron rings on their hands and legs. "The wives of some of the
wealthy are often laden with iron to such a degree that, without
exaggeration, I may affirm, that I have seen several carrying about with
them close upon half a hundredweight of these savage ornaments. The
heavy rings with which the women load their wrists and ankles, clank and
resound like the fetters of slaves." ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ This, of course,
is rather inconvenient, but that does not prevent them from wearing with
pleasure these "fetters of slaves," as Schweinfurth calls them. Now why
is it so agreeable to a Negro woman to wear such fetters? Because with
them she seems, to herself and to others, more beautiful. This notion is
the result of a very complex association of ideas. Passion for such
ornaments developed, according to Schweinfurth, among those tribes
living in the iron age, for whom iron is a precious metal. That which is
precious seems beautiful, for the idea of wealth is associated with it.
A woman of one of those tribes seems to herself and to others to be more
beautiful when she wears twenty pounds of rings than when she wore only
ten pounds, i.e., when she was poorer. It is clear that it is not the
beauty of the iron rings which determines, but rather the idea of wealth
which is associated with them.

A third instance: Among the Batoka, of the Upper Zambesi, a man whose
upper incisor teeth are not pulled out is considered very ugly. Where
did they get this strange conception of beauty? It, too, was formed as
the result of a complex association of ideas. With their incisor teeth
pulled out, the Batoka try to imitate the ruminant animals; to us this
would seem to be a rather dubious ambition, but the Batoka are a
shepherd tribe that deify their cows and bulls. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ Here
again the beautiful is that which is precious, and we see that aesthetic
ideas arise on a foundation of ideas of quite a different order.

The best example, however, is the one quoted by Darwin from the
Livingstones. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^

Among the Makalolo the women pierce their upper lip and insert a ring
made of metal or bamboo, called a *pelele*. When an old Makalolo chief
was asked why their women wear these *peleles*, he was very much
surprised at such an absurd question. "For beauty, to be sure! Men have
beards and whiskers; women have none; and what kind of creature would a
woman be without whiskers, and without the pelele? She would have a
mouth like a man, and no beard, ha! ha! ha!!" The origin of this custom
is difficult to determine, but without doubt it is to be sought not in
the laws of biology, to which it obviously has no relation, but in some
complex association of ideas. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ In view of these examples
we feel justified in declaring that responses to certain colors and
designs, even among primitive peoples, are associated with very complex
ideas, and many of these forms and combinations seem beautiful to them
only because of these associations.

But what gives rise to these associations, and what is the source of the
complex ideas connected with these responses? Obviously this question
cannot be answered biologically, but only sociologically. Now if the
materialist conception of history provides a more adequate solution than
any other view, and if it can be shown that the aforementioned complex
association of ideas is created and determined in the last analysis by
the economic conditions and the state of the productive forces of the
given society, then we must admit that Darwinism does not in the least
contradict the materialist conception of history.

Although at this point we cannot dwell much longer on the relationship
of Darwinism to our doctrine, let us at least turn our attention to the
following:

It may be well first to premise that I do not wish to maintain that any
strictly social animal, if its intellectual faculties were to become us
active and as highly developed as in man, would acquire exactly the same
moral sense as ours. In the same manner as various animals have some
sense of beauty, though they admire widely different objects, so they
might have a sense of right and wrong, though led by it to follow widely
different lines of conduct. If, for instance, to take an extreme case,
men were reared under precisely the same conditions as hive-bees, there
can hardly be a doubt that our unmarried females would, like the
worker-bees, think it a sacred duty to kill their brothers, and mothers
would strive to kill their fertile daughters; and no one would think of
interfering. Nevertheless, the bee, or any other social animal, would in
our supposed case gain, as it appears to me, some feeling of right or
wrong, or a conscience. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

What conclusion is to be drawn from this? That in the moral conceptions
of men there is nothing absolute, that they change as social conditions
change. And what determines these conditions? What causes them to
change? On this matter Darwin is silent; and if we say, and prove, that
they are created and changed by the forces of production, according to
the development of those forces, then not only do we not contradict
Darwin, but we even add to what he has said and explain what he has left
unexplained. And this we shall do by applying to the study of social
phenomena the same principles that served him so well in the field of
biology.

It may seem rather strange to relate Darwinism to the materialist
conception of history. Darwin's sphere of activity was quite different.
He studied the descent of man as a zoological species. Those who are of
the materialistic viewpoint wish to explain the historical destiny of
this species. Their field of investigation begins where Darwin's ended.
Their work cannot replace that of the Darwinists; likewise the most
splendid discoveries of the Darwinists cannot replace their
investigations, but can only prepare the ground for them, just as the
physicist who prepares the grounds for the chemist does not thereby
invalidate the necessity for chemical research. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

The crux of the problem here is as follows: Darwin's theory appeared in
its time as a very great and necessary step forward in the development
of biological science, and satisfied the most searching questions put to
it. Can the same be said of the materialist conception of history? Can
it be said that in its time it too appeared as an inevitable step
forward in the development of social science? And is it now able to
satisfy all the demands put to it? To these questions we can reply in
the affirmative with absolute certainty. And we hope to show that this
certainty is not without foundation.

But let us return to aesthetics. From the above quotations it is clear
that Darwin views the development of aesthetic tastes in the same light
as the development of moral feelings. Human beings, like many animals,
have a sense of beauty -- that is, they are able to experience a special
kind of pleasure (aesthetic pleasure) caused by certain objects and
phenomena.

But what are the objects and phenomena which afford them so much
pleasure? This depends upon the environment in which they are brought
up, and live and act. Human nature makes it possible for man to have
aesthetic tastes and conceptions. His environment determines the
transformation of this potentiality into reality. This environment
explains how a given social man (i.e., society, nation or class) has
only certain aesthetic tastes and conceptions and not others.

This is the obvious conclusion of Darwinism, and it will not be opposed
by any historical materialist. In fact every historical materialist will
see in it a further confirmation of his view. Certainly none would ever
think of rejecting any of the well-known characteristics of human
nature, or of entering into an arbitrary discussion upon the subject.
Historical materialists have consistently maintained that if human
nature is immutable, then it cannot explain the historical process,
which presents a sum of constantly changing phenomena; on the other hand
if human nature changes with the course of historical development, then
it is evident that there must be some objective cause for these changes.

Therefore it is the duty of both the historian and the sociologist to go
beyond the limit of discussions about human nature.

Let us take even such a characteristic as the proclivity toward
imitation. Gabriel Tarde, who has done some very interesting research
into the laws of imitation, finds in them the soul of society. According
to his definition, each social group consists of a combination of beings
partially imitating each other and partially imitating a mutual model.
Imitation has undoubtedly played a very important role in the history of
all our ideas, tastes, styles and customs. The materialists of the
eighteenth century emphasized its enormous importance: "Man is all
imitation," said Helvetius. However, there is little doubt that Tarde's
theory of imitation is based on a false premise.

When the restoration of the Stuarts in England temporarily restored the
reign of the ancient nobility, this nobility was not in the least
inclined to imitate the extreme representatives of the revolutionary
bourgeoisie -- the Puritans; rather they displayed a strong inclination
to habits and tastes directly contrary to the Puritan rules of life.
Puritan strictness of morals gave way to extreme licentiousness. To do
and to love that which the Puritans had prohibited became a virtue. The
Puritans were very religious, the Cavaliers were latitudinarian, even
atheistic. The Puritans persecuted literature and the theatre; their
downfall was the signal for a new and violent passion for these things.
The Puritans wore short hair and condemned luxury in dress; after the
Restoration, long hair, elegant clothes and card playing became the
rage. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ In short, we discover not imitation but
contradiction, which evidently also exists in human nature.

But why did this sense of contradiction in the mutual relations of the
nobility and the bourgeoisie develop so strongly in England in the
seventeenth century? Simply because that was an age of bitter struggle
between the nobility and the bourgeoisie, or rather the "third estate."
We may conclude, then, that although man undoubtedly has a strong
tendency toward imitation, this tendency develops only in certain social
relations, such as those existing in France in the seventeenth century,
when the bourgeoisie consciously, though unsuccessfully, attempted to
imitate the nobility; recall Molière's *Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.* In
other social relations the tendency toward imitation is replaced by the
opposite tendency, which for the time being we shall call the tendency
toward contradiction. But we have expressed this incorrectly. The
tendency toward imitation did not disappear among the English of the
seventeenth century. In the mutual relations between the people of the
same class it was displayed as clearly as ever. Beljame describes the
Cavaliers as follows: "These people are not even unbelievers; they deny
a priori, in order not to be mistaken for Roundheads, and in order to
spare themselves the trouble of thinking." ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ About these
people we can say that they contradicted in order to imitate. But in
imitating the infidels they of course contradicted the Puritans.
Imitation proved to be, therefore, a source of contradiction. But we
know that if among the English nobility the weaker noblemen imitated the
stronger ones, this was due to the fact that disbelief was considered
good breeding, and it became such only by virtue of contradiction, as a
reaction against Puritanism-a reaction which, in its turn, came as a
result of the above-mentioned class struggle. Therefore at the basis of
all this complex dialectic of psychological phenomena there were facts
of a social nature; and from all this it is obvious to what extent and
in what sense the conclusion made above from Darwin's thesis is correct:
that man's nature makes it possible for him to have certain conceptions
(or tastes or inclinations), and that upon his environment depends the
transformation of this potentiality into reality-the environment makes
him have precisely these conceptions (or tastes or inclinations) and not
others. If we are not mistaken, this was admitted by one of the Russian
historical materialists:

If the stomach is provided with a certain amount of food it sets to work
in accordance with the general laws of digestion. But is it possible
through these to explain why in your stomach there is tasty and
nourishing food every day, while in my stomach this is but rare? Do
these laws explain why some eat too much while others die of hunger? It
seems that this explanation must be sought elsewhere, in entirely
different laws. The same is true of man's mind. Once he is put in a
certain condition, once his surroundings give him certain impressions,
he combines them according to certain general laws; and here again the
results differ extremely, according to the diversity of the impressions
received. But what places him in such a condition? What determines the
stream and character of those impressions? This is a question which is
not to be solved by any laws of thought.

And further: Imagine a rubber ball falling from a high tower. Its
movements are governed by certain well-known and obvious laws of
mechanics. But the ball strikes a sloping plane. Its movements alter
according to another also very simple and well-known mechanical law. As
a result a broken line of movement is produced, made possible by the
combined action of the two abovementioned laws. But where did the
sloping plane come from? That is not explained by either of the laws,
nor by their united action. It is exactly the same with man's thought.
Whence came the conditions according to which its movements are
subjected to the combined action of certain laws? This is not explained
by any of the separate laws nor by their combined action.

We are firmly convinced that the history of ideology can be understood
only by those who accept this sound and obvious truth.

Let us go further. In discussing imitation, we mentioned the tendency
toward contradiction as directly opposing it.

This should be studied carefully.

We know what an important role the "principle of antithesis" plays in
the emotions of men and animals, according to Darwin.

Certain states of mind lead, as we have seen in the last chapter, to
certain habitual movements which were primarily, or may still be, of
service; and we shall find that when a directly opposite state of mind
is induced, there is a strong and involuntary tendency to the
performance of movements of a directly opposite nature, though these
have never been of any service. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

Darwin cites many examples which demonstrate clearly that the "principle
of antithesis" explains a great deal about the expression of emotions.
We ask is this principle evident in the origin and development of
customs?

When a dog throws himself on his back before his master, his pose,
summing up as it does the very opposite of antagonism or resistance, is
an expression of obedience. The principle of antithesis is obvious here.
It is also evident in the case described by the traveller Burton. The
Negroes of the Wanyamwezi tribe, passing through their enemies' village,
carry no weapons, so as not to provoke a quarrel. Nevertheless in their
own homes, where they are comparatively out of danger, every one of them
is armed with at least a club. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^ If, remarks Darwin, a
dog turns up his maw, as if to say to his master: "Look, I am your
servant," then the Wanyamwezi Negro, disarming when it seems he should
be armed, in the same way tells his enemy: "The thought of self-defense
is far from my mind; I rely entirely upon your generosity."

The various modes of expressing grief also furnish illustration of the
principle of antithesis, David and Charles Livingstone state that a
Negress never leaves home without her pelele except when she is in
mourning. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^ "Whenever a Niam-niam has lost any very near
relative the first token of his bereavement is shown by shaving his
head. His elaborate coiffure-that which had been his pride and his
delight, the labor of devoted conjugal hands is all ruthlessly
destroyed, the tufts, the braids, the tresses being scattered far and
wide about the roads in the recesses of the wilderness."
^[\[22\]](#n22)^ According to Du Chaillu, in Africa upon the death of a
man occupying an important place in his tribe, many Negroes attire
themselves in dirty clothes. ^[\[23\]](#n23)^

On the island of Borneo, some of the natives, in order to express grief,
take off their usual cotton clothes and put on garments made of the bark
of trees, the kind used in ancient times. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^ Some of the
Mongolian tribes turn their clothes inside out for the same purpose.
^[\[25\]](#n25)^ In all of these instances, in order to express certain
emotions there is an action which is the exact opposite of that which is
considered normal, essential, useful or pleasant in the ordinary course
of life.

Thus, while ordinarily it is considered good to change from dirty
clothes to clean clothes-in cases of grief the opposite takes place, in
accordance with the principle of antithesis, i.e., clean clothes give
way to soiled. The aforementioned natives of Borneo were quite pleased
with their cotton garments, but in their time of sorrow the principle of
antithesis operates to cause them to revert to the ancient clothes made
of treebark. Until such time as their normal life is interrupted by some
grief the Mongolians wear their clothing like all other people, but
because this seems so normal they turn their garments inside out as soon
as something happens. A further and more vivid example: Schweinfurth
relates that many African Negroes "as a sign of grief \... wear a cord
round the neck." ^[\[26\]](#n26)^

In all these cases the emotion is expressed by an action contrary to the
one which is considered useful or agreeable in the normal course of
life. Because of the great number of such cases, we are convinced that
many customs owe their origin to the action of the principle of
antithesis. And if this conviction has any foundation in fact then we
can suppose that the development of our aesthetic conceptions is also
influenced by this principle. Is there any factual material to confirm
such a proposition? We believe there is.

In Senegambi, rich Negresses wear slippers which are so small that their
feet do not fit into them, with the result that these ladies are
distinguished by a very awkward gait. This awkward gait, however, is
considered extremely attractive. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^

How did this come about?

In order to understand this, we must first of all note that the poor,
working Negresses do not wear the abovementioned slippers, and have a
normal gait. They cannot walk like the rich coquettes do, because it
would consume too much time. And it is only on account of this
distinction that the awkward gait of the rich women is so attractive;
time is not valuable to them, for they do not have to work. In itself
this gait has no value; it becomes significant only by contrast with the
gait of the women who work. The principle of antithesis is obvious here,
but notice that it is called forth by social reasons: by the existence
of inequality of property among the Negroes of Senegambi.

Let us recall what we have said earlier about the morals of the
Cavaliers after the Restoration of the Stuarts, and it will be seen with
what a peculiar effect the tendency to contradiction operates in social
psychology. Such virtues as industriousness, temperance, strictness of
family morals, etc., were very necessary for the bourgeoisie, whose aim
was to occupy a higher social and political position. But did the
struggling nobility need the vices counteracting the bourgeois virtues?
No, these vices sprang up not as a weapon in the struggle for existence,
but as a psychological result of this struggle: hating the class whose
final triumph would end all the privileges of the aristocracy, the
nobility began to despise also all bourgeois virtues, and therefore
began to practice the opposite vices. This tendency to vice appeared as
a correlative change (if I may borrow this term from Darwin). In social
psychology such correlative changes occur quite frequently; one must
note them. At the same time, however, one must remember that in the last
analysis they, too, are called forth by social reasons.

From the history of English literature we know how strongly the
psychological action of the principle of antithesis, brought about by
class struggle, reflected itself upon the aesthetic conceptions of the
upper classes of society. The English aristocracy who lived in France
during their exile became acquainted with the French theatre and French
literature, which, being the product of a refined aristocracy, was more
suited to their own aristocratic tendencies than the English literature
and theatre of the Elizabethan age. After the Restoration, French tastes
began to dominate the English stage and English literature. The English
then began to berate Shakespeare in the same way as the French, who,
strongly adhering to classical traditions, considered him "a drunken
savage." His *Romeo and Juliet* was then considered bad; *A Midsummer
Night's Dream, "*ridiculous and insipid"; *Henry VIII* was found to be
"a simple thing," and *Othello, "*a mean thing." ^[\[28\]](#n28)^ Such
criticism of Shakespeare does not entirely disappear even as late as the
next century. Hume thought that Shakespeare's genius was overrated in
the same manner as disproportioned and misshapen bodies often appear
more gigantic than they really are. He censured the dramatist for his
total ignorance of all theatrical art and conduct.

Pope regretted that Shakespeare wrote for the people and did without the
protection of his prince and the encouragement of the court. Even the
famous Garrick, a worshipper of Shakespeare, tried to ennoble his "idol"
by omitting the grave-diggers' scene in *Hamlet,* and he gave a happy
ending to *King Lear.* But the democratic part of the English
theatre-going public continued to feel the deepest devotion to
Shakespeare. Garrick confessed that in altering Shakespeare's plays he
ran the risk of having "the benches thrown at his head" by the rabble.
His French friends in their letters complimented him on his *tres
hasardeuse entreprise* and the "courage" with which he faced the danger
-- *car je connois la populace angloise,* adds one of them.
^[\[29\]](#n29)^

The licentiousness of the nobility of the second half of the seventeenth
century was also reflected, of course, on the English stage, where it
became extreme indeed. According to Eduard Engels, English comedies
written between 1660 and 1690 almost without exception belong to the
realm of pornography. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ In view of this we can say a
priori that sooner or later in England (due to the principle of
antithesis) there would inevitably appear dramatic productions concerned
chiefly with depicting and exalting bourgeois virtues. Such plays were
indeed written and produced later by the ideologists of the English
bourgeoisie. However, we shall leave the discussion of this type of play
for the time when we speak of the French *comedie larmoyante,* the
sentimental comedy.

So far as we know the most brilliant observation of the significance of
this in the history of aesthetic conceptions was made by Hippolyte
Taine. ^[\[31\]](#n31)^ In his illuminating and interesting, *A Tour
Through the Pyrenees*, he tells of a talk with one of his table
companions, Paul, who, it is quite evident, adequately expresses the
author's own point of view:

You go to Versailles, and you cry out against the taste of the
seventeenth century\... . But cease for an instant to judge according to
your habits and wants of the day\... . We have the right to admire wild,
uncultivated spots, as once men had the right of getting tired of them.
Nothing uglier to the seventeenth century than a true mountain.
^[\[32\]](#n32)^ It recalled a thousand ideas of misfortune. The men who
had come out from the civil wars and semi-barbarism thought of famines,
of long journeys on horseback through rain and snow, or the wretched
black bread mingled with straw, of the foul hostelries, infested with
vermin. They were tired of barbarism as we of civilization\... . These
old wasted mountains \... refresh us after our pavements, our offices
and our shops. You only love them for this cause, and this cause
removed, they would be as unpleasant to you as to Madame de Maintenon.
^[\[33\]](#n33)^

We like wild landscapes as a change from city views, of which we are
tired. City landscapes and trimmed gardens were liked by the people of
the seventeenth century as a contrast from the wild countryside. The
action of the "principle of antithesis" is here obvious, and
demonstrates clearly to what extent psychological laws can serve to
explain the history of ideology in general, and the history of
aesthetics in particular.

The principle of antithesis played an important role in the psychology
of the people of the seventeenth century, just as it plays an important
role in the psychology of our contemporaries. Why then are our aesthetic
tastes so different from the tastes of the seventeenth century? Because
we live in an entirely different environment. Therefore we come to the
conclusion already known to us: the psychological nature of man enables
him to have aesthetic conceptions, and Darwin's principle of antithesis
(Hegel's "contradiction") plays an immensely important role,
unappreciated even to this day, in the mechanism of those conceptions.
But why a given man has certain tastes and not others, why he likes only
certain things and not others -- this depends upon his environment.
Taine's example illustrates well the character of those conditions: it
is obvious that these are social conditions whose totality is
determined-we speak abstractly for the time being -- by the course of
development of human culture. ^[\[34\]](#n34)^

Here we anticipate an objection on your part. You will say: "Supposing
that Taine's illustration points to social conditions as being
responsible for the action of the basic laws of our psychology;
supposing that your examples also point to the same. Is it not possible
to find examples that would indicate an entirely different conclusion?
Are there no examples indicating that the laws of our psychology operate
under the influence of surrounding nature?"

Our answer is that of course there are such examples. Taine's
illustration deals precisely with our reactions to nature. The point is,
however, that these reactions vary in accordance with our attitude
toward nature, and our attitude is determined by the course of
development of our social culture.

Taine uses the landscape as an example. It is to be noted that in the
history of painting, the landscape in general is not always regarded in
the same light. Michelangelo and his contemporaries neglected it. It
becomes important in Italy only toward the very end of the Renaissance.
For the French artists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries also
it had no particular meaning. In the nineteenth century there is an
abrupt change; the landscape comes to be esteemed for its own sake, and
young painters such as Flers, Cabat and Theodore Rousseau seek
inspiration in the bosom of nature, on the outskirts of Paris, in
Fontainebleau, and in Medon; the possibility of such inspiration was not
even suspected by painters of the time of Le Brun and Boucher. Why?
Because the social conditions of France changed, and the psychology of
the French changed as a result. And so in various epochs of social
development man has different reactions to nature, for he looks upon it
from different points of view.

The operation of general laws upon the psychological nature of man never
ceases, of course. However, since in each epoch human minds, because of
changes in social relationships, are saturated with different materials,
it is not strange that different effects are produced.

Another example. Some writers have expressed the thought that human
beings find ugly that which suggests the features of lower animals. This
is right when applied to civilized people, though even here there are
many exceptions: a lion's head does not seem ugly to us. Nevertheless,
despite such exceptions, we can assert that civilized man, conscious
that he is an incomparably higher being in comparison with the creatures
of the forest, fears to resemble them and even tries to exaggerate his
unlikeness. ^[\[35\]](#n35)^

When it comes to primitive man, however, we find a vivid and sweeping
contrast. It is known that primitive men often pull out their incisor
teeth in order to resemble ferocious animals; some dress their hair to
give it the appearance of horns. ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ Often this tendency to
imitate animals is connected with some primitive religious faith.
^[\[37\]](#n37)^ But this does not change the matter in the least. If
primitive man looked upon the lower animals as we do, there would be no
place for animals in religious performances. Primitive man, then, looks
upon them differently. Why? Because he stands on a different level of
culture. That means that if in one case men try to resemble animals and
in another try not to resemble them, then the difference of attitude
depends upon cultural conditions, i.e., again upon the social conditions
above mentioned\...Furthermore, we can express ourselves much more
clearly by saying it depends upon the degree of development of the
respective productive forces, upon the means of production. And in order
not to be accused of exaggeration and one-sidedness of vision, we shall
cite a quotation from the learned German traveller Karl von den Steinen:

We cannot expect to understand these men \[says he of the Brazilian
Indians\], unless we regard them as products of a hunting existence. The
bulk of their experiences has to do with animals, and therefore they
have explained to themselves the phenomena of nature, and formed their
outlook on life, chiefly by means of these experiences, since new
experiences can be understood only in terms of the old. Consequently
their artistic motives, as we shall see, are derived with a
disconcerting partiality from the animal kingdom. Indeed their whole
surprisingly rich culture is rooted in their hunting existence\...
.^[\[38\]](#n38)^

Chernishevsky in his dissertation *Life and Aesthetics* wrote:

We like plants with freshness of color and splendor of form, revealing a
life full of energy and strength. The withering plant is not good, nor a
plant which has little vital sap.

Chernishevsky's dissertation is an extremely interesting and remarkable
example of the application of the general principles of Feuerbach's
materialism to questions of aesthetics. But history has always been a
poor place for this kind of materialism as is well seen from the above
quoted lines. "We like plants." But who is "we?" People's tastes are
extremely changeable, as Chernishevsky remarks many times in his essay.
It is known that primitive tribes, such as Bushmen and Australians,
never adorn themselves with flowers, though they live in a country
redolent with their presence. The Tasmanians are said to be an
exception, but it is impossible to verify this, for the Tasmanians have
died out. At any rate it is very well known that in the ornamentation of
primitive hunting people who took their motives from animals, plants are
entirely absent. Contemporary science can explain this in no other way
than on the basis of productive forces.

The ornamental motives which the hunting tribes have borrowed from
Nature consist almost exclusively of animal and human forms. These
people choose thus precisely those phenomena that have the highest
practical interest for them. The primitive hunter leaves the care of the
plant-food, which he cannot indeed dispense with, to the women, as being
a lower occupation, and himself gives to the plants no special
attention. In this way we explain why no traces are found in his
ornamentation of plant motives which are so richly and gracefully
unfolded in the decorative art of civilized people\... . The transition
from animal to plant ornament is in fact the symbol of the greatest
advance that has been accomplished in the history of culture-the
transition from hunting to agriculture. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^

\[Primitive art reflects so clearly the state of productive forces that
now when there is doubt the state of those forces is determined by art.
Thus the Bushmen draw people and animals very readily and with
comparative ease; some of their grottoes are excellent picture
galleries. But they never draw plants. There is only one known exception
to this rule: in picturing a hunter hiding behind a bush, the crude
depiction of the bush indicates how unusual this subject is for the
primitive painter. On this ground some ethnologists conclude that if the
Bushmen ever had a higher culture than at present, which, generally
speaking, is not impossible, they most certainly have never known
agriculture.\] ^[\[40\]](#n40)^

If all this is correct, then we can formulate the conclusions which we
made above on the basis of Darwin's words: the psychological nature of
the primitive huntsman makes possible his aesthetic tastes and
conceptions; and the state of his productive forces -- the hunting state
-- determines that only these and no other tastes and conceptions are
formed. This conclusion, throwing a bright light upon the art of hunting
tribes, is also another argument for the validity of the materialist
conception of history.

\[Among civilized people the mode of production has a less obvious and
more indirect influence upon art. To the superficial observer this fact
seems to invalidate the materialist conception of history, but in
reality, when considered in the profound manner of a sociologist, it
gives it brilliant support.\]

Let us now consider another psychological law, one that has also played
an important role in the history of art, and yet has not had the
attention it deserves.

Burton tells us that certain African Negroes, while their music is at a
low ebb, and they remain contented with the simplest and most monotonous
combinations, yet take great delight in harmony. "The fisherman will
accompany his paddle, the porter his trudge, and the housewife her task
of rubbing down grain, with song." ^[\[41\]](#n41)^ Casalis says the
same thing about a tribe of the Basutos. "Sometimes, to lighten their
labors, the women assemble together, and grind their corn in unison,
singing an air which perfectly accords with the harmonious tinkling of
the rings on their arms." ^[\[42\]](#n42)^ The men of that tribe, when
they soften their skins, let out strange yells: "a mixture of nasal
grunts, clucking, and shrill cries, which, though most discordant, are
in perfect time \... every effort, every turn, is accompanied by one of
those strange sounds." ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ "It is more especially the time
that charms their ear. Those airs in which the measure is most marked
afford them the most pleasure." ^[\[44\]](#n44)^ "To increase the
pleasure they find in the regular movements of the hands and feet, they
hang about their persons garlands composed of little leathern bells.
\... It is for the purpose of excelling in their dance that the African
loads his person with glass beads and wears immense copper rings round
his neck, arms, and ankles." ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ The music of the Brazilian
Indians also reveals a strong sense of rhythm, although at the same time
they are weak in melody, and have no sense of harmony. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^
The same can be said of the natives of Australia. ^[\[47\]](#n47)^ In a
word, rhythm plays an important part in the lives of primitive people.
Response to rhythm, just as musical sensibility in general, is evidently
one of the principal characteristics of the psycho-physiological nature
of men. And not only men.

The perception, if not the enjoyment of musical cadences and of rhythm
is probably common to all animals \[says Darwin\], and no doubt depends
on the common physiological nature of their nerve systems.
^[\[48\]](#n48)^

In view of this one might assume that qualities which are common to both
men and animals do not depend on social conditions and certainly not on
the state of the forces of production. However, although such a
supposition seems logical at first sight it will not bear critical
examination. Science has shown that such dependence does exist. And let
us not forget that science has done this in the person of one of the
greatest economists, Karl Bucher.

As can be seen from the aforementioned quotations, man's ability to
notice and to enjoy rhythm leads to the fact that the primitive producer
in the course of his work readily follows a certain time and accompanies
the movement of his body with singing or with rhythmical jingling of
various trinkets. But what determines this rhythmical beat kept by our
primitive producer? Why only these and no other bodily movements? This
depends on the technological character of the given productive process,
on the technique of the given production. Among primitive peoples each
form of labor has its own song, the refrain of which is always adjusted
to the rhythm of the productive movements. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ With the
development of the forces of production the significance of rhythmic
activity in the productive process decreases. But even among civilized
people, for example in Germany, according to Bucher, each season's labor
has its definite song, and every task a music of its own.
^[\[50\]](#n50)^ It is also necessary to note that depending on how the
labor is performed -- whether individually or in groups -- the songs are
arranged either for solo singing or chorus, the last being divided also
into several categories. And in all cases the rhythm of these songs
follows closely the rhythm of the productive process. But that is not
all. The technological character of the process governs also the subject
matter of these songs. The study of the mutual relationship between
labor, music and poetry led Bucher to conclude that "while in the first
stages of their development labor, music and poetry were usually
blended, labor was the predominant element, the others being only of
secondary importance." ^[\[51\]](#n51)^

Since the sounds accompanying many industrial processes have in
themselves a musical function, and since for primitive people the
principal element is rhythm, it is easy to understand how their simple
musical compositions grew out of the sounds made by the contact of their
working implements with the object of their labor. They would emphasize
these sounds, vary the rhythm and adapt them to express human emotions.
^[\[52\]](#n52)^ In order to do this it became necessary to make changes
in the working implements, which were thus turned into musical
instruments.

The first implements to undergo such changes were those which the
producer used simply to beat or strike the object of his labor. It is
known that the drum was the first instrument to spread among primitive
peoples, and with many of them the drum is still their only musical
instrument. String instruments belong to the same category, for when
primitive musicians play these they beat along the strings. Wind
instruments take secondary place; the flute is often used to accompany
group work and provide a certain rhythm. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^ We cannot here
give a more detailed account of Bucher's theory -- in brief, he is
convinced that the origin of poetry lies in the energetic bodily
movements which we call labor, and that this applies not only to
poetical form but also to poetical content. ^[\[54\]](#n54)^

If Bucher's remarkable findings are correct, then we can justly say that
the nature of man (the physiological nature of his nervous system)
endowed him with the capacity to notice and to enjoy musical rhythm,
while his technique of production has determined the course of the
development of this capacity.

Scholars have already observed the close relationship between the
productive forces of primitive people and their art. But since in many
instances these scholars have been philosophical idealists, they have
recognized these relationships much against their own will, and have
given them a wrong interpretation. For instance a well-known historian
of art, Wilhelm Lubke, says that among primitive peoples art bears the
stamp of natural necessity whereas among civilized people it is a
spiritual consciousness. Such reasoning can only be defined as
idealistic prejudice. In reality, artistic creativeness is subordinate
to necessity no less among civilized people than it is among primitive
people. The difference is that among civilized people art's direct
dependence upon the technical means of production disappears. Of course
we know that this difference is important. But we also know that this
difference is caused by the development of the means of production,
leading to the division of social labor among various classes. This does
not contradict the materialist view of the history of art; on the
contrary it provides new evidence of its validity.

### \* \* \*

Consider the "law" of symmetry. Its significance is great and
unquestionable. In what is it rooted? Most probably in the construction
of the human, as well as animal body. That which is crippled or deformed
always leaves a very bad impression upon a physically normal person.

Thus we see that the ability to enjoy symmetry is also given us by
nature. To what extent this ability would have developed if it had not
been strengthened and nurtured by the mode of life of primitive people,
we do not know. We do know that the primitive man is principally a
hunter. This mode of life, as we have seen, leads to the cultivation of
animal motives in his decoration. And this leads the primitive artist,
from a very young age, to pay a great deal of attention to the law of
symmetry. ^[\[55\]](#n55)^

That the sense of symmetry in man is cultivated by these factors can be
seen from the fact that primitive peoples (and not only the primitives)
in their ornamentation use horizontal symmetry more than vertical
^[\[56\]](#n56)^: look carefully at any human figure or animal and you
will notice that horizontal and not vertical symmetry is more natural to
him. Furthermore it should be noted that utensils and weapons often
demand symmetrical form in accordance with their character and purpose.
If the Australian savage, in decorating his shield, acknowledges the
value of symmetry as it was acknowledged by the highly civilized
builders of the Parthenon, it is obvious that the sense of symmetry in
itself explains nothing in the history of art, and in this instance, as
in other instances, one has to say: nature gives man the ability, and
the practice and application of this ability is determined by the course
of development of his culture.

We use the term culture purposely. Reading it you will exclaim: "Who has
ever denied that? We only say that the development of culture is
determined not alone by economics and the development of the forces of
production."

Alas! Such objections are very familiar. However, it is difficult to
understand why even intelligent people cannot see the logical flaw in
these arguments.

As a matter of fact you would prefer that the course of culture be
determined also by other "factors." Now, does art belong among those
other "factors?" You will say that of course art does belong among them.
Then we have the following situation: The course of the development of
culture is determined, among other factors, by the development of art,
and the development of art is determined by the development of human
culture. The same can be said about the other "factors": economics,
politics, institutions, morals, etc. Then what do we get? We get the
following: The course of the development of human culture is determined
by the development of all of the enumerated factors, and the enumerated
factors are determined by the development of culture.

You must agree that in analyzing questions of social development one
must reason more seriously.

There can be little doubt that henceforth criticism (scientific theory
of aesthetics) will be able to make greater strides by relying more on
the materialist conception of history. It is our belief that in the past
also critics stood on more solid ground the more closely they approached
the historical views expressed above. For example we might consider the
evolution of criticism in France.

This evolution is closely related to the development of general
historical ideas. The scholars of the eighteenth century looked upon
history from the idealist point of view. They saw in the accumulation
and spreading of knowledge the most important and profound cause of the
historical development of mankind. If the spread of knowledge and the
general evolution of human thought actually represents the main reason
for historical movement, the question naturally arises: On what does the
evolution of thought depend? From the point of view of the eighteenth
century there is only one answer to this question: man's nature, and the
immanent laws of the development of his mind. But if the nature of man
in itself conditions the growth of the whole development of his mind, it
is clear that the nature of man conditions also the growth of literature
and art. It seems, therefore, that the nature of man -- and only this --
can and must give us the key to an understanding of the growth of
literature and art in civilized society.

Human nature is such that it lives through various stages -- childhood,
youth, middle age, etc. Literature and art also pass through these
stages in the course of their development.

"Which nation was not first a poet and then a thinker?" asks Grimm in
his *Correspondence Litteraire,* meaning by this that the flourishing of
poetry corresponds to the childhood and youth of nations, while the
accomplishments of philosophy correspond to maturity. This
eighteenth-century view was inherited by the nineteenth century. We even
find this in Mme de Stael's famous book, *The Influence of Literature
upon Society,* where there are also to be found the rather important
seeds of an entirely different outlook.

An attentive examination of the three different eras of Grecian
Literature, will enable us very distinctly to discover in them the
natural progress of the human mind\...Homer stamped the character of his
genius on the first epoch of Grecian Literature: the age of Pericles was
distinguished by a rapid progress in the Drama, in eloquence, in
morality, and by the first dawnings of philosophy. In the time of
Alexander, a more profound study of the philosophical sciences became
the principal occupation of those who possessed literary talents. It
must indeed be acknowledged, that the powers of the human mind require
to be unfolded to a certain degree, before it can reach the elevations
of poetry; but it must likewise be confessed, that the range of a
poetical fancy must be somewhat checked, when the progress of
civilization and of philosophy has rectified all the errors of the
imagination. ^[\[57\]](#n57)^

Meaning that once a nation has outgrown its youth, poetry must perforce
come to a certain decline.

Mme de Stael was aware of the fact that the younger nations,
notwithstanding all their intellectual achievements, had not made a
single poetical contribution which could be placed on a higher level
than the *Iliad* or the *Odyssey.* This threatened to shake her belief
in the continuous and steadfast improvement of mankind; she therefore
did not wish to part with the theory of the various ages, inherited by
her from the eighteenth century, a theory which would enable her easily
to dismiss the difficulties noted above.

As a matter of fact we can see that according to this theory the decline
of poetry resulted from the intellectual maturity of the civilized
nations of the whole world; but when Mme de Stael, leaving these
comparisons, turns to the history of the literature of the younger
nations, she is able to see it in an entirely new light. Especially
interesting are her chapters dealing with French literature.

French gaiety and French taste, have been proverbial in all the
countries of Europe \[she says in Chapter XVIII\], and that taste and
gaiety have generally been attributed to the national character: but
what is a national character if not the result of the institutions and
circumstances which influence the happiness, interests, and customs of a
people? Since those circumstances and those institutions have been
changed, and even in the most tranquil periods of the revolution, the
most striking contrasts have not been the subject of one single epigram,
or of one spirited pleasantry. Many of those men who have obtained great
ascendancy over the destiny of France, were destitute of every grace of
expression and brilliancy of understanding; perhaps even they were
indebted for some part of their influence to the gloom, silence, and
chilling ferocity, that pervaded both their manners and their
sentiments. ^[\[58\]](#n58)^

We are not here concerned with either the people to whom Mme de Stael
refers or the truth of her implications. In her opinion, national
character is the product of historical conditions. But what is national
character if not human nature as it appears in the spiritual
characteristics of a nation?

If a given nation's character is determined by its historical
development obviously this character could not have been a primary
factor in its development. Hence it follows that literature -- which is
a reflection of national character -- is a product of the same
historical conditions which determined this character. Which means that
it is not the nature of man, not the character of a given nation, which
explains its literature, but its history and social order. It is from
this point of view that Mme de Stael looks upon the literature of
France. Her chapter dealing with French literature of the seventeenth
century represents a very interesting attempt to explain this literature
in terms of the socio-political relationships of the period and the
psychology of the French nobility in its relation to the monarchy.

Here we find many shrewd observations concerning the psychology of the
ruling class of that period, and several correct predictions as to the
future of French literature.

Nothing similar to this \[the literature of the seventeenth century\]
will ever be witnessed in France while under a government of a different
nature, however it may be constituted \[said Mme de Stael\]; which will
be a convincing proof, that what was called French genius, and French
grace, were only the result of monarchical institutions and manners,
such as they have for many past ages existed in France. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^

This new theory of literature as a product of the social order gradually
came to be the predominant theory in European criticism of the
nineteenth century.

In France, Guizot repeats it in his literary essays. It is also
expressed by Sainte-Beuve, who, it is true, accepts it not without
reservations; finally it finds its fullest expression in the works of
Taine.

Taine held to the opinion that "every change in the state of men leads
to a change of their psychology." The literature and art of every
society is to be explained precisely by its psychology, because "the
production of the human spirit, as the production of living nature, is
explained only by its environment." Therefore in order to understand the
history of the art and literature of a country, one must study the
history of the changes which took place in the life of its inhabitants.
This is the absolute truth. It suffices only to read his *Philosophy of
Art, History of English Literature,* or *Italy,* to find many
illuminating illustrations. Taine, however, like Mme de Stael and others
of his predecessors, still clung to the idealist view of history, and
hence his apt and true illustrations did not serve him as well as they
might serve an historian of literature and art.

Since an idealist looks upon the progress of human thought as the
principal motive force of history, Taine concluded that man's psychology
is determined by his environment and man's environment is determined by
his psychology. This reasoning leads to a number of contradictions and
difficulties from which Taine, like the philosophers of the eighteenth
century, emerged by resorting to human nature, in the form of race. What
doors this key opened for him can be seen from the following example. It
is known that the Renaissance began in Italy earlier than in any other
country, and in general Italy was the first to emerge from the Middle
Ages. What was the reason for these changes in the environment of the
Italians? These changes were due to the peculiarities of their race,
answers Taine. We leave it to you to judge the worth of such an
explanation. Here is another example. In the Sciarra Palace, in Rome,
Taine saw a landscape by Poussin, and he remarks in this connection that
Latins, because of the peculiarities of their race, respond to a
landscape in a special manner: they accept it "only as decoration in
order to appropriate it and subordinate it to man"; whereas Germans love
nature "for itself." ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ Further on this same Taine,
discussing another landscape by this same Poussin, says: "In order fully
to appreciate it, however, one must love tragedy, classic verse, the
pomp of etiquette, and seigneurial or monarchical grandeur. The distance
between these and modern sentiments is infinite." ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ Now
why are modern sentiments so far removed from the sentiments of the
people who loved the pomp of etiquette, tragedy and classic verse? Is it
because the Frenchmen of the time of the "Sun King" belonged to a
different race from the Frenchmen of the nineteenth century? A queer
question! Taine himself persistently repeats that the psychology of men
changes with changes in their environment. We have not forgotten this
and we repeat after him: Our contemporary environment is far removed
from the environment of the people of the seventeenth century; therefore
our sentiments are far removed from the sentiments of the contemporaries
of Boileau and Racine. It remains to find out why the environment has
changed, that is, why the *ancien r & gime* gave way to the present
bourgeois system; why the Stock Exchange rules where once, without
exaggeration, Louis XIV could say: "I am the State!" And to this
question we find the only satisfactory answer in the economic history of
the country.

As you know, of course, various writers with different shades of opinion
have opposed Taine's view. We might say, however, that none of Taine's
critics has been able to shake that principle which embodies all that is
sound in his aesthetic doctrine, which is, in sum, that art is the
result of human psychology and that the psychology of men changes with
their environment. Furthermore, not one of them was able to perceive the
deep contradiction making impossible further development of Taine's
views. Not one of them realized that according to his interpretation of
history, human psychology, which is determined by historical conditions,
turns out to be the final cause of those conditions. Why did no one
notice this contradiction? Because it was part and parcel of their own
historical conceptions. What is this contradiction? What elements does
it consist of? It consists of two elements, one of which is called the
*idealist* view of history, and the other the *materialist* view. When
Taine said that men's psychology changes with their environment, he was
a *materialist;* but when he declared that the environment of a people
is determined by their psychology, he repeated the *idealist* view of
the eighteenth century. Needless to say it was not the latter view which
dictated his best work on the history of art and literature.

In order to avoid the abovementioned contradiction which so clearly
hampers the development of the profound and brilliant views of the
French art critics, one must reason as follows: The art of every nation
is determined by its psychology; its psychology, by its conditions; and
its conditions are determined in the last analysis by the state of its
productive forces and its productive relations. This is the materialist
view of history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[[1.]{#n1}]{.info} Greece had a special significance for Saint-Simon,
for in his opinion "it is among the Greeks that the liuman mind first
began seriously to concern itself with social organization."

[[2.]{#n2}]{.info} See his *Memoire sur la Science de FHomnic.*

[[3.]{#n3}]{.info} *Cours de le philosophie positive,* Vol. I, p. 48,
Paris, 1830.

[[4.]{#n4}]{.info} Several years ago \[in 1897 -- *A. F.\]* a work
called *Les Origines de la Technologic* was published in Paris. The
author, A. Espinas, endeavored to explain the development of the ancient
Greeks' *Weltanschauung* in terms of their productive forces. This is a
most important and interesting attempt, for which we must be very
grateful to the author, despite the many errors of the book.

[[5.]{#n5}]{.info} Charles Darwin: *The Descent of Man and Selection in
relation to Sex,* 2 vols., Vol. 1, pp. 63-64, London, 1871.

[[6.]{#n6}]{.info} According to Wells, Darwin overemphasized the
significance of aesthetic reactions on the part of the lower animals in
connection with selection in relation to sex. However, we will leave it
to the biologists to determine the validity of Wells' objection, and
proceed on the assumption that Darwin was correct.

[[7.]{#n7}]{.info} Darwin: *ibid.*

[[8.]{#n8}]{.info} Darwin: *op. cit.,* p. 92, London, 1874 (2nd ed.,
revised and augmented).

[[9.]{#n9}]{.info} Henry R. Schoolcraft: *Historical and Statistical
Information respecting the History, Conditions, and Prospects of the
Indian Tribes of the United States,* 5 vols., Vol. Ill, pp. 63-69,
Philadelphia, 1851-1855.

[[10.]{#n10}]{.info} There is a case, however, where objects of the same
kind are liked only for their color.

[[11.]{#n11}]{.info} Ceorg Schweinfurth: *The Heart of Africa,*
translated by E. E. Frewer, 2 vols. Vol. I, p. 163, New York, 1874. Also
Paul B. Du Cliaillu: *Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa,*
p. 33, New York, 1861.

[[12.]{#n12}]{.info} Schweinfurth: *ibid.,* Vol. I, p. 151.

[[13.]{#n13}]{.info} David and Charles Livingstone: *Narrative of an
Expedition to Zambesi,* p. 128, New York, 1866 -- *A.F.1*

[[14.]{#n14}]{.info} Later on we shall try to explain this on the basis
of the development ol productive forces in primitive society.

[[15.]{#n15}]{.info} Darwin: *ibid.,* Vol. I, p. 73.

[[16.]{#n16}]{.info} The biological research of the Darwinists, in so
far as it deals with the development of organic forms, cannot but
advance scientific methods in sociology in so far as it deals with the
development of social organization and its products: human thoughts and
feelings. However, we do not in the least share the social views of
Darwinists such as Haeckel. Many so-called Darwinists in their arguments
about human society do not use Darwin's methods, but only idealize the
instincts of the animals (mostly carnivorous) studied by the great
biologist. The social conclusions which Darwin reached on the basis of
his theory have little resemblance to the conclusions formulated from
his theory by the majority of his followers. Darwin considered the
development of the social instincts to be extremely vital to the success
of the species; those Darwinists who preach social struggle of all
against all cannot share this view.

[[17.]{#n17}]{.info} Alexandre Beljanie: *Le Public el les Homines de
Lettres en Angleterre au Dix-huilieme Steele,* pp. 1-10, Paris, 1881.
Also H. Taine: *Histoire de la Littera-ture Anglaisc,* Vol. 11, pp. 443

[[18.]{#n18}]{.info} Beljame: *ibid.,* pp. 7-8.

[[19.]{#n19}]{.info} Charles Darwin: *Expression of the Emotions in Man
and Animals,* p. 50, New York, 1873.

[[20.]{#n20}]{.info} Richard F. Burton: *The Lake Regions of Central
Africa,* 2 vols. Vol. 1, p. 307, London, 1860.

[[21.]{#n21}]{.info} Livingstone: *ibid.,* p. 127

[[22.]{#n22}]{.info} Schweinfurth: *ibid.,* Vol. II, p. 34.

[[23.]{#n23}]{.info} Du Chaillu: *ibid.,* p. 280.

[[24.]{#n24}]{.info} Friedrich Ratzel: *Volkerkunde,* p. 65, B. J.
Einleitung.

[[25.]{#n25}]{.info} Ratzel: *The History of Mankind,* translation of
*Volkerkunde* by E. B. Tylor, 3 vols., Vol. III, p. 326, London, 1898.

[[26.]{#n26}]{.info} Schweinfurth: *ibid.,* Vol. I, p. 154.

[[27.]{#n27}]{.info} Laurent Jean-Baptiste Berenger-Feraud: *Les
Peuplades de la Senegambie,* p. 11, Paris, 1879.

[[28.]{#n28}]{.info} Beljame: *ibid.,* pp. 40-41. Cf. Taine: *ibid.,*
pp. 508-512.

[[29.]{#n29}]{.info} See the interesting work of J. J. Jusserand:
*Shakespeare in France,* p. 301, London, 1899.

[[30.]{#n30}]{.info} Eduard Engels: *Geschichte der Englischen
Literatur,* p. 269, Leipzig, 1893 (3rd ed.).

[[31.]{#n31}]{.info} Gabriel Tarde had a very fine opportunity to study
the psychological action of this principle in his book *UOpposition
Universelle, Essai d'une Theorie des Contraires,* published in 1897.
However, for some reason he did not take advantage of this opportunity,
confining himself to a few minor comments. It is true, as he says \[p.
245\], that his book is not a sociological treatise. If it were, and if
he had abandoned his idealist point of view, he would undoubtedly have
covered the subject.

[[32.]{#n32}]{.info} Let us remember that this conversation takes place
in the Pyrenees.

[[33.]{#n33}]{.info} Hippolyte Taine: *A Tour through the Pyrenees,* pp.
194-196, New York, 1874.

[[34.]{#n34}]{.info} The operation of the psychological principle of
contradiction is already evident in the lowest levels of culture, from
the division of labor between the sexes; also from the distinctions made
in matters of dress noted by many travellers. For instance: "Here \[in
Bongoland\], as in every other quarter of the globe, the male sex
desires to be externally distinguished from the female, and they differ
widely in their habits in this respect" (Schweinfurth: *ibid.* Vol. I,
pp. 293-294), and the males \[of the Niam-niam tribe\] waste a great
deal of time on the arrayal of their hair, whilst the head-gear of the
women is modest and simple (Schweinfurth: *ibid.,* Vol. II, pp. 6-7).
See Karl von den Steinen: *Unter den Naturvolkern Zentral-Brasiliens,*
p. 298, Berlin, 1894, for a reference to the influence of the division
of labor between the sexes upon the dance. It may be said with full
conviction that the tendency on the part of man to distinguish himself
from women appears earlier than the inclination to consider himself
superior to the lower animals. Is it not true that in this instance the
basic characteristics of the psychological nature of man are expressed
in a rather paradoxical manner?

[[35.]{#n35}]{.info} "In this idealization of nature, sculpture was
guided by hints from nature herself; the chief emphasis was placed on
those characteristics which distinguish man from the brute. An erect
posture led to greater slenderness and length of the leg. The increasing
height of the forehead in the evolution of animal life led to the
formation of the Greek profile. The general principle, already
enunciated by Winckelmann, that in nature planes do not merge
imperceptibly into each other, but are sharply broken, permitted an
accentuation of the sharp edges of the eye sockets and the nostrils, and
of the equally sharp-edged contour of the lips." Herman Lotze:
*Geschichte der Aeslhetik in Deutschland,* p. 568, Munich, 1868.

[[36.]{#n36}]{.info} The missionary Heckewelder relates that once when
he visited an Indian whom he knew, he found him preparing for a dance.
Dancing, of course, has great social significance among primitive
peoples. The Indian had decorated his face in the following unique
manner: "When we viewed him on profile on one side, his note represented
the beak of an eagle\... .When we turned round to the other side, the
same nose represented the snout of a pike\...He seemed much pleased with
his execution, and having his looking-glass with him, he contemplated
his work, seemingly with great pride and exultation." John Heckewelder:
*History, Manners, and Customs of the Indian Nations who once Inhabited
Pennsylvania and the Neighboring States,* p. 204, Philadelphia, 1876
(new and revised ed.).

[[37.]{#n37}]{.info} Cf. J. G. Frazer: *Totemism,* pp. 26 ff.,
Edinburgh, 1887; Schweinfurth: *ibid.,* Vol. I, pp. 406-407.

[[38.]{#n38}]{.info} Karl von der Steinen: *ibid.,* p. 201.

[[39.]{#n39}]{.info} Ernst Grosser *The Beginnings of Art,* p. 156, New
York, 1900.

[[40.]{#n40}]{.info} See Raoul Allier's interesting introduction to
Frederic Christol's *Au Sud de FAfrique,* Paris, 1897.

[[41.]{#n41}]{.info} Burton: *ibid., Vol.* II, p. 291.

[[42.]{#n42}]{.info} E. Casalis: *The Basutos,* p. 143, London, 1861.

[[43.]{#n43}]{.info} Casalis: *ibid.,* p. 134.

[[44.]{#n44}]{.info} Casalis: *ibid.,* p. 150.

[[45.]{#n45}]{.info} Casalis: *ibid.,* p. 150.

[[46.]{#n46}]{.info} Von den Steinen: *ibid.,* p. 326.

[[47.]{#n47}]{.info} See Edward J. Eyre: "Manners and Customs of the
Aborigines of Australia" in *Journal of Expeditions of Discovery into
Centred Australia,* etc., Vol. II, p. 229, London, 1847.

[[48.]{#n48}]{.info} Darwin**:** *The Descent of Man,* Vol. II, p. 333,
London, 1871.

[[49.]{#n49}]{.info} Karl Bucher: *Arbeit und Rhythmus,* pp. 21-23, 35,
50, 53-54, Leipzig, 1896.

[[50.]{#n50}]{.info} Bucher: *ibid.,* p. 29.

[[51.]{#n51}]{.info} Bucher: *ibid.,* p. 78.

[[52.]{#n52}]{.info} Bucher: *ibid.,* p. 91.

[[53.]{#n53}]{.info} Bucher: *ibid.,* pp. 91-92.

[[54.]{#n54}]{.info} Bucher: *ibid.,* p. 80.

[[55.]{#n55}]{.info} I say from a very young age because among primitive
peoples children's games represent their education and serve to develop
their artistic talent. Christol points out that the children of the
Basutos make clay models of various animals such as cows, horses, etc.
Of course this sculpture is not art, but civilized people could not
compare in this respect with the little African "savages." In primitive
society children's games are closely related to the productive
occupations of their elders; this fact has a bearing on the relation
between play and social life.

[[56.]{#n56}]{.info} See the drawings of Australian shields in Ernst
Grosse: *The Beginnings of Art,* p. 124, New York, 1900.

[[57.]{#n57}]{.info} Mme de Stael: *The Influence of Literature upon
Society,* 2 vols., Vol. I, 83, London, 1812.

[[58.]{#n58}]{.info} Mme de Stael: *ibid.,* Vol. II, p. 48.

[[59.]{#n59}]{.info} Mme de Stael: *ibid.,* Vol. II, p. 61

[[60.]{#n60}]{.info} H. Taine: *Italy, Rome and Naples,* translated by
J. Durand, Vol. I, p. 222,

[[61.]{#n61}]{.info} H. Taine: *op. cit.,* Vol. I, p. 223 -- *A J.*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm) \| [Literary Criticism
Section](../../../subject/art/lit_crit/index.htm)
