---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1899

### A Critique of Our Critics: Part I: Mr P Struve in the Role of Critic of the Marxist Theory of Social Development

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 474-595. Scanned and
prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'These articles, "Mr Struve in the Role of a
Critic of the Marxist Theory of Social Development," were a reply to
Struve's article "Marx's Theory of Social Development," which was
published in 1899 in the journal *Archiv für soziale Gesetzgebung und
Statistik* (*Archive of the Social Legislation and Statistics*). They
appeared in *Zarya* (*Dawn*), the theoretical organ of the Russian
Marxists, which was brought out in Stuttgart. Planned as the first part
of the work, they contained, in particular, criticism of Struve's
revision of Marxism in the sphere of political economy and sociology.
The second part, which was never written, was intended to criticise
Struve's philosophical views. Pyotr Bernardovich Struve (1870-1944) --
Russian bourgeois economist and publicist, from 1890s representative of
"legal Marxism," then one of the theorists and leaders of the
Constitutional Democrat (Cadet) Party; after the October Revolution came
out against Soviet power, White émigré.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Article One

### I

Nachdem eine Sache zur Klarheit gediehen ist, finden sich immer gewisse
Gegner, die sogleich beflissen sind unter dem Scheine der Neuheit die
Sache wieder zu verdunken und unklar zu machen. Ich bin dieser Art von
Gegnern und Gegenreden häufig begegnet. -- Cuno Fischer ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Ces messieurs font tous du Marxisme, mais de la sorte que vous avez
connu en France, il y a dix ans, et dont Marx disait: tout ce que je
sais, c\'est que je ne suis pas marxiste, moi! Et probablement, il
dirait de ces messieurs ce que Heine disait de ses imitateurs: 'J\'ai
sémé des dragons et j\'ai récolté des puces.' -- From Frederick Engels'
letter to Paul Lafargue, 27 October 1890 ^[\[2\]](#n2)^

Mr P Struve has long been exercising himself in a 'critique' of Marx,
but until recently his 'critical' exercises were not marked by any
system: he confined himself, in the main, either to brief and prideful
statements to the effect that he, Mr P Struve, was not infected with
'orthodoxy' and stood 'under the sign of criticism', or to laconic
remarks on the theme that, in such and such a question, Marx's
'orthodox' followers were in error whereas the truth emanated from the
'critical' Marxists. However, brief remarks and laconic statements
explained practically nothing regarding the roots of the errors of the
'orthodox' Marxists or the proofs of the 'critics' being in the right.
One could only engage in surmises on the matter, the most probable of
which was that Marx and his 'orthodox' followers were in error because
they had not been blessed with the grace of what is known as critical
philosophy, one that so brightly illuminated the world-outlook of Mr P
Struve and his 'critical' fellow-thinkers. Although this surmise may
have been highly probable, the reader possessed insufficient data to
verify it. We now have these essential data at our disposal, so we are
now in a position, in our turn, to subject our 'critic' to criticism.

In the articles we propose to offer the reader, we would like to analyse
the 'critical essay' published by Mr P Struve in *Brauns Archiv*
^[\[3\]](#n3)^ under the title of 'Die Marxsche Theorie der sozialen
Entwickelung', ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ his review, published in the same book of
the *Archiv*, of Eduard Bernstein's well-known book *Die Voraussetzungen
des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie*, and Kautsky's no
less well-known reply to Bernstein, 'Bernstein und das
Sozialdemokratische Programm'. This 'critical essay' and this no less
'critical' review are highly characteristic both of our author's devices
and his mode of thinking.

In his essay, Mr P Struve remarks, he dealt not so much with the
materialist understanding of history in all its plenitude as with 'its
special application to the development from capitalism to socialism'.
But while his 'criticism' is directed only against *part* of Marx's
theory of social development, it touches, at the same time, upon *all*
that theory in general and even upon some of its philosophical promises.
Thus, it provides ample material for our *criticism* of the *critic*.
But first let us hear what Mr Struve has to say.

He asserts that the part of Marx's theory he is subjecting to analysis
has a triple foundation, namely: 1) the theory of the development of the
productive forces in capitalist society or, in other words, 'the theory
of the socialisation and concentration of production, and the theory of
industrial anarchy in capitalist society\'; 2) the theory of the
deterioration of the conditions of the lower classes of society, or 'the
theory of the impoverishment and the theory of the expropriation of the
petty capitalists by the big ones', and finally, 3) the theory of the
revolutionary role of the proletariat, that is, 'the theory of the
socialist mission of the proletariat, which is formed by the development
of capitalism and grows in the course of that development'.

In his explanation of the latter theory, Mr P Struve goes on to add:

The proletariat is subjected to impoverishment, but at the same time
achieves a social and political maturity which makes it capable of
overthrowing the capitalist system through an active class struggle, and
replacing it with the socialist system.

But what does our critic think of this triple foundation of Marx's
theory?

While he does not take up the question of whether Marx gave a correct
definition of the *relative* importance of each of these three trends,
Mr P Struve recognises their actual existence in capitalist society of
the first half of the nineteenth century; the theory of impoverishment
is a simple statement of fact; the development of the productive forces
was there for all to see; the proletariat's revolutionary actions,
ranging from spontaneous outbursts to the communist movement, were
questions of the day. However, in our critic's opinion, Marx was grossly
in error in asserting that the trends he had named led *to socialism*.
That assertion had no real foundation, and was simply a *utopia*.
^[\[5\]](#n5)^ The triumph of socialism was quite impossible as long as
the impoverishment of the masses was an indisputable fact. The workers'
impoverishment was incompatible with a degree of maturity in that class
that would render it capable of carrying through the socialist
revolution. That was why the actual state of things in the 1840s left no
room for a social optimism to which any utopia is alien: were capitalism
really doomed to collapse, there would be nobody to erect the edifice of
socialism on its ruins. If, nevertheless, all pessimism was quite alien
to Marx, that was due to the very groundlessness of his socio-political
world-outlook:

*An imperative psychological urge to prove the historical necessity of
an economic order based on collectivism* \[says Mr P Struve\] *forced
the socialist Marx, in the 1840s, to deduce \[deduzieren\] socialism
from more than insufficient premises*. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

Marx subsequently substantially modified, in Mr P Struve's opinion, his
pessimistic view of the conditions of the working class in capitalist
society but did not reject it completely and quite consciously. The
glaring contradiction between the impoverishment of the working class,
on the one hand, and society's development towards socialism, on the
other, remained beyond his purview: 'This actual contradiction even
acquired, in his eyes, a lawful appearance, presenting itself to him as
a dialectical contradiction that was striving towards its resolution.'
^[\[7\]](#n7)^ In view of this strange psychological aberration, there
is nothing surprising in Mr P Struve's seeing himself forced to turn his
attention to the 'doctrine of development through the growth of
contradictions' (\'*durch Steigerung der Widersprüche*'), and subjecting
that doctrine to close analysis.

### II

Our critic has 'taken' two phenomena, *A* and *B*, which are mutually
antagonistic, and argues as follows.

If a growth of contradictions actually takes place here, then the
development of the two mutually contradictory elements will be expressed
in the following formula: *Formula I, which Mr P Struve calls a formula
of contradiction*:

*A*

*B*

2*A*

2*B*

3*A*

3*B*

4*A*

4*B*

5*A*

5*B*

6*A*

6*B*

\...

\...

*nA*

*nB*

Each of these two phenomena, *A* and *B*, grows through the accumulation
of homogeneous elements (*Häufung des Gleichartigen*); simultaneously
with and thanks to that, the contradiction existing between them also
grows, which is ultimately eliminated by the victory of the stronger
phenomenon over the weaker: *nA* destroys *nB*.

But, Mr P Struve observes, we can imagine that, in social reality, there
exist contradictions of quite another kind expressed by a quite
different formula: *Formula II, which we propose calling a formula of
blunted contradiction*:

  ------ ------
  *A*    *B*
  2*A*   2*B*
  3*A*   3*B*
  4*A*   2*B*
  5*A*   *B*
  6*A*   0*B*
  ------ ------

In each of these instances ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ as expressed by the two
formulas, there is a certain *interaction* between *A* and *B*. But
whilst, in the first instance, the growth of *A* invariably leads to the
growth of *B* as well, that is, to the *sharpening of the contradiction*
between these two phenomena, in the second instance, the operation of
the constantly growing *A* brings about an increase in the coefficient
of *B* only at the outset, and then, *exceeding a definite finite
limit*, it leads to its decrease, and consequently also *to a
slackening* of that *contradiction*. Thus, the contradiction is resolved
here through a '*blunting*' (*durch 'Abstumpfung*'). ^[\[9\]](#n9)^

Mr P Struve considers 'fabulous' the idea that 'at its decisive turns,
social development takes place exclusively according to the first
formula'. But who expressed that 'dogma', and when? With Mr P Struve, it
follows that it is held by all 'orthodox' Marxists. That is quite wrong.
We think that hardly any of Marx's serious followers will agree to
recognise Mr P Struve's 'first formula' as correct. Without recognition
of the correctness of either formula, it cannot, of course, be asserted
that it is (\'exclusively') after that formula that the historical
advance takes place. Mr P Struve has awarded this 'fabulous dogma' to
his 'orthodox opponents' with excessive haste.

Later, in the last chapter but one of this article, we shall give a
detailed analysis of Mr P Struve's first formula, and show its
erroneousness. And now we shall invite the reader to turn his attention
to his second formula.

It is designed to express the interaction between *A* and *B*. However,
that interaction presupposes both the action of *A* on *B* and,
conversely, the action of *B* on *A*. Mr P Struve does not say what the
latter consists in; he limits himself to determining the action of *A*
on *B*. From the formula itself and the accompanying explanations, we
have learned that, up to a certain limit, the growth of *A* also
conditions the *growth* of *B*, and then, *beyond that limit*, it leads,
on the contrary, to a *decrease* in *B*. But what does that mean? It
means that the limit indicated is a point beyond which *A*'s *impact on
B turns into its direct opposite*. Mr P Struve's second formula can
therefore serve as quite a good, so to say, algebraical example of that
*transition of quantitative changes into qualitative* which is met at
every step both in Nature and in social life but is nevertheless
numbered by our 'critics' (from the camp of the 'theorists of
cognition') among the 'fabulous dogmas' invented by Hegel and accepted
on trust by Marx and his 'orthodox' followers.

After inviting the reader to remember this example, which will prove
very useful to us later, we shall proceed.

Our critic remarks that consideration of the 'formula of contradiction'
acquires particular interest when it is compared with the fundamental
idea of the materialist explanation of history. That is true for many
reasons and, incidentally, because, coming from Mr P Struve, that
comparison shows us whether he has correctly understood the writer he is
criticising.

Mr P Struve begins that comparison with an excerpt from the frequently
quoted and probably universally known Preface to Marx's *Zur Kritik der
politischen Oekonomie*:

The mode of production of material life conditions the general process
of social, political and intellectual life\... At a certain stage of
development, the material productive forces of society come into
conflict with the existing relations of production or -- this merely
expresses the same thing in legal terms -- with the property relations
within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of
development of the productive forces these relations turn into their
fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the
economic foundation lead sooner or later to the transformation of the
whole immense superstructure\... ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ No social order is
ever destroyed before all the productive forces for which it is
sufficient have been developed, and new superior relations of production
never replace older ones before the material conditions for their
existence have matured within the framework of the old society.
^[\[11\]](#n11)^

After citing this excerpt, Mr P Struve sets about commenting it:

What is clearly expressed here \[he says\] is the idea of the constant
*adaptability* \[*Angepasstsein*\] of legal and political institutions
to the economy, as *a normal form of their coexistence*.
^[\[12\]](#n12)^ The non-correspondence of legal relations and economic
relations is a contradiction which leads to law being adapted to the
economy. Marx has presented as fundamental the contradiction between the
productive forces and production relations (property relations). The
adaptation of production relations to the productive forces forms the
content of the social revolution. In all of this exposition by Marx,
there is the unclarity that, on the one hand, the material productive
forces and, on the other, relations of production, which are nothing but
an abstract sum of concrete economic, or, in juridical terms, legal
relations, are *sui generis* independent essences or 'things'. It is
only due to that unclarity that one can speak of the contradiction, or
the adaptation, of the productive forces, taken as a whole \[*en bloc*\]
to all legal relations taken as a whole too, and see the social
revolution as a clash (immaterial whether lasting a single moment or a
more or less lengthy period of time) between these two essences. It is
clear that social development can be regarded as a lengthy process of
various clashes and adaptations. Marx seems to have considered both
modes of understanding social revolution correct, and to have failed to
notice their incompatibility. As for the socialist revolution in
particular, Marx saw it as a mighty clash between the economy and law,
inevitably crowned by some decisive event or social upheaval, in the
proper sense of the expression. Thus, in Marx's theory of social
development, everything revolves about the relations, or if you please
the contradiction between the economy and law. Marx regarded the economy
as cause, and law as effect. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^

As we shall see, this comment is marked by an extraordinary wealth of
theoretical content. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ To begin with, we shall take note
of the following two points. In Mr P Struve's opinion Marx:

1\. Considered *fundamental* the contradiction that inevitably arises in
a progressing society between the productive forces on the one hand, and
property relations on the other.

2\. Saw the social revolution as a violent clash between the economy and
law, in consequence of which everything revolves, in his theory, about
the relations between law and the economy.

Is this opinion of Mr P Struve's correct? In other words, has he
properly understood and correctly set forth Marx's theory? As for the
first point, he is indubitably right: the contradiction between
society's productive forces and its property relations has always been
focal in Marx's theory of social development. To bear that out or
rather, for the reader to get a better understanding of Marx's idea, we
shall quote, in addition to the passage Mr P Struve has cited, from the
Preface to *Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*, the following excerpt
from the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*:

We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal
society. At a certain stage in the development of these means of
production and of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society
produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of agriculture and
manufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal relations of property
became no longer compatible with the already developed productive
forces; they became so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they
were burst asunder.

Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social and
political constitution adapted to it, and by the economic and political
sway of the bourgeois class. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

As you will see, the matter is perfectly clear: social revolution,
meaning the collapse of the *feudal* economic system and the triumph of
the *bourgeois* system, was seen and described by Marx as *a clash* (or
contradiction) *between the productive forces which had grown in the
womb of feudal society, and the property relations inherent in that
society, or, which is the same, the feudal organisation of agriculture
and industry*. And if you wish to get a clearer idea of how Marx
understood and described the social revolution, which he served with
such utter dedication and which will lead to the replacement of the
*bourgeois* economic system by the *socialist*, you might well read the
following page:

Modern bourgeois society with its relations of production, of exchange
and of property, a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of
production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer able
to control the powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his
spells. For many a decade past the history of industry and commerce is
but the history of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern
conditions of production, against the property relations that are the
conditions for the existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule\...

The productive forces at the disposal of \[bourgeois -- GP\] society no
longer tend to further the development of the conditions of bourgeois
property; on the contrary they have become too powerful for these
conditions, by which they are fettered\... The conditions of bourgeois
society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them. (Same
place, pp 8-9) ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

It is the elimination of bourgeois property relations that comprises the
proletariat's historic revolutionary mission.

The proletariat wages against the bourgeoisie an unending civil war
which is more and more expanding in volume and content, ultimately
turning into 'open revolution, and\... the violent overthrow of the
bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat'.
^[\[17\]](#n17)^

We would refer anyone who wishes to follow up this fundamental idea in
Marx's theory of social development in his other writings to the
*Poverty of Philosophy* and to pages 420-21 in Part 2 of Volume 3 of
*Capital*. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^

Thus, no doubt is possible: in Marx's theory of social development,
everything revolves about the *contradiction between society*'s
*productive forces and its property relations*. But if this is quite
true and beyond doubt, then it may be asked on what grounds Mr P Struve
asserts (see point two above) that Marx saw the social revolution as a
violent *clash between the economy and law*. Is this second clash
identical in significance with the first? Has the contradiction between
society's *productive forces* and its *property relations* absolutely
the same significance as the contradiction between *the economy and
law*?

To reply to this question, which is of '*fundamental' importance* to us,
it should in the first place be established what kind of *concept* our
critic associates with the *words 'the economy*\'; that, of course,
cannot be done otherwise than on the basis of his 'critical essay',
which we are analysing here.

In his analysis of Stammler's ^[\[19\]](#n19)^ view in respect of the
relation of law to the economy, Mr P Struve says, among other things,
the following:

Unfortunately, the concept of the economy (the economic order, relations
of production) is not fully defined by what we consider the 'economic'
element in individual social phenomena. *The economy is, for instance, a
capitalist economic order*\... ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

Several lines below, we come up against an aphorism that says that '*law
is already contained in the economy*, and vice versa' (\'in der
Wirthschaft ist das Recht und vice versa enthalten'). ^[\[21\]](#n21)^
Finally, we come across the following argument several lines later:

The circumstance that I have no bread\... constitutes no legal relation
between myself and my fellow-citizens\... and let it not be objected to
me that, under some other social system, some reasonable legal
regulation would do away with the phenomenon of unemployment. That only
shows that this economic phenomenon depends on the given *economic, or,
in other words, legal system* taken in its totality \[etc\].
^[\[22\]](#n22)^

These explanations show that, with our critic, the words 'the economy'
have the same meaning as the term *the economic* (for example, the
capitalist) *order* or the term *production relations*. But we already
know that production relations -- or the economic order or structure --
are called *property relations* in legal parlance. This was also pointed
out both by Marx himself, whose theory is being discussed here, and by
Mr P Struve, who is analysing that theory. ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ Very good.
Let us take note of that, and ask ourselves: what does Marx's theory of
social development look like in the way his critic presents it? To that
question only one answer is possible: *in the way Mr Struve puts it, it
follows that everything revolves around the contradiction between a
particular society*'s *property relations, and its law*. Expressed in
other words, this means that, according to Marx, the gist of the
contemporary so-called social question lies in the contradiction between
property relations, say, in the bourgeois France of today, and her Civil
Code. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^ Or, if you would put it otherwise, you might say
the following: the contradiction between property relations in
present-day bourgeois France, and her Civil Code comprises '*das
Fortleitende*', that is, that contradiction, which leads that country
forward and brings it closer to the socialist revolution. This is
perfectly logical and follows inescapably from Mr P Struve's words; at
the same time, it constitutes such an amazing, such an unintelligible,
or, more briefly, such a '*fabulous*' *dogma* that had Mr P Struve made
his 'critical essay' in Marx's lifetime, and had the author of *Capital*
gone to the trouble of acquainting himself with the contents of this
unbelievable essay, it would have remained for him only to spread his
hands in perplexity, and explain, somewhat changing the words spoken by
the main character in Nekrasov's ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ poem *Judgement*:

The judge, of course, I cannot be\
Of my own case; but you\'ll agree\
It's vexing when my critics quote\
Against me things I never wrote.\
A ploughman would be as surprised\
If he had sown a field to rye\
And not a single stalk came up\
Of rye, of wheat or buckwheat, but\
Gross barleycorn grew from the seeds,\
All intermixed with noxious weeds.

### III

Let the gentle reader not think that we are out to trip the critic over
some chance slips. Not at all! The monstrous blunder we have noted is
repeated on almost every page of the 'essay' and forms the logical hub
about which *almost all the content 'revolves*' in the '*criticism*' of
revolutionary Marxism ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ that Mr P Struve has clutched out
of thin air. Thus, several pages after the commentary we have quoted
from, Mr P Struve categorically states the following: 'A revolution that
removes contradiction is in any case logically necessary for the Marxist
theory of the constantly mounting contradiction between the economy and
law.' ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ These words show that Mr P Struve is not only
'stubborn' in his incomprehensible error, but besides makes it underlie
all his 'criticism': he is out to question the necessity of revolution
as removing the contradiction, by pointing out that there can be no
essential contradiction between law and the economy (that is, property
relations, the economic structure). No less 'stubbornness' in error is
revealed in the following argument which our 'critic' considers
irresistible and triumphant:

What, after Marx, is called relations of production is logically and
historically already included in the legal regulation of property
relations. For that reason alone, it is logically impossible, while
remaining on the Marxist standpoint, to speak of the contradictory
development of production relations and the legal system.

But who speaks of that except you, O severe critic! Marx is referring to
the contradiction between the *productive forces* and property
relations. You yourself '*noted*' this really noteworthy
'*circumstance*', in the beginning of your comment -- true, without
'*special force*'. How could you have so suddenly forgotten it when you
came to stand in need of 'criticising' Marx's theory?

But what is far more important is that recognition of such development
actually and absolutely precludes any realistically understood impact of
economic phenomena on the legal system.

Whence have you taken economic phenomena, Mr P Struve? You are dealing
with *production* relations, or, in other words, with the *economy*, and
you very correctly say that the concept of the *economy* is not at all
fully defined by what we call the *economic* element in *social
phenomena*:

Just think: production relations \[the 'critic' again, *sans crier
gare*, returns to production relations, the idea of which, as he himself
has remarked, is not at all defined by the concept of economic phenomena
-- GP\], which are becoming more and more socialist, engender the class
struggle; the class struggle gives rise to social reforms, which, it is
alleged, enhance the capitalist nature of society. Thus, production
relations, which are becoming more and more socialist, engender a legal
system which is becoming more and more capitalist. Far from engendering
any mutual adaptation between them, the economy's impact on law ever
more increases the contradiction existing between them. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

The part of this tirade that follows the words '*Just think*' seems to
have been written for the purpose of 'noting with special force' the
illogicality of Marx's 'orthodox' followers, who recognise the
dialectical law of development. But here again, our critic imposes an
'absolutely fabulous dogma' on the 'orthodox' Marxists, and again his
exposition converts into 'barley intermixed with noxious weeds' the
highly valuable grain of Marx's theory of social development. '*Just
think!*' When Marx and his 'orthodox' followers speak of the constantly
growing contradiction between the *productive forces* in capitalist
society and its *production relations*, they understand by the latter
bourgeois *property relations*, as is most clearly shown by the excerpts
given above from the *Manifesto of the Communist Party* and as Mr P
Struve himself admits. That is why it could never have occurred either
to Marx or to his 'orthodox' followers to arrive at the idea -- as Mr P
Struve imputes to them -- that bourgeois society's production relations
are becoming ever more socialist. Anyone who said that would thereby be
expressing the thought -- worthy of some newest Bastiat alone -- that
the *property relations* inherent in capitalist society and so ardently
defended by the bourgeoisie are approaching ever closer to the socialist
ideal. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^

Mr P Struve has called the book *The Development of the Monist View of
History* the finest exposition of the historico-philosophical
foundations of orthodox Marxism. He considers our *Beiträge zur
Geschichte des Materialismus* fully in the spirit of that book. I would
ask the reader to go to the trouble of going through these two books and
deciding for himself whether they contain anything resembling what our
strange 'critic' has ascribed to Marx's 'orthodox' followers!

From all this follows the inevitable conclusion that a colossal and
truly unbelievable *failure to understand Marx* has served Mr P Struve
as a base of operations in his 'critical' campaign. How glorious a
campaign! What profound 'criticism\'! How interesting a 'critic\'!

Mr P Struve's literary career began in the autumn of 1894 with the
appearance of his book *Critical Remarks on the Question of Russia*'s
*Economic Development*, which produced quite a commotion. In this book,
ponderously written and naive in parts but yet useful on the whole,
there simultaneously appeared, 'embracing like two sisters'
^[\[30\]](#n30)^ and curiously intertwined, two theories: in the first
place, the theory of Marx and the 'orthodox' Marxists, and, in the
second place, the theory of Brentano ^[\[31\]](#n31)^ and his school.
The eclectic mishmash in the book's contents justified to a considerable
extent both the reproaches that descended on the author from certain
'orthodox' Marxists, and the hopes placed on it by other no less
'orthodox' followers of Marx: the reproachers were irritated by the
*Brentanoism*, while those who placed hopes on Mr P Struve expected that
this bourgeois theory in his views would be gradually overcome by the
element of *Marxism* present in them. The author of these lines belonged
to the number of the hopeful. True, his expectations were not very
great: he never considered Mr P Struve a man capable of enriching Marx's
theory with any substantial theoretical contribution, but he hoped that,
in the first place, Mr P Struve's Brentanoism would soon be overcome by
his Marxism, and, secondly, that the author of *Critical Remarks* was
capable of a correct understanding of the author of *Capital*. It now
appears that we were mistaken on both scores: Marxism has already
yielded place, in Mr P Struve's views, to its old neighbour --
Brentanoism; besides, our 'critic' has revealed a total lack of
understanding of the most fundamental and the most important
propositions of historical materialism. In this latter respect he has
gone very far back indeed, which, of course, is to be accounted for by
the influence of that self-same Brentanoism. In view of all this, it
remains for us only openly to confess to our error and to say in
justification what Euripides ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ used to say: 'The Gods do
much contrary to expectation; they do not do what we have expected, but,
on the other hand, they find ways of doing the unexpected.'

### IV

As we have seen, it is impossible for us to be mistaken as to the
meaning in which Mr P Struve uses the words *the economy*, as he himself
has tried to give a rigorous definition of that meaning. Nevertheless,
let us imagine that we have failed to understand him correctly and that
our critic uses the word, not to indicate some economic order or other
(\'*for example, the capitalist*'), and not the production (property)
relations peculiar to a given society, but that *economic element in
social phenomena* the notion of which, as he himself has very correctly
noted, is not completely defined by the concept of *the economy*. But
where will that supposition lead us to? ^[\[33\]](#n33)^

Once we accept that, we must naturally also accept another
interpretation of Mr P Struve's words, to the effect that everything in
the Marxist theory revolves about the contradiction between the economy
and law. We are now obliged to assume that he regards as underlying that
theory the doctrine of the contradiction. (relation) between the
*economic phenomena* that take place in a given society, and the *laws*
inherent in that society. It is that contradiction that must now be
recognised as the hub about which '*everything revolves*' in Marxist
theory.

Let us consider *capitalist society* and see in what degree and in which
conditions the contradiction between the economic phenomena proceeding
in it and its legal system can be a cause impelling its development
forward.

Let us suppose that what is known as the *permits* system for the
establishment of joint stock companies ^[\[34\]](#n34)^ exists in our
capitalist society. It is common knowledge that such a system is marked
by many disadvantages hampering the development of joint-stock companies
and therefore of large-scale production, which now stands in such need
of the association of capital belonging to individuals. That is why a
*contradiction* will sooner or later arise in our society between an
*economic phenomenon* -- the growth of large-scale production that
stands in need of the development of joint-stock companies -- and *law*
-- inexpedient legislation, which regulates the establishment of such
companies. That contradiction can be eliminated only in one way; the
destruction of the permits system and its replacement by the so-called
*fait accompli* system, which is far more convenient. Of course, the
latter system, as one that is incomparably more expedient, will sooner
or later become enacted. In that case, the accommodation of a legal norm
to an economic phenomenon will, it may be said, take place of itself
and, as the French have it, one has to be *fou à lier* ^[\[35\]](#n35)^
to start speaking of *social revolution* in circumstances in which the
development of social life has brought forward *only* contradictions of
this kind.

But what are contradictions of this kind marked by? They are marked by
the fact of the economic phenomena that contradict *bourgeois law* in no
way contradicting *the economic foundation of that law*, that is, *the
property relations of capitalist society*.

The question that now arises is: did Marx himself or any of his
'orthodox' followers ever say that the social revolution is caused by
contradictions of that kind? No, neither Marx nor his pupils ever said
that. According to Marx (we have pointed that out many times, and are
now obliged to repeat it), social revolutions are prepared and become
inevitable as a result of the contradiction between *society*'s
*productive forces* and those of its *property relations* on which the
laws peculiar to that society *are based*. *That* contradiction is of a
quite different (and infinitely more dangerous) kind; with the
appearance of *that* contradiction, a revolutionary epoch sets in. To
swaddle it in vague and therefore empty verbiage on the contradiction
between economic phenomena and legal institutions, and on the adaptation
of law to the economy means not throwing light on the question but
muddling and obscuring it to the uttermost degree. In truth, what is
needed here is Mr P Struve's '*kritischer Geist*', 'taken in its
entirety', to create even a momentary impression that such muddling and
obscuring of the question is equivalent to a further advance of the
'realistic' thinking that underlies Marxism as an historical theory. Far
from being any *forward movement*, this is not even any *movement of
thought* (as the late AS Khomyakov ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ used to say); it is
simply some untidy and empty -- and therefore quite useless and barren
-- *theoretical fussing over nothingness*. That kind of fuss can give
the greatest pleasure to those of whom Cuno Fischer ^[\[37\]](#n37)^ has
spoken in the words we have used in the epigraph, but *to science* such
fuss is worse than nothing, for it marks a *vast backward step, a
negative phenomenon*.

Marx himself has emphatically said that law, as inherent in a given
society, develops on the basis of the latter's economic structure (its
property relations). ^[\[38\]](#n38)^ This can be borne out by a number
of most *indisputable examples*. Who does not know today that the
property relations of savage tribes of hunters are imbued with
communism, and that *an appropriate common law arises on the foundation
of those communist relations?* Who is unaware that, on the foundation of
feudal property relations (the foundation of the 'feudal organisation of
agriculture and industry'), *there arose an entire system of legal
institutions which were nurtured by that system and disappeared together
with it?* Who has not heard that present-day *bourgeois law* -- for
example, the Civil Code we have mentioned above -- evolved on the basis
of *bourgeois property relations?* Mr P Struve himself, in his comment
on Marx (see above; footnote 33) designates as a *superstructure* the
*legal* and political relations that have arisen on the *basis* of a
given economic structure or particular property relations. Besides, Mr P
Struve has himself admitted that the *fundamental contradiction* pointed
out by the Marxist theory of social development is one between society's
productive forces and its property relations. Why then does he
immediately lose sight of this *fundamental contradiction*, for which he
substitutes a secondary contradiction between the economic phenomena
within a given economic structure, and the laws for which that
structure, as Marx has put it, serves as a real foundation? How can he
justify that kind of substitution?

Take *crises*, which the *Manifesto of the Communist Party* points to as
a phenomenon that most vividly confirms the idea that the productive
forces of bourgeois society have outgrown the *property relations*, or
the *economic structure*, peculiar to it, and tell us, dear reader,
whether that economic phenomenon contradicts *law* which has developed
on the basis of bourgeois property relations, for instance the *French
legal code of 1804*? What a naive and ridiculous question! *Crises*
contradict bourgeois society's *civil law* just as little as the *rates
of bills of exchange* contradict its *criminal* law. It is not crises
that contradict the Civil Code, but the productive forces that
contradict the economic structure (\'property relations') that *underlie
that code*. What is meant by the words: the productive forces of
bourgeois society contradict its economic structure, its property
relations? They mean that such relations hamper the use of those forces
in their full volume and that, when those forces are given extensive
play, they impair the proper course of the economy. It consequently
follows that the more society's productive forces are developed, the
more dangerous their full play becomes to it. This is a contradiction
that cannot be removed while bourgeois property relations continue to
exist. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ What is necessary for its elimination is a
*social revolution* that will destroy *bourgeois* property relations and
replace them with *socialist* property relations, which are of a totally
different nature. Such is the meaning of Marx and Engels' remark. The
economic phenomenon they have cited as an example is indicative of
narrow confines (the property relations) limiting the economic life of
bourgeois society and underlying bourgeois law. Their 'critic' passes
over in silence (or, more precisely, has completely forgotten, after a
single mention) that very contradiction which they have considered the
fundamental cause of social revolutions, and then naively remarks that
Marx's own theory, if correctly understood, leaves no room for the
social revolution, but presupposes the 'constant adaptability of law to
the economy as a normal form of their coexistence'. This kind of
criticism involuntarily leads one to recall the words of the Russian
fabulist Krylov: *You have failed to notice the elephant*.
^[\[40\]](#n40)^

### V

It follows that, in whichever of the two possible meanings we understand
Mr P Struve's words on the contradiction between *law* and *the
economy*, which, he asserts, is the theoretical hub of the Marxist
theory of social development, we shall have to recognise that he has
*understood* that theory quite erroneously, or else has *set it forth*
quite wrongly. His error is so egregious, however, and so unexpected
that we must again ask ourselves whether all this is the result of some
misunderstanding. Or perhaps Mr P Struve has been misled by some
expression used by Marx and Engels, which he has *misunderstood* or else
has been incorrectly used by the founders of scientific socialism
themselves.

Let us search for the answer together, dear reader. You will probably
recall the passage in Engels' celebrated pamphlet *Socialism: Utopian
and Scientific*, which speaks of the fundamental contradiction in the
present-day mode of production. Formerly, in the Middle Ages, the
*producer* was at the same time the *proprietor* of the tools he used
and, with rare exceptions, he *appropriated* for himself *only the
product of his own labour*; at present, the *capitalist*, the proprietor
of the implements of labour, continues to appropriate as his *private
property* the products turned out at the factory by the joint *social
labour* of his workers:

The means of production, and production itself, had become in essence
socialised. But they were subjected to a form of appropriation which
presupposes the private production of individuals, under which,
therefore, everyone owns his own product and brings it to market.

Hence the contradiction between the mode of production and the form of
appropriation:

The new mode of production is subjected to this form of appropriation,
although it abolishes the conditions upon which the latter rests.
^[\[41\]](#n41)^

This fundamental contradiction contains the germ of all the
contradictions in present-day society.

At first glance, it may seem to a 'critical' mind which clutches at
words without penetrating into the gist of the content they designate
that the contradiction indicated here by Engels is between the economy
and law, which Mr P Struve is dealing with. However, a minimum of effort
is required to realise how erroneous such a view is.

In speaking of social production as being contradictory to individual
appropriation, Engels is referring to the machine-shop of today, in
which the workers' labour is united in a single whole, with the output
therefore being the product of *social labour*. However, the
organisation of labour in such a shop is determined by the present state
of *technology*; it characterises the state of the *productive forces,
not the economic structure of present-day* (capitalist) *society*, which
is marked mainly and primarily by its inherent *property relations*,
that is, by the machine-shop in question belonging not to the workers
united in it but to the capitalist, who exploits those workers. Thus,
the contradiction between the *social* labour at the factory and the
*individual* appropriation of that labour is the self-same contradiction
we already know between the productive forces of capitalist society and
its property relations. This has been very well explained by Engels
himself:

But just as the older manufacture, in its time, and handicraft, becoming
more developed under its influence, had come into collision with the
feudal trammels of the guilds, so now modern industry, in its more
complete development, comes into collision with the bounds within which
the capitalistic mode of production holds it confined. The new
productive forces have already outgrown the capitalistic mode of using
them. ^[\[42\]](#n42)^

It is clear that Engels is in no wise referring to the contradiction
between '*law*' and '*the economy*'. Beside the pamphlet *Socialism:
Utopian and Scientific* we have quoted from, we do not know a single
piece of writing by Marx and Engels that provides *even a purely
external* and *at least some verbal pretext* for the Marxist theory of
social development to be interpreted in the way Mr P Struve has done.

We say this with reference to 'the contradiction between law and the
economy' (\'for example, the capitalist economic structure') our
'critic' has thrust on Marx. And how will it be, we shall ask, if the
'contradiction' imposed on Marx should be understood in another sense,
that is, in the meaning of the contradiction between the economic
phenomena (the notion of which is not completely defined by the
'economy') and that society's legal institutions? Will it not emerge, in
that case, that Mr P Struve is saying the same thing as Frederick
Engels?

Here, too, it may seem so at first glance, but this time again the
matter looks different on closer examination.

The organisation of labour in the workshop is undoubtedly an economic
phenomenon. However, this *economic phenomenon* is contradictory, not to
law, but to other *economic phenomena*, namely, those property relations
in bourgeois society which comprise the 'real foundation' of bourgeois
law. Identifying that real foundation with the 'legal superstructure'
that rises above it means setting forth somebody else's theory, not that
of Karl Marx, who himself established the distinction between the
superstructure (law) and the foundation (production relations). We are
well aware that it would be far easier to 'criticise' Marx had he not
established that distinction. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ But what is to be done
about that? After all, Marx was not in duty bound to twist the truth to
suit the 'critics\'!

Whatever turn is given to the question, it has to be admitted that Mr P
Struve has *muddled up things frightfully*, and that it is extremely
difficult, or rather *quite impossible*, to find any verisimilar
circumstances to extenuate in some measure the fault for that muddling,
which falls squarely on him, and most probably on Stammler as well.

As is his wont, Mr P Struve 'criticises' that writer (he cannot get
along without 'criticism'); however, he is quite incapable of casting
off his influence.

This is not the place to expatiate on Stammler himself, but it should be
mentioned, in passing, that he has led into temptation quite a number of
'Marxists' in our country, who were first perverted and 'blunted' by the
so-called critical philosophy now so dear to the hearts of all those who
are trying to '*blunt*' our social contradictions.

### VI

We have already noted that if the essence of the so-called social
question consisted in the non-correspondence of bourgeois law to
bourgeois economy, the historical necessity of the social revolution
could then be spoken of only by raving lunatics. Given that gratifying
state of affairs, the theorists of law and intelligent people of
practice from the world of the business bourgeoisie would have no
difficulty in finding where, as the Germans have it, the shoe pinches,
and the worthy bourgeois would have to do nothing more than grumble
peevishly and frown threateningly for their parliamentary
representatives immediately to give the shoe a new shape. But, it may
well be asked, would natural development, in that case, follow Mr P
Struve's second formula, which we have called a *formula of blunted
contradiction*?

Above we took, as an example, the legislation on joint-stock companies.
We shall now return to that example, for the sake of convenience. Now
tell me, dear reader, what kind of relationship will be established
between social life, which calls for the multiplication of joint-stock
companies, and the permits system, which hampers that multiplication? As
we see it, there will be established between them a *contradiction* that
will *constantly grow* until the permits system disappears, yielding
place to the *fait accompli* system. Is that the case? It undoubtedly
is. If that is so, then what we have here too is a phenomenon which
bears out the truth of Hegel's aphorism: *a contradiction leads
forward*. In its turn, this new inference makes one realise the comic
situation of those 'critics' who are given to censuring Hegel and
speaking of a '*blunting of contradictions*'.

Mr P Struve may retort that a *sharper contradiction* between an
outmoded legal norm and a new social need is no guarantee that the
*struggle* between the defenders and the enemies of the old norm *will
grow sharper*. That will be true, and we are *willing* to admit that, in
insignificant cases such as the one examined above, the growth of the
contradiction mentioned above may, in certain cases, be accompanied even
by a *slackening* of the social struggle, that is, a *blunting* of the
contradiction between the warring parties. True, it should also be noted
that this is no more than a supposition, which has to be proved and
which we are accepting only out of courtesy for Mr P Struve. But can
that take place where it is a matter, not of petty things such as
legislation on joint-stock companies but of major upheavals in the life
of society, which affect the very *foundation* of law: the *economic
structure*, and *property* relations? To that question unembellished
historical reality answers in a categorical *negative*. We do not know
very well in what way development took place in China over a very long
and still incomplete period of its decline; however, we do know very
well that, in progressing societies, the growth of the contradictions
between the new social needs and the old social system is usually
accompanied by an exacerbation of the struggle between the innovators
and the conservatives. It is to such societies (those that are marching
'*forward*') that we can apply what has been said *on the struggle for
right* by Ihering in his celebrated pamphlet:

Any right in the world is won in struggle; any important legal principle
must be torn from those who have opposed it\...

The interests of thousands of people and entire estates gradually merge
with the existing law, so that it cannot be abolished without causing
considerable detriment to them. To raise the question of the abolition
of a given statute or institution means declaring war on all such
interests. Therefore, any such attempt naturally gives rise, through the
operation of the instinct of self-preservation, to strong opposition
from the interests affected, and thereby to a struggle\...

That struggle achieves the greatest intensity when interests take the
shape of acquired rights\...

All the great gains that are to be found in the history of law: the
abolition of slavery and the serf-owning system, freedom of
landownership and crafts, freedom of conscience and the like -- all
these have been won through in a fierce struggle often lasting
centuries, and the road law has travelled during its development has
often been marked by torrents of blood and everywhere strewn with the
ruins of smashed legal institutions. ^[\[44\]](#n44)^

If this kind of social development is called one achieved through the
*blunting of contradictions*, then we are at a loss to say what should
be called their *aggravation*.

In explanation and defence of his second formula, Mr P Struve cites two
examples, both of which, however, possess a property that hardly suits
him, namely, that they 'contradict' him most emphatically.

Example one:

Let us suppose, that, as a result of the development of industry, there
arises a practico-economic \[*praktischwirtschaftliche*\] working-class
movement. A harsher law is promulgated banning strikes and workers'
associations. Repressions mount, and, together with them, the
opposition. But in its further development the working-class movement
outgrows the repressions, whose weapon becomes blunt, and, in
conclusion, the laws directed against the working-class movement are
abolished. Here we have an instance of a contradiction that first
increases and then weakens, so that one of the parties finally wins.
^[\[45\]](#n45)^

When one of the parties '*wins*', the contradiction, far from
increasing, is done away with. That is self-evident. The whole question
is whether the contradiction *grows weaker or*, on the contrary,
*increases* during the period immediately before the victory of one of
the conflicting parties. To this question, Mr P Struve himself replies
in the negative: in his own example, 'opposition or resistance' *grows*
until the repressions prove powerless, that is, until the workers win.
True, in his example, the abolition of such a law is preceded by a
period during which 'the weapon of repressions becomes blunt'. But the
existence of such a period is *mere supposition*. Will Mr P Struve say
that such a supposition is in full keeping with historical reality? If
he says that it is, then we shall reply that the history of laws
directed against workers' associations argues *against* his supposition.
Indeed, was the repeal of the laws against associations in Britain, that
classical country of compromise, preceded by their less severe
application? Not at all. The situation was quite different on the eve of
their abolition. According to Howell, dissatisfaction with such laws was
constantly mounting, leading to new repressive measures, and when
legislation directed against associations in the proper sense of the
word proved too weak an obstacle to the mounting torrent of the
working-class movement, the government tried *to sharpen its weapon* by
appealing to other laws, such as the Sedition Acts. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^ For
their part, the workers grew ever more embittered until their
indignation and the *attentats* ^[\[47\]](#n47)^ coming from their midst
obliged the government to abolish the hated law. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^

We learn exactly the same from the Webbs and from Kulemann, who,
incidentally, merely repeats, in this case, what the former have said.
^[\[49\]](#n49)^

The second example cited by our 'critic' is no more conclusive than the
first one is. This example is concerned with the well-known German
'*Anti-Socialist Law of 1878*'. ^[\[50\]](#n50)^ Mr P Struve points out
that, with the growth of the working-class movement, that law was
applied in ever weaker degree, and was finally abolished. 'What is that:
a growth or rather a weakening of resistance?', our 'critic' asks.

To that question we shall reply with another one: what kind of
resistance (*Widerstände*) is he referring to? If he has in view the
imperial government's resistance to the aspirations of the
Social-Democrats, on the one hand, and of the resistance of the
Social-Democrats to the strivings of the imperial government, on the
other, then the less severe application of the law, followed by its
abolition, did not in any way mean any weakening of *such '*resistance',
as has been well realised both by the Social-Democrats and the imperial
government. The less severe application of the Anti-Socialist Law meant
merely that the government had realised its *purposelessness*, the
latter being the result of the socialists having acquired
*conspiratorial skill* and learnt to evade the police snares. Having
lost its *raison d\'être*, the law, far from weakening worker
dissatisfaction, made it *greater*, irritating the worker masses with
its unbearable *police badgering*. Seeing that the results were the
reverse of what had been expected, the imperial government found the
further strict application and even the existence of the law awkward and
unprofitable, so it was abolished. If we have now called its history to
mind, it is to show how *laws that have lost their raison d*\'*être are
abolished but not how social contradictions are 'blunted*'.

Everything said and done, unembellished history provides poor testimony
in favour of Mr P Struve's second formula. But if, nevertheless, he does
engage in 'criticising' those who recognise as correct Hegel's
observation regarding contradictions that lead forward, he must have
some serious cause for that. What can that cause be?

To this question, he himself replies with a frankness that is most
praiseworthy:

I have already emphasised \[he says\] the circumstance that while social
development takes place following the formula of the growth of
opposites, a 'social upheaval' must of necessity take the form of
political revolution. However, that idea, which underlies the celebrated
theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat, collapses together with
the dialectical course of development. ^[\[51\]](#n51)^

So that's how it is. We are told that the crux of the matter lies in
*political revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat*. We shall
place that on record!

*An unflagging psychological urge to undermine the theoretical
foundation of the celebrated theory of the dictatorship of the
proletariat and political revolution, as necessary for the social
emancipation of that class, has led the critic P Struve, on the
threshold of the twentieth century, to base his objections to 'orthodox'
Marxism on more than insufficient premises.*

Under the influence of this unflagging psychological urge, Mr P Struve
has ascribed to the Marxist theory of social development a content that
is quite unlike what it has in reality; this 'basic' error of his has
naturally brought in its train a number of others of greater or lesser
significance. His incorrect understanding of Marxist theory has found
reflection, in the mind of our 'critic', in the form of the
'*obscurity*' of the theory itself. Thus, he has discerned, as we learn,
an unclarity to the effect that, in that theory, the productive forces
and production relations of society are a kind of essences or 'things'.
Our 'critic' thinks that it is only due to such obscurity that one can
speak of the contradiction: between all productive forces taken
together, and all production relations taken together too, and to
imagine the social revolution as a clash between those forces and those
relations. We have also learnt from Mr P Struve that Marx's
socio-political world-outlook was marked by another obscurity: on the
one hand, he held that view on the development of society through
mounting contradictions, which is now defended by his 'orthodox'
followers; on the other hand, he was inclined to a view on the
development of society about which Mr P Struve's 'social' policy now
'revolves', and which is expressed in the formula of a blunted
contradiction. At the same time, the author of *Capital* was not
cognisant of the incompatibility of such views.

Let us analyse the first '*obscurity*'.

In the present-day machine-shop, that is, at the factory, the labour of
the *proletarians* working there assumes the nature of *social labour*,
while the factory itself belongs to an *individual* or to *individuals*.
The organisation of labour at the factory contradicts the social
relations of production, namely, the *property relations* in present-day
society. But what is the factory itself? Inasmuch as it is a sum of
advanced implements of labour, it is a component of what we call *social
productive forces*. Inasmuch as the totality of advanced *implements* of
labour calls for a certain *organisation* of that labour, that is,
certain *relations among the producers*, the factory is a *social
relation of production*. ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ If that relation begins to
contradict the property relations in capitalist society, if the *factory
no longer gets along with capital*, then that means that a *certain
part* of the social relations of production no longer corresponds to
another part, and that the sentence 'the productive forces of society
contradict its property relations' should be understood in that
evolutionary sense which precludes any idea of those forces and those
relations as certain independent essences. That is why it becomes
impossible, indeed, to speak of a contradiction between the productive
forces and *all relations of production 'taken together*'. *But who
else* but our 'critic' *speaks* of that? In any case, neither Karl Marx
nor Frederick Engels have done that. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^

Note that Mr P Struve, who has been speaking all the time of the
contradiction between law and the economy, has nevertheless suddenly
recollected that, in the Marxist theory, that contradiction is not the
main driving force of social development, and has gone on to speak of
the contradiction between the productive forces and the social relations
of production. *Mieux vaut tard que jamais!* ^[\[54\]](#n54)^ On the
other hand, this return to the genuine theoretical focus of Marx's
theory would be really worthwhile only if Mr P Struve went to the
trouble of *understanding* Marx's words before setting about
'criticising' them. However, *understanding* them is something he has
not considered necessary.

Mr P Struve has unconsciously gone over from one incorrect understanding
of Marx's theory to another just as wrong; moreover, he has failed to
notice that these two wrong modes of understanding are '*incompatible*'.
Yet sometimes stirring in his mind is a vague consciousness that
something is somehow out of joint. Then, to soothe his own theoretical
conscience and to prevent his readers from raising objections, he lays
the blame at another's door and accuses Marx of that very 'obscurity'
and that very blending of incompatible ideas which are the main feature
of his own 'criticism'. That kind of critical device will not satisfy
all readers but it seems to be quite satisfactory to Mr P Struve
himself. At least, somebody is pleased.

Let us take note of another circumstance.

Mr P Struve has just rebuked Marx for all productive forces, *taken
together*, entering, in his theory, into contradiction with all social
relations of production *taken together too*. But what did we hear from
him a few pages back? Here it is:

Just think\... production relations, which are becoming more and more
socialist, engender a legal system that is becoming more and more
capitalist. Far from engendering any mutual adaptation between them, the
economy's impact on law ever more increases the contradiction existing
between them.

That was how -- as Mr P Struve himself then puts it -- the course of
social development should present itself to those Marxists who recognise
the dialectical law of development. But Marx himself recognised that
law. Consequently, he too should have had the same idea of the course of
social development. However, *this* idea does not in any way resemble
the one we have just considered: *there* (in the idea we have just
examined) the productive forces ever more contradict the production
relations, which evidently play the part of a *conservative element*;
*here* that *conservative element* turns into a *progressive* one: the
production relations become ever more *socialist*, and the contradiction
exists, not between the backward production relations and the advanced
productive forces, but between the advanced production relations and the
backward legal system (which ever more 'becomes capitalist'). And all
this, it is claimed, is *after Marx!* What is all this \... muddled
thinking? Mr P Struve harps on one and the same thing: he is not at
fault; it all sprang from muddling by Karl Marx, who held two
incompatible views! But we can now already understand the meaning of
this pretext, for we already know that this muddling comes, not from
Marx, but from his 'critic', and we shall have no difficulty in
revealing where and in what the latter has muddled things.

Mr P Struve, who has rebuked Marx for his productive forces, taken
together, contradicting all the social relations of production, again
taken together, has at the same time sensed that his rebuke was not
quite well founded, and that, with Marx, the development of the
productive forces is also accompanied *by a change in the mutual
relation among producers in the process of production*. However, he did
not know *which relations of production* undergo change parallel with
the development of the productive forces, and which lag behind that
development, their backwardness creating the need for a radical social
upheaval -- the social revolution. In his ignorance, he made use of that
self-same clumsy device which he had ascribed to Marx: he took, '*all
together*', all the social relations of production, and declared that
Marx and the Marxists thought that such relations were becoming more and
more *socialist*, while the legal system was becoming more and more
imbued with the spirit of *capitalism*. Of course, Marx and the
'orthodox' Marxists never maintained anything of the kind. However, the
'fundamental' absurdity ascribed to them, which directly '*contradicts*'
another 'fundamental' absurdity ascribed to them elsewhere by the same
'critic', is highly characteristic of the chaotic ideas reigning in Mr P
Struve's head regarding Marx's theory of social development!

### VII

The extent of that chaos is indeed boundless. We do not feel equal to
depicting it in all its glory: that would call for the pen of a
Derzhavin, ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ but, to round off our characterisation, we
shall make mention of one of the '*obscurities*'.

According to Mr P Struve, the concept of *the sum of the production
relations in a given society* is overlapped, in Marx's theory, by the
concept of the totality of the concrete legal relations. For the reader
to form his own judgement, we shall give two or three examples.

**Example One**: the mutual relations among producers in the modern
machine-shop represent, as we have seen, social relations of production.
These mutual relations in the process of production, however, do not
comprise any legal relations among them. It is between them and their
employer that such relations exist. But that is another story.

**Example Two**: *value*, according to Marx, is a social relation of
production. The concept of value, however, is not overlapped by the
concept of legal relations among people who enter into exchange deals
with one another.

**Example Three**: *competition* is a production relation inherent in
bourgeois society. It gives rise to many legal relations, but its
concept is not at all overlapped by that of such legal relations.

**Example Four**: *capital*\... but enough! The reader himself can now
see that Mr P Struve is no end of a muddler. For our part, we shall only
add that, in this instance, our 'critic' was drawn into his strange
error by Stammler, whose influence he could not escape.

Let us now return to the focal point in the stand taken by our 'critic'
-- his arguments on the various formulas of social development.

We said at the outset that no 'orthodox' Marxist would agree to
acknowledge the correctness of his first formula. Then, in our criticism
of Mr P Struve, we insisted that social development takes place through
an *aggravation* of contradictions, not through their *blunting*. Some
readers may have taken this as a recognition of the correctness of that
very formula which we declared erroneous. That is why we find it
necessary to explain matters, while reminding the reader that Marx
himself was not given to 'formulas' and, in his *Poverty of Philosophy*,
bitingly ridiculed Proudhon for the latter's predilection for them.

The reader will remember the 'formula of contradiction' drawn up by Mr P
Struve.

  ------ ------
  *A*    *B*
  2*A*   2*B*
  3*A*   3*B*
  4*A*   4*B*
  5*A*   5*B*
  6*A*   6*B*
  \...   \...
  *nA*   *nB*
  ------ ------

Whence has that *A* appeared? Whence *B*? Is *A* a cause of the
existence of *B*? Is *B* a cause of the existence of *A*? All this is
wrapped in mystery. From Mr P Struve we learn only that *interaction*
exists between *A* and *B*, but that formula does not even express
interaction: it merely points out that *B grows in direct proportion to
the growth of A*. Mr P Struve has limited himself to this statement in
the supposition that a formula that expresses the relation between the
growth of *B* and that of *A* depicts with sufficient completeness the
view held by the 'orthodox' Marxists regarding the course of social
development:

Each of the two phenomena *A* and *B* grows through the accumulation of
homogeneous elements \[he says\]. At the same time and as an outcome,
the contradiction existing between them also grows, which is ultimately
removed by the triumph of the stronger phenomenon: *nA* destroys *nB*.

But if *nA* destroys *nB*, that final outcome of the 'interaction'
between the two phenomena should also have found its expression in Mr P
Struve's first formula. Yet, it does not express that outcome; its
concluding *nA nB* merely indicates that *B* grows in direct proportion
to the growth of *A*, but not that the growth of *A* brings about the
destruction of *B*. Consequently, Mr P Struve's formula should first of
all be corrected as follows:

  ----------------------------------- ------
  *A*                                 *B*
  2*A*                                2*B*
  *A*                                 3*B*
  \...                                \...
  *nA*                                *nB*
  *n* \[or rather: (*n* + *x*)\]*A*   *0B*
  ----------------------------------- ------

Let us proceed further and see whether this slightly corrected formula
is in keeping with the course of social development where the latter
takes place through an *aggravation* of contradictions.

As an example, let us consider the social revolution that took place in
France at the end of the eighteenth century and is known in history by
the name of the Great French Revolution.

This *social revolution* utterly destroyed the '*ancien régime*' and
ushered in the full and immediate supremacy of the bourgeoisie. However,
it was prepared by a lengthy process of *social evolution* which lasted
for many centuries. The struggle waged by the third estate against the
spiritual and temporal aristocracy began as early as the thirteenth
century and, in a wide variety of forms, did not flag until 1789.
^[\[56\]](#n56)^ The bourgeoisie which, in that year, engaged historical
enemies in decisive battle, had been, as is so well pointed out in the
*Communist Manifesto*, created by a series of revolutions in the modes
of production and of exchange. Each new step in its *economic* might was
accompanied by certain *political* (that is, *legal*) gains. Anyone who
thinks that the feudal regime remained unchanged throughout its
existence is greatly in error. The victories scored by the advancing
bourgeoisie were constantly modifying the feudal social structure, into
which they were constantly bringing various more or less significant
*reforms*. It might have been thought that these reforms should have
'*blunted*' the contradictions existing within feudal society, and
thereby prepared the peaceful, gradual and almost imperceptible triumph
of the new order. As is common knowledge, matters developed in another
way. The reforms the bourgeoisie were able to achieve, far from
'*blunting*' the contradictions between its innovatory aspirations and
the old social order, gave a fresh impetus to the growth of its forces,
encouraged those aspirations still more and thereby *aggravated* these
contradictions even more, gradually preparing the social storm with the
onset of which it was no longer a matter of *reform* but of
*revolution*, not of *changes within the old* order but of *its complete
elimination*. ^[\[57\]](#n57)^ That was why the third estate's hatred
for the *ancien régime* was far stronger on the eve of the revolution
than ever before. ^[\[58\]](#n58)^ As Tocqueville pointed out, the
preceding demolition of part of the feudal institutions made the
remaining part a hundred times more hateful. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^ This
remark is apt in the measure in which it contains the truth that
concessions made *by the old to the new* in no way '*blunt*' the
contradiction between *the old* and *the new*. But it is wrong, inasmuch
as Tocqueville is out to say that the feudal yoke on the eve of the
revolution in France was lighter than ever before. The abolition of
*part* of the feudal institutions did not yet mean any *easing* of the
feudal yoke: the rapid growth of the new social requirements could --
and, as we see did -- make the *surviving part* still more injurious to
the social advance, and therefore even more oppressive and more hated
than the entire feudal system had previously been. ^[\[60\]](#n60)^
Besides, even under the old order, there had been different kinds of
institutions. Tocqueville himself admits that, with the passage of time,
the privileges separating the nobility from the bourgeoisie in France,
*far from decreasing*, *had actually grown greater*. ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ As
he puts it, a man of the middle class had found it easier to become a
nobleman in the reign of Louis XIV than under Louis XVI. He goes on to
say that, in general, the more the French nobility turned into *a
caste*, the more it ceased from being an *aristocracy*. ^[\[62\]](#n62)^
All this has been fully borne out by other historians. Thus, Doniol has
pointed out that on the eve of the Revolution there was general
complaint against the growth of feudal oppression. 'Each locality
complains of a considerable growth \[of feudal oppression\] and tries to
back its complaint with facts.' ^[\[63\]](#n63)^ Just as categorically,
Alfred Rambaud has expressed the thought that the reforms extracted by
the bourgeoisie from the aristocracy did not weaken the oppressiveness
of the old order:

While the *ancien régime* tried to amend certain of its shortcomings
\[this researcher says\], it seemed to have gone to pains to aggravate
all its vices. It was a time \[immediately preceding the Revolution\]
when the edicts of 1779, 1781 and 1788 excluded all members of the third
estate (*roturiers*) from commissions on the army; when the Royal Court,
which did not dare publish an edict on this question, made it a rule of
conduct that in future 'all ecclesiastical benefits, from the most
modest priory to the richest abbeys, should be appanages of the
nobility\'; when the parliaments refused to admit into their midst any
magistrate who could not prove two generations of gentility, and when
the Bordeaux Parliament for two years refused to install Councillor
Dupaty as its President. As the higher courts were in the hands of the
nobles, the *roturiers* and the rural communities lost all the cases
they had brought against the pretensions of the *seigneurie*; this led
to a recrudescence of *feudalism* in the countryside. The Royal
Government\... favoured any persecution launched by the landowners and
the land commissars against the peasants. In certain of their petitions
of 1789, the *roturiers* expressed the wish that the half of the
parliaments should be composed of non-nobles; they were to win the
guarantees the Huguenots had tried to win during the reign of Henri IV.
The all-pervading spirit of reaction made itself universally felt both
in the decree of the Paris Parliament, which condemned Boncerf's book on
feudal privileges to be burnt (1776), and in the banning of the use of
scythes in the harvesting of wheat, as well as in the decree of 1784
which demanded that all scarves made in the French kingdom should be the
same in length as in width. Finally, the royal authority itself, which
had stripped parliament of any right of control over legislation and
finances and forcibly dissolved the Assemblies in 1788, was out to
establish what had never before existed in France -- a regime of
unrestricted arbitrariness. It was becoming more despotic than the
government of Louis XIV at a time when it had become evident to all that
it was incapable of using its authority for the common weal.
^[\[64\]](#n64)^

As opposed to the French scholars we have just quoted from, the Russian
savant MM Kovalevsky has roundly condemned the use of the term
*feudalism* as applied to the socio-economic structure of
eighteenth-century France. 'Nothing gives a falser idea of the economic
and social order in France', he says, 'than calling them feudal. The
term is applicable to them just as little, for instance, as to the
Russian landed-estate system on the eve of 1861.' ^[\[65\]](#n65)^ But
it will suffice to read the chapter (the second in Volume One), from
which we have taken the lines quoted here, to see the measure in which
French agriculture and the French agricultural class suffered from the
*survival* of a system which Mr Kovalevsky himself calls *feudal*.
Besides, Mr M Kovalevsky, in full agreement with the French historians
we have quoted, has noted that on the eve of the Revolution both the
nobility and the royal authorities themselves did everything in their
power to maintain the surviving feudal institutions and to fortify their
*practical* significance. 'The quarter century prior to the Revolution',
he writes, 'presents to us a number of attempts to restore disused
obligations and payments.' ^[\[66\]](#n66)^ Again in full agreement with
Tocqueville and Doniol, he says that the French government of the time
artificially fostered the caste spirit and caste exclusiveness through
its legislation. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^

In a word, this book by a Russian researcher, like the writings of his
precursors abroad, testifies to the times immediately preceding the
French Revolution being marked, *not by a blunting* but, on the
contrary, *by a very sharp aggravation of the contradictions* between
the old order and the new social needs. But both Mr M Kovalevsky and the
French historians have shown that *this* aggravation of contradictions
was itself the complex outcome of a lengthy historical process during
which the old order was evermore crumbling away, its defenders
forfeiting one position after another. What follows from this
indisputable historical truth is, first, that the victories gained by
the innovators over the conservatives and leading to *reforms do not
preclude revolution but*, *on the contrary*, *bring it closer*, evoking
in the conservatives reactionary strivings natural in such cases, and,
in the innovators, a thirst for ever new conquests. If we would depict,
in a single formula, this historical process, in which *revolution is a
moment of evolution* and is prepared *by reforms*, ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ we
shall need something more complex than the 'formula of contradictions'
proposed by Mr P Struve. We know of no formula that is capable of giving
any satisfactory expression to this multilateral process. However, on
the basis of everything we have said on the course of the struggle waged
by the third estate against the *ancien régime*, we can speak of the
need of essential amendments to Mr P Struve's first formula.

If a lengthy historical development of elements in a new society is
marked by the victories of the innovators and the defeats of the
conservatives, then the formula we have referred to must certainly very
definitely indicate this highly important circumstance. Yet, we have not
found a hint of that there. On the contrary, it says that the growth of
*A* is invariably accompanied by the directly proportional growth of
*B*, right up to the moment at which *nA* destroys *nB*. To express the
actual course of things, it must be changed, in the first place, as
follows:

  ------ --------------
  *A*    *nB*
  2*A*   (n -- 1) *B*
  3*A*   (n -- x) *B*
  \...   \...
  *nA*   *B*
  *mA*   ½*B*
  ------ --------------

Here the first row should express the constant development of new social
needs, and the second the no less constant modifications in the old
order, the concessions exacted from the conservatives by the innovators.
But since these concessions do not, as we already know, preclude any
*aggravation of the contradictions* between the old and the new, then to
the *two rows* we already have there should be added a *third one*,
which expresses the *result of the interaction* between constantly
growing *A* and (*in general*, that is, despite the temporary successes
of the reactionaries) the just as constantly decreasing *B*. By adding
this third row we get:

*A*

*nB*

*C*

2*A*

(*n* -- 1) *B*

2*C*

3*A*

(*n* -- x) *B*

3*C*

\...

\...

\...

*nA*

*B*

*nC*

*mA*

½*B*

*mC*

However far this new formula is removed from the *ideal*, that is, from
what should give complete expression to actual development through the
aggravation of contradictions, it is, nevertheless, far closer to
reality than Mr P Struve's first formula. Its advantage lies in
*one-sidedness* being alien to it, and that in it, as in real life,
reforms do not preclude revolution. On the contrary, it shows that the
possibility of revolution, far from being precluded, is created by
reforms: what a near-sighted or prejudiced glance may take for a
'*blunting*' of contradictions is in actual fact a source of their
*aggravation*.

### VIII

In our opinion, we repeat, the actual course of the historical
development of human societies cannot be expressed with due completeness
by any single 'formula'. It is, however, for that very reason that it
may prove very useful to make another attempt to give schematic
expression to that course.

We shall ask the reader to take note of the following excerpt, for the
length of which we apologise most sincerely in advance:

It is slowly and only through arduous struggle that the ruling order
develops, under which people live and work. After a lengthy struggle,
frequent setbacks, erroneous attempts and insistent efforts to move
forward, an order is ultimately set up which, on the basis of past
experience, meets present needs, and under the protection of which the
individual forces will develop with the greatest advantage for the weal
of society. But as soon as so favourable a situation is established,
there appear new needs, previously unprovided for. There appears a
striving to modify the existent and gradually to alter it. To outweigh
this striving there develops, on the other hand, a one-sided desire to
preserve the old order of things in its entirety. The forms established
with a view to the public good are obstinately clutched at, towards the
end, by private and selfish interests. In the long run, the preservation
of the old and unchanged forms is demanded only by false interests that
do not understand the significance such forms once possessed. In
conclusion, there often remains a single naked form, wholly unviable,
next to which the new and fresh life finds expression in completely new
forms, until the day comes when the old form is utterly destroyed, even
in its external manifestations. ^[\[69\]](#n69)^

Here we have before us something that also resembles a formula of social
progress, the correctness of which will, we hope, not be denied even by
the most indefatigable 'critic\'; definite *social needs* engender
definite *forms of everyday life* that are necessary for society's
further advance. However, that advance, which has become possible thanks
to the given forms of everyday life, gives rise to *new social needs*
that are no longer in keeping with the *old forms* of everyday life
created by the *former needs*. Thus, there arises a *contradiction*
which grows more and more under the influence of the continuing social
advance and ultimately leads to the old forms of everyday life once
created by society's burning needs losing all useful content. They are
then abolished after a more or less lengthy struggle, and yield place to
*new* ones.

This (objective) 'formula of progress' expresses, as the reader will
see, the mutual relation (the 'interaction') between *content* and
*form*. The content is the *social needs*, which have to be met; *social
institutions* are the form. Content engenders form, thereby ensuring
itself further development. The latter, however, renders its form
unsatisfactory; a contradiction arises; contradiction leads to struggle,
and struggle, to the destruction of the *old* form and its replacement
by a *new* one, which, in its turn, ensures the further development of
content, that makes the form unsatisfactory, and so on and so forth,
until development comes to a standstill. This is that very law of which
the late Nikolai Chernyshevsky spoke in the following eloquent words:

An eternal change of forms; an eternal denial of form as engendered by a
certain content or striving; in consequence of the increase of that
striving, a higher development of the same content! Whoever has
understood this great, eternal and universal law, whoever has learnt to
apply it to any phenomenon -- O, how calmly will he greet opportunities
that others will eschew! Repeating after the poet -- *Ich hab 'mein*'
*Sach auf Nichts gestellt / Und mir gehört die ganze Welt*,
^[\[70\]](#n70)^ -- he will not regret anything that has outlived its
time, and will say: 'Happen what may, our day will come.'
^[\[71\]](#n71)^

This great *law of the denial of form as engendered by certain content
in consequence of the further growth of that content* is indeed a
*universal* law, because subordinate to it is the development, not only
of *social* but also of *organic* life. ^[\[72\]](#n72)^ It is indeed
*eternal* in the sense that its operation will cease only when all
development comes to an end. But this great, universal and eternal law
is at the same time that '*formula of contradictions*' which, probably
better than all the others, expresses Marx's view of the course of
social development.

Here is what we read in Part 2 of Volume Three of *Capital*:

To the extent that the labour-process is solely a process between Man
and Nature, its simple elements remain common to all social forms of
development. But each specific historical form of this process further
develops its material foundations and social forms. Whenever a certain
stage of maturity has been reached, the specific historical form is
discarded and makes way for a higher one. The moment of arrival of such
a crisis is disclosed by the depth and breadth attained by the
contradictions and antagonisms between the distribution relations, and
thus the specific historical form of their corresponding production
relations, on the one hand, and the productive forces\... on the other
hand. A conflict then ensues between the material development of
production and its social form. ^[\[73\]](#n73)^

Social man's productive impact on Nature, and the growth of the
productive forces involved in that impact -- such is the *content*;
society's economic structure, its property relations provide the *form*,
engendered by a given content (the particular degree in the 'development
of material production') and rejected in consequence of the *further
development of that content*. Once it has arisen, the contradiction
between form and content is not 'blunted' but *increases*, thanks to the
continuous growth of the content, which far outstrips the ability of the
old form to change in keeping with the new needs. Thus a moment arrives
sooner or later when the elimination of the *old form* and its
replacement by a *new* one becomes necessary. Such is the meaning of the
Marxist theory of social development.

Whoever has realised this perfectly clear and at the same time most
profound meaning has also understood the revolutionary significance of
*Marxist dialectics* in its application to social questions:

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, because
it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In
its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and
its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension and
affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same
time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its
inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed
social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its
transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets
nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and
revolutionary. ^[\[74\]](#n74)^

Adopt the viewpoint of Marx's dialectics, dear reader, and you will see
how desperately feeble and how ridiculously clumsy are the efforts of
those 'critics' who are trying so hard to bring into Marx's coherent
theory a certain 'blunting' element so dear to their hearts! Then you
will not be embarrassed by the numerous and often amazing
'*obscurities*' these esteemed gentlemen attempt to introduce into the
*interpretation* of Marx's theory. And if you finally lose all patience,
and words of irritation burst from your lips, then it will not at all be
because the imaginary force of their puerile arguments has irritated
you, but because you will find impermissible and scandalous the *claim*
some of them make to considering and calling themselves *Marxists*. We
fully understand that so ridiculous a claim merits the most severe
condemnation, so we shall not at all be surprised if you exclaim in your
impatience: 'For heaven's sake, Messieurs the critics! What kind of
Marxists are you?! Marx has sown dragons, while you are only\... you are
only\... well, in a word, you are organisms of quite a different
calibre!'

In our next article we shall see how unsuccessfully Mr P Struve, basing
himself on 'critical' philosophy, 'criticises' Marx's concept of social
revolution. In it we shall get acquainted with his argumentation, which
is levelled against what Messieurs the critics call *Marx*'s *theory of
the impoverishment of the proletariat*, and comes out in defence of *the
theory of the blunting of the contradictions existing in capitalist
society*, which has long been put forward by the bourgeois apologists.

### Article Two

Mr P Struve is neither the first nor the last forerunner of the theory
of the 'blunting' of contradictions between the interests of the
proletariat and those of the bourgeoisie. This theory had many adherents
prior to Mr Struve, and *there will be* still more *after him*, since it
is spreading extremely rapidly in the *educated stratum of the petty
bourgeoisie*, that is, that class whose very position has doomed it to
vacillation between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. It deserves the
closest consideration for the very reason that it is spreading so
rapidly, trying to pass itself off as the most up-to-date and also
'*critical*' socialism, which has come to take the place of the
allegedly outmoded socialism of Marx and his 'dogmatic' followers.
Whoever wants to combat that theory should know both its theoretical
genealogy and its present value. For that reason, the reader will feel
no surprise if we leave our 'critic' for a while so as to get a closer
knowledge of his precursors and his still extant and more or less
distant kinsmen.

### I

The price of labour power and surplus value are in inverse ratio to each
other. The dearer labour power is sold, the lower the rate of surplus
value, and vice versa. The interests of the *seller* of labour power are
diametrically opposed to those of its *buyer*. Taken in its essence,
this contradiction can be neither removed nor 'blunted' until the buying
and selling of labour ends, that is, until the capitalist mode of
production is eliminated. *However*, the *terms* under which the buying
and selling of labour power are effected can change in one direction or
another. If they change to the advantage of the *sellers*, the price of
labour power *rises* and the working class receives, in the form of
wages, a greater share of the value created by its labour than before.
This, in its turn, leads to an *improvement of its social position and a
decrease in the distance between the exploited proletariat and the
capitalists*, *who exploit it*. If the terms on which labour power is
sold change to the advantage of its *buyers*, then its price *falls*,
and the working class gets a *smaller part* of the *value* created by
its labour *than before*. This is inevitably followed by a
*deterioration in the proletariat*'s *social position and a greater
distance between it and the bourgeoisie*. In the first instance, we seem
to have a right to speak of a blunting of the contradiction, if not
between the workers and the employers, then at least between the
interests of the worker, on the one hand, and the existence of the
capitalist system, on the other. In fact, this will only *seem* to be a
right; we have already seen, in our first article, that the improvement
in the French bourgeoisie's social condition, far from blunting the
contradiction between its interests and those of the *ancien régime*,
made it more and more acute. Nevertheless, those who are afraid of the
proletariat's revolutionary movement have always been prone to think
that gradual improvement in the life of the working class is able to
avert the danger and rid society of stormy convulsions. That is why
people of this category try to assure themselves and others (and
sometimes *only* others) that, with the development of capitalism, the
proletariat's condition *improves*, and *with the passage of time it
comes closer to the bourgeoisie than it stood at the beginning*. It must
be recognised that their conservative instinct prompts in them a
consideration that is not quite erroneous: while a decrease in the
distance between the exploiters and the exploited is by no means
sufficient to prevent a revolutionary explosion, an *increase* in that
distance already holds out to the esteemed conservatives no other
prospect but the rapid spread of the 'dogmata' of *revolutionary
Social-Democracy* among the workers.

But what do we see *in reality?* In what direction do the conditions of
the sale of labour power change with the consolidation and development
of the capitalist system?

This is a question that vulgar political economy has long been engaged
in: it has brought forward a phalanx of 'scholars' who are bending every
effort to prove that the conditions of the sale of labour power are
changing ever more to the advantage of the proletariat, which is getting
an ever greater *share* of the national income. Henry Charles Carey, the
well-known US economist, lucidly formulated this theory as far back as
1838. ^[\[75\]](#n75)^ It was borrowed from Carey by the notorious
*Bastiat*, whose arguments we must study a little more closely.

In his *Harmonies économiques*, Bastiat assures us that, in its justice
and goodness, Providence has prepared a better part for Labour than for
Capital. ^[\[76\]](#n76)^ This pleasant thought is based on the
following 'unshakeable axiom':

In proportion to the increase of capital, the *absolute* share of the
total product falling to the capitalist is augmented, but his *relative*
share is diminished; while, on the contrary, the share of labourer is
increased both absolutely and relatively.

To make this 'axiom' clearer, Bastiat provides a table, which is quite
identical with the one we meet in Carey's *Principles of Social
Science*:

  --------------- --------------- ------------------ -----------------
                  Total product   Share of capital   Share of labour
  First period    1000            500                500
  Second period   2000            800                1200
  Third period    3000            1050               1950
  Fourth period   4000            1200               2800
  --------------- --------------- ------------------ -----------------

Such is the grand, admirable, consoling, necessary and *inflexible* law
of capital \[Bastiat exclaims rapturously\]. To demonstrate that means,
it would seem, completely discrediting these declamations\... against
*the greed and the tyranny* of the most powerful instrument of
civilisation and *egalisation* that has emerged from the human
faculties. ^[\[77\]](#n77)^

The reader will see for himself that it would be most pleasing to prove
so admirable and consoling a law but, to his regret, he will have to
acknowledge that Bastiat's proofs lack conviction. All his arguments
consist in the indication that the percentage accompanying the
industrial development of civilised countries is falling. Anyone with
the most modest acquaintance with political economy understands that
this proof is more than feeble. However, this 'brilliant French
economist' lacks the time to dwell on proofs. He hastens to go over to
the admirable and consoling conclusions that emerge from his admirable
and consoling law:

Cease, capitalists and workers \[he vociferates\], to regard each other
with an eye of defiance and envy! Close your ears to these absurd
declamations, whose arrogance is matched only by their ignorance and
which, under a promise of prospective philanthropy, begin by encouraging
the present discord. Acknowledge that your interests are common and
identical, that they converge towards the achievement of the common weal
\[etc, etc\]. ^[\[78\]](#n78)^

This sentimental tirade leaves no room for the least doubt as to why
Bastiat has needed the necessary and inflexible law he has borrowed from
Carey (without indicating the source): reference to that law would have
the aim of reconciling the workers with the capitalists and *undermining
the influence of socialism*.

### II

Julian Kautz considers Bastiat one of the most outstanding minds engaged
during recent years in a study of political economy. ^[\[79\]](#n79)^
One cannot agree with this appraisal. Bastiat undoubtedly possessed the
ability of clear and perhaps even brilliant exposition, but his
*thoughts* were always so *superficial* and his *arguments* so *feeble*
that he cannot be considered a brilliant *man of science*. He was
nothing more than a brilliant *advocate* of capitalist exploitation. It
is his outstanding defence of that exploitation that has ensured him a
strong, and lengthy influence on very many friends of 'social peace'. It
is in this sense -- and only in this -- that Julian Kautz is right in
calling Bastiat's work important and fruitful. ^[\[80\]](#n80)^
Bastiat's influence on the economists of the more or less conservative
trend has always been far stronger than is thought by many of those who
are amazed by his *admirable* but hardly *consoling* superficiality,
even if the latter is necessary in a way. Luigi Cossa has remarked that
the influence of the healthy part of Bastiat's ideas has found
expression, not so much in the works of his pupils as in the overall
trend of the *majority* of our contemporary French economists, as well
as of a *considerable part* of their German and Italian counterparts.
^[\[81\]](#n81)^ By 'healthy part' Cossa understands 'a rebuttal of the
sophistry of the Protectionists and the Socialists'. We have already
seen that, with Bastiat, all refutation of socialist 'sophistries' rests
on a flimsy foundation. But that is not the crux of the matter. Cossa is
right when he says that Bastiat's *overall trend* continues to live on
in the writings of very many economists in various countries. A
particularly strong and deep impression was produced by his 'admirable'
and 'necessary' law of the distribution of products between the workers
and the capitalists. It is noteworthy that the 'discovery' of this law
has been ascribed to Bastiat even in the homeland of Carey himself, from
whom the French economist undoubtedly borrowed both the law and its
exposition. For instance, the eminent American statistician Edward
Atkinson has frankly stated that though he has had, in general, little
time 'for the reading of books or the consideration of theories of
wages', ^[\[82\]](#n82)^ he thinks that Bastiat was the first to found a
correct theory of the relations between the interests of the workers and
the employers:

Many years ago \[he says\], a single phrase in Bastiat's *Harmonies
économiques* became engraved upon my mind, and by its application I have
been enabled to observe the phenomena of wages in the course of my
business life with much clearer insight. It is this: 'In proportion to
the increase of capital, the absolute share of the total product falling
to the capitalist is augmented, but his relative share is diminished;
while, on the contrary, the share of labourer is increased both
absolutely and relatively.' ^[\[83\]](#n83)^

Atkinson has borrowed this passage as an epigraph to his essay 'What
Makes the Rate of Wages', and, inspired by Bastiat, he has, on the basis
of certain data referring to the American iron and steel industry, drawn
up a table which, as he puts it, can even be called '*an indicator of
progress from poverty of the workman and progress toward poverty of the
capitalist*'. ^[\[84\]](#n84)^ In this new wording, Bastiat's
*admirable* law sheds a considerable part of its *consoling nature* by
arousing in the reader excessively gloomy misgivings regarding the
future fate of the *capitalists* in *capitalist* society. However, the
dispassionate scholars, with their ignorance of everything except the
interests of pure science, and without being embarrassed by compassion
for the poor capitalists, willingly quote from Atkinson's book. Thus we
meet with frequent references to it in the book by Professor
Schultze-Gävernitz, *Large-Scale Production*, which, according to Mr P
Struve, is 'perhaps the most thorough monographical study of the social
history of British industry'. ^[\[85\]](#n85)^ This 'thorough study' of
the economics of the British cotton industry has led Schultze-Gävernitz
to the conviction that although the increase in the overall national
product gives to the share of labour and capital as absolutely greater
quantities, the participation of capital therein diminishes relatively,
while the participation of labour increases relatively. 'Labour receives
an ever greater share of the entire national product', says
Schultze-Gävernitz. 'It is beginning more and more to get what is left
after the payment of the shares of interest and profits.'
^[\[86\]](#n86)^ This is the self-same consoling law of Carey --
Bastiat, and it is strange that Mr P Struve has failed, or not wished,
to note this in his preface -- in general very poorly reasoned -- to
Schultze-Gävernitz's book. It is also useless to add that the admirable
and consoling law of distribution has led our grave German to the same
gratifying conclusions that it once led the frivolous Frenchman to.

The social consequences of the process we have described has consisted
in an equalising of opposites in property \[Schultze-Gävernitz assures
us\], without making the wealthy richer or the indigent poorer, it leads
to the reverse, as has been statistically proved in respect of Britain.
^[\[87\]](#n87)^

Hence it is very simple to arrive at the inference on '*social peace*',
to which Herr Professor had already dedicated a separate two-volume work
of research. ^[\[88\]](#n88)^

Herr Schultze-Gävernitz considers it the more necessary to draw his
readers' attention to the consoling conclusions he has arrived at
because, in his words, the fact of the growing distance between the rich
and the poor in the sense attached to it by Marx and Engels is
recognised even in circles which in general, come out as decisive
opponents of Marxism. ^[\[89\]](#n89)^ But in this, he almost falls into
exaggeration. As far as we know, circles hostile to Marxism are ever
more becoming imbued with the consoling consciousness of the
incontestability and the 'necessity' of the Carey -- Bastiat law.
Practically every self-respecting bourgeois scholar is more than glad if
he has any opportunity -- in any piece of 'scientific' research -- to
expatiate on the narrowing gap between rich and poor. The 'blunting' of
the contradiction between the capitalists and the workers is now a theme
very much in vogue in bourgeois economic literature.

### III

According to Schultze-Gävernitz, the decrease in the distance between
the rich and the poor in Britain was proved by that country's 'leading
statistician' Robert Giffen, in an address 'The Increase of Moderate
Incomes', supposed to have been given at a meeting of the Royal
Statistical Society in December 1887. Schultze-Gävernitz made reference
to this address both in his *Zum sozialen Frieden* (Volume 2, p 490) and
in his book on *large-scale production* (page 229 in the Russian
translation). But he was mistaken in ascribing it to Giffen. In fact,
the address was really given at the meeting mentioned by
Schultze-Gävernitz, but it was delivered by *Goschen*. ^[\[90\]](#n90)^
This circumstance, of course, in no way impairs the value of the speech
itself, but Goschen should not be deprived of the laurels he deserved,
which should not be presented to Giffen even by mistake. *Suum cuique!*
^[\[91\]](#n91)^

The speech on the increase in moderate incomes seemed convincing to many
others besides Schultze-Gävernitz. After its delivery (6 December 1887),
Collet, Governor of the Bank of England, expressed warm thanks to the
speaker for his having shown the degree in which the hackneyed prattle
on the constantly growing enrichment of the wealthy and impoverishment
of the poor was contrary to the truth:

Nothing was more valuable in these days of visionary theories and
excited propositions for the distribution of wealth \[said the esteemed
Governor\] than to have it shown in a manner so perspicuous and
indisputable, that the distribution which is so ardently called for, is
in fact already in active although silent operation, through the regular
action of economic laws\... ^[\[92\]](#n92)^

However, Mr Collet's opinion may be considered insufficiently
authoritative. Some sceptic may suppose that, like Edward Atkinson, the
Governor of the Bank of England did not have enough time for a study of
economic theory, a knowledge of which is, after all, necessary for a
correct understanding of statistical data. That is why we shall also
mention a well-known German economist, Gustav Schmoller, who, while
regarding the writings of a 'leading British statistician' -- viz,
Giffen -- with a dash of scepticism, yet finds that Goschen's
conclusions are based on an objective and convincing analysis of
reality. ^[\[93\]](#n93)^ It would therefore be useful to take a closer
look at what the British Chancellor of the Exchequer had to say.

Goschen was in full agreement with Collet in his view on the great
social significance of the data he had adduced:

I do not know \[he told his audience\] whether the statistics I have
brought before you will to any extent have caused the same impression in
your minds that they have made on mine. To me it seems that, while some
people are crying out for the artificial reconstruction of society, a
sort of silent socialism is actually in progress. There is a silent
movement towards the further distribution of wealth over a larger area,
which from whatever point of view it is regarded seems to me to be a
matter for national congratulation. No violent specifics have been
applied to produce it. The steady working of economic laws, under a
system of commercial and industrial freedom, is bringing about the
result I have described\... And the best of this automatic socialism is
that it appears to operate even in a time of depression. Despite the
complaint of absence of profit and of bad times generally; despite want
of work and the irregularity in the employment even of those who have
work, the great central body of society is strengthening its economic
position. ^[\[94\]](#n94)^

The reader will see that both Goschen and his audience were under the
influence of the 'cries for the artificial reconstruction of society'.
Indeed, such outcries were very loud in Britain at the time Goschen
delivered his speech, a time of industrial stagnation and unemployment,
which led to disturbances among the workers. Meetings of unemployed were
held in London, Manchester, Birmingham, Leicester, Yarmouth and
elsewhere, with incendiary speeches being made. There were some who
thought then that Britain was *on the eve of social revolution*. Some
people, says Sidney Webb, even specified the time of the forthcoming
revolution: 1889, the hundredth anniversary of the Great French
Revolution. ^[\[95\]](#n95)^ This foment in minds could be soothing
neither to the ministers nor to the upper classes in general, so it
should be admitted that Goschen was speaking at a time when the
conditions hardly favoured 'objective research' into economic phenomena.
It is also well known, however, that love of truth sometimes gains the
upper hand over formidable external obstacles. Though Goschen probably
found it very hard to preserve his moral calm and scientific
impartiality, this does not yet mean that he had to get worked up and
see Britain's economic development through the prism of his class
prejudices. Who knows? Perhaps the 'automatic socialism' discovered by
him is indeed penetrating more and more into British social life? The
question however is: *on what actual foundation did the British
minister*'s *confidence in the slow*, *silent but steady development of
that socialism rest?*

The actual foundation of that confidence was the following: the
statistics told him that, in 1875, the number of (physical and
juridical) persons registered under Schedule *D* ^[\[96\]](#n96)^ and in
receipt of incomes of between £150 and £1000 reached 317,839, while in
1886 the number *increased* to 379,004, that is, went up by 19.26 per
cent. During the same period, the number of persons with incomes of
*£1000* or more *fell* from 22,848 (1877) to 22,298 (1886), a *fall* of
2.4 per cent. A more detailed analysis of the statistics enabled Goschen
to draw up the following table:

  ------------------------- --------- --------- -------------------------------
                            1877      1886      Per cent increase or decrease
  Between £150 and £500     285,754   347,021   +21.4
  Between £500 and £1000    32,085    32,033    nil
  Between £1000 and £5000   19,726    19,250    -- 2.5
  Over £5000                3,122     3,048     -- 2.3
  ------------------------- --------- --------- -------------------------------

Hence Goschen concluded that:

\... during ordinary times, and during times of depression, during times
such as we have recently gone through and which certainly have not been
times of great prosperity, there has yet been a most satisfactory and
steady increase in the number of incomes below £1000.

But under Schedule *D*, British income tax statistics do not register
all those who can be referred to the middle class. Quite a number of
such persons also register under Schedule *E*, which includes, besides
officials in the public service, also persons employed privately or with
companies. The number of persons under this schedule rose from 78,224 to
115,964 during the decade under review. In Goschen's opinion, this
growth also testified to the strengthening of the economic position of
'the great central body of society', that is, the middle class.

These figures are no doubt interesting on the theoretical plane, but
they do not in any way have the significance ascribed to them by
Goschen.

In the first place, as already pointed out by Mr Isayev, the data for
the decade 1877-86 showed a fall in the number of big incomes:

The sharp fall in the prices of all commodities; the lower profits of
all enterprises to half of the average level, or less; the vast number
of bankruptcies (up to 1877, an average of 8500 bankruptcies per year;
between 1877 and 1884 -- over 12,000) -- all these led to a large number
of wealthy persons with incomes of between £1000 and £2000 in the
mid-1870s receiving hardly more than £500 to £1000, while those with
incomes of over £500 descended to a lower group, that is, of those with
incomes of between £150 and £500. ^[\[97\]](#n97)^

How the industrial depression affected the growth of Britain's national
wealth is shown by the following figures: in the years between 1865 and
1875, Britain's aggregate capital rose from £6113 million to £8548
million, that is, a 40 per cent increase; in the years between 1875 and
1885, it rose from £8500 million to £10,037 million, that is, increased
only by 17.5 per cent. ^[\[98\]](#n98)^

It will readily be understood that the slower rate of capital
accumulation was caused by a fall in the level of profits during the
industrial depression. This fall in the level of profits was alone
sufficient to transfer income-tax payers from higher schedules to lower
ones. But it is noteworthy that the lower level of profits was far from
the same in various kinds of enterprises. It was felt with special force
in *industrial enterprises* and was far weaker in those *unrelated*
directly to industry. Thus, retailers had very few complaints to make.
Low losses were also incurred by those who had invested their capital
abroad, for instance in foreign loans and the like. One of the members
of the Commission appointed to inquire into the depression of industry
pointed out ^[\[99\]](#n99)^ that British capital investments abroad
were one of the causes of a phenomenon that appeared strange at first
glance, namely, that the total sum of taxable incomes had grown, despite
the business depression. Since the growth of this overall sum was
nevertheless accompanied by a fall in big incomes, it was to be surmised
that capital of relatively smaller size had been invested in trading
concerns both within the country and abroad. Such was the opinion of the
minority on the Commission. The great increase in the number of low
incomes and a fall in a number of large incomes under Schedule *D*
probably took place in considerable measure because industry, to which
large enterprises with big capital belong, did not produce incomes,
while trade, especially retail trade, the greater part of which is
conducted with small capital, yielded profits. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^

In view of these considerations alone, the British Chancellor of the
Exchequer's 'automatic socialism' loses a considerable part of its
'admirable' and 'consoling' qualities. But it seems even more pitiful to
us if we remember that *another cause* of the growth in the total of
taxable incomes (Schedule *D*) was simply *more thorough governmental
assessment of private incomes*. The majority of the Commission were in
full agreement with the minority in indicating this cause, but while the
majority did not ask themselves how it had affected the number of
registered persons with 'moderate' incomes, the minority pointed out
with good reason that it should have *increased that number* as a result
of the income-taxing of many *new* taxpayers of modest means, who had
previously had no difficulty in declining the honour. ^[\[101\]](#n101)^

Thus, the actual foundation of the gratifying conclusions drawn by
Goschen is quite groundless. Just as groundless, of course, is the
gratifying conviction of those friends of 'social peace' who think that
Goschen has proved the narrowing of the distance between poor and rich.

We would ask the reader also to note the following. Goschen had high
praise for the concluding report, quoted by us, which studied the causes
of the depression in industry, and voiced regret that the conclusions it
had arrived at did not attract due attention from the reading public.
^[\[102\]](#n102)^ It might have been thought that he himself had made a
thorough study of those conclusions and conveyed them to his audience in
all their fullness and variety. In fact, however, the reverse was true.
So trifling was his attitude to the report in question, that he found it
possible unreservedly to make use of statistics concerning which the
Commission minority had stated forthright that their significance was
not what it had seemed at first sight and was ascribed to them by
Goschen himself shortly after the publication of the Final Report. The
'worthy' speaker found it discreet to make no mention of this statement
of the minority in his speech, so firm and inflexible was his
'objectivity'.

Goschen wished to hearten his audience, who were under the strong
impression of the workers' disturbances; clutching at the first figures
that had come to hand, he began to set forth to them, in a new version,
the very theory that had previously been brought forward by Carey,
Bastiat and similar apologists of capitalism. The delighted listeners
thanked the speaker in most heartfelt fashion. Continental scholars like
Schmoller and Schultze-Gävernitz were overjoyed too. These 'objective'
men of science were not concerned with any critical verification of the
arguments brought forward by the British Minister, for they, too, were
delighted to hear that the admirable and consoling Bastiat law could be
backed by new data. Since Goschen's reasoning was met respectfully by
Schmoller, Schultze-Gävernitz and other 'scholars', the 'critics' of
Marxism had no other choice than to proclaim from the houses that social
contradictions had been blunted as a result of the 'growth of moderate
incomes'. Our 'critics' do not at all engage in criticising bourgeois
scholars; they specialise in 'criticising' Marx alone.

### IV

Goschen himself was aware that the data his report was based on in
respect of the successes of 'automatic socialism' were lacking in proof,
which was why he tried to back them with the aid of indirect
considerations. We shall learn of one of the latter when we deal with
the condition of the working class in Britain; we shall now consider
some of the rest:

Year by year \[says Goschen\], it would seem, a larger number of persons
are becoming shareholders in companies, and thus participating in the
wealth which arises from the vast industrial and commercial activity of
the country\... ^[\[103\]](#n103)^

Taken up by Schultze-Gävernitz and other adherents of 'social peace',
this consideration, as is common knowledge, produced a profound
impression on some socialists. Thus, Herr Bernstein came to the
conclusion that 'the form taken by the joint-stock company has
considerably countered the trend towards the centralisation of capital
through the centralisation of production'. He thinks that:

\... if economists opposed to socialism have used this fact with the aim
of embellishing the present social relations, it does not follow that
socialists should conceal or deny the fact. It is more a question of
admitting its actual significance and spread. ^[\[104\]](#n104)^

To conceal the facts or to deny their existence when they have been
proved is, of course, quite ridiculous and absolutely absurd. But
*facts* are one thing and their *social significance* is something else.
The social significance of the fact indicated by Herr Bernstein who
follows in the footsteps of Goschen and Schultze-Gävernitz, can be
understood in a variety of ways. Bourgeois scholars and Herr Bernstein,
who is trailing behind them, have not noticed that the spread of
joint-stock companies may be -- and indeed is -- a *new factor in the
centralising of property and the growth of the distance between the poor
and the rich*. We shall illustrate our thought with an example taken
from the economic history of the same period that is dealt with in
Goschen's speech.

It is common knowledge that the increase in the number of joint-stock
companies in Britain was greatly facilitated by the Limited Liability
Acts. By the time the Commission appointed to study the causes of the
depression in industry had begun its deliberations, the economic
consequences of the new laws had made themselves felt with sufficient
clarity. Let us see what the Commission had to say about them.

According to the majority of its members, limited liability led to a
less cautious and more speculative management of enterprises than that
to which the entrepreneur may have been inclined when he was fully
liable for his operations. In consequence, limited liability in
production led to a fall in profits under which the ordinary
entrepreneur would have felt obliged to curtail its extent. Even the
loss of capital caused by the failure of a considerable number of such
companies did not exert the influence that might have been expected in
the sense of a reduction in their operations, since the losses were
spread over a larger number of persons and were therefore less felt.
Moreover, on the wreckage of enterprises that had foundered there are
constantly arising new ones which, after the purchase of the property of
old ones for a song, are able to conduct production on the former scale.
^[\[105\]](#n105)^

The minority members were in full agreement, in this case, with the
majority. In their opinion, limited liability had led to the appearance
of a special class of promoters who, taking advantage of the
inexperience and defencelessness of owners of small sums of money,
floated enterprises with the exclusive purpose of selling off their own
shares at the first opportunity, without the least concern for the fate
of the companies they had launched. ^[\[106\]](#n106)^

We do not think that this kind of 'automatic socialism' was capable of
considerably promoting the 'blunting' of social contradictions.
*Overproduction and speculation* have always been and will remain
powerful factors in ruining the economically weak and enriching a
handful of slick businessmen skilled in fishing in muddy waters.

Goschen also spoke of the larger savings-bank deposits during the period
under review, considering them a manifestation of the slow but sure
triumph of the 'silent socialism' he holds so dear. ^[\[107\]](#n107)^
But had he carefully perused the report he insistently recommended to
his audience's attention, he would have had to agree that the fact he
had adduced permitted another and far less 'consoling' interpretation.
As so correctly remarked by A O\'Connor, a member of the Commission, who
registered a dissident opinion, the *growth in the number of
savings-bank deposits* might have been caused by *fewer opportunities*
(as a consequence of the depression in industry) *to invest small sums
in industrial enterprises*. ^[\[108\]](#n108)^ In view of this more than
probable explanation of the fact, one can readily understand that the
increasing total of savings-bank deposits *went hand in hand with a fall
in the demand for industrial workers*.

However 'silent' and 'automatic' this kind of socialism is, it always
contains little that is *consoling*.

We can now leave Goschen for a while and address ourselves to another
British expert, this time to the statistician *Michael Mulhall*.

In his *Dictionary of Statistics*, Mulhall cites the following figures
regarding the growth in the number of incomes of £2000 or upwards.
^[\[109\]](#n109)^

  ------ --------- ------------------------
  Year   Number    Per million population
  1812   39,765    3314
  1850   65,389    3115
  1860   85,530    2949
  1870   130,375   4206
  1880   210,430   6313
  ------ --------- ------------------------

The number of persons enjoying incomes of over £5000 a year increased as
follows:

  ------ -------- ------------------------
  Year   Number   Per million population
  1812   409      34
  1850   1181     56
  1860   1558     53
  1870   2080     67
  1880   2954     88
  ------ -------- ------------------------

Taking the relative numbers of each class to the whole population, we
find:

Persons of

Per million inhabitants

Rate of increase %

1860

1880

Great wealth

53

88

66

Easy fortune

2949

6313

112

'this shows', says Mulhall, 'a greater diffusion of wealth, contrary to
the common impression that "the rich are getting richer every day\"\...'
^[\[110\]](#n110)^

All this is very fine and most consoling. But when we meet with the
self-same Mulhall elsewhere and under different circumstances, we learn
things that are far less fine and far less comforting.

On the basis of certain calculations, he accepts that wealth in the
United Kingdom is distributed as follows:

  ------------ ------------------- ------------ ------------
  Class        Number of persons   Millions £   £ per head
  Rich         327,000             9,120        28,000
  Middle       2,380,000           2,120        900
  Working      18,210,000          556          31
  Children     17,940,000          --           --
  Population   38,857,000          11,806       302
  ------------ ------------------- ------------ ------------

What are these figures indicative of? They show the following. 'Nearly
80 per cent of the total wealth is held by 1.5 per cent of the adult
population. The middle class stands for 11 per cent of population, and
holds 18 per cent of wealth.' ^[\[111\]](#n111)^ Mulhall has nothing to
say of the working class, for the crumbs falling to its share are so
miserably small! It follows that the 'diffusion of wealth' is not so
great as Mulhall would assure us. A pity, a great pity, for we were on
the verge of arriving at a very pleasant state of mind. But let us now
see what else our statistician has to say. Let us ask him how that
'diffusion of wealth' operated in the past. ^[\[112\]](#n112)^

According to his own calculation, ^[\[113\]](#n113)^ it appears that, if
we take the number of fortunes of over £5000 in the year 1840 as one
hundred, we find that in 1877 that number rose to 223, and in 1893 to
270. Yet if we take as one hundred the number of fortunes between £100
and £5000 in 1840, we find that the number increased only to 203 in 1877
and to 249 in 1893. That means that 'fortunes over £5000 are multiplying
much faster than those under £5000, which is the reverse of what is
desirable and this congestion \[*in the upper classes* -- GP\] seems to
increase in intensity the higher we go'. ^[\[114\]](#n114)^ Some
'diffusion\'! Mulhall himself seems to be somewhat taken aback and
therefore hastens to comfort us with the following table:

  ---------------------- ------ ------ ------
                         1840   1877   1893
  Population             100    126    146
  Possessing over £100   100    205    251
  ---------------------- ------ ------ ------

While the population increased by 40 per cent in fifty years, the number
of persons possessing over £100 went up by 151 per cent: 'In other
words, the class of society which may be considered above the reach of
want has grown since 1840 three times faster than the general
population.' ^[\[115\]](#n115)^

Below we shall analyse in detail the consoling nature of all this
comfort; for the time being, we shall draw the reader's attention to
Mulhall's following opinion regarding the condition of the working class
in Britain:

The improved condition of the working classes is evident from the
increased number of depositors in savings banks; it was less than four
per cent of the population of the United Kingdom in 1850, and has now
risen to 19 per cent. Nevertheless, the sufferings of the indigent class
in our large towns are greater than ever before; the condition of this
class has been aptly described as far worse than that of Hottentots.
^[\[116\]](#n116)^

What a ludicrous descent from the elevated to the trivial.

### V

We can now see that both Goschen's 'silent socialism' and Mulhall's
'diffusion of wealth' are something out of this world. Mulhall himself
has had to admit that there is an ever greater congestion of wealth in
the upper reaches of society. But if that is so, then, regarded from
their economic aspect, *social contradictions*, *far from becoming
'blunted*', *are increasing more and more*. Mulhall tries to 'blunt'
this conclusion by pointing out that the number of persons in Britain
possessing fortunes in excess of £100 is growing far more rapidly than
the population is. It would be timely to take a closer look at this sham
consolation.

Let us imagine a society made up of three classes: the wealthy, the
well-to-do, and the poor. Let us imagine, for the sake of simplicity,
that the poor class live exclusively *by the sale of their labour*, the
well-to-do engage *in trade*, while the wealthy consist of *capitalist
entrepreneurs and landowners*; the poor class total *one thousand*, the
well-to-do, *one hundred*, and the wealthy, *ten* persons.
^[\[117\]](#n117)^ In the distribution of social income, the share of
each of these classes is a magnitude we shall denote as *A*.
Consequently, society's aggregate income equals 3*A*; *on the average*,
a member of the wealthy class is *ten times as rich* as any member of
the well-to-do class, any member of which, in his turn, is ten times as
rich as one belonging to the poor class. Such is the *relative*
condition of classes in a particular period, say 1875.

Twenty-five years have passed. The social income *has doubled*, so that
the share of *each* social class is now 2*A instead of the previous*
1*A*. ^[\[118\]](#n118)^ We can now say that the economic prosperity of
each class of society *has doubled*. However, the *relationship between
these classes has remained unchanged*: just as before, the rich man is,
on the average, ten times as wealthy as the well-to-do man, while the
latter's fortune averages ten times as much as the possessions of the
poor man. Consequently, we have no right to speak either of a 'diffusion
of wealth' in our society, or of 'automatic socialism' as changing the
distribution of incomes in the sense of blunting the contradictions
between the social classes. We shall proceed, keeping this conclusion in
mind.

Let us suppose that income tax exists in our society, payable by all
persons with incomes of £100 or more. Let us also suppose that the
wealthy and the well-to-do classes do not contain a single person with
an income below £100, while there is not a single person in the poor
class whose income reaches that figure. Consequently, no person in the
latter class paid income tax in 1875.

But how will matters stand 25 years hence, when the aggregate income of
each class of society has doubled?

If we suppose, in the first place that, 25 years ago, there were 250
persons in the poor class, who annually received between £50 and £100,
and, in the second place, the *distribution of wealth within each class
remained constant*, we shall now have, in the poor class, 250 persons
receiving between £ 100 and £200, and consequently liable to income tax.
Thus the number of poor income-tax payers *will increase though no
'diffusion of wealth*' *has taken place* since the rich man will be ten
times as wealthy as the well-to-do person, and the latter will still be
ten times as rich as the poor man.

However, in what degree will the number of poor income-tax payers
increase?

That, of course, will depend on the distribution of wealth within the
well-to-do class. Let us suppose that 25 years ago that class contained
25 persons with annual incomes of between £500 and £1000. In that case,
these 25 persons will be receiving -- after the *doubling* of the income
of that class (with the distribution of that income remaining unchanged)
-- between £1000 and £2000. Assuming that persons in receipt of over
£1000 can be called *big* payers, we shall see that the *category* of
such payers will now be joined by 25 persons belonging to the *middle
class*. Consequently, the total number of modest payers (in other words,
the total number of 'moderate incomes') ^[\[119\]](#n119)^ will now be
325 (75 remaining from the former number -- 100, and 250 new incomes
formerly belonging to the working class), that is, it *will now have
increased by 225 per cent*.

Let us continue our calculations. Twenty-five persons of the trading
class, who receive between £1000 and £2000, will now figure in the lists
of big payers, in the same *category* as persons in the upper class
consisting of industrialists and landowners. These formerly numbered
*ten*. By adding to them 25 persons from the *middle class*, we find
that the number of big payers now totals 35 -- *an increase of 250 per
cent*.

The number of big payers has grown somewhat faster than that of the
'moderates', but it will easily be seen that, with some change in our
hypothetical figures, we shall arrive at an opposite result.

Indeed, let us assume that we had only ten persons receiving from £500
to £1000 in 1875. Twenty-five years later, with the doubling of the
income of the middle class, these ten persons will be receiving between
£1000 and £2000 and will therefore join the big payers of income tax.
Adding their number to that of the former big payers, who, as we
remember, also totalled ten, we shall find that we now have twenty such
payers in this category, which means that *their number has grown only
by 100 per cent*. In view of the far more rapid growth in the number of
'moderate' payers, we are now in a position to vociferate about
'automatic socialism' and to evoke in uncritical 'critics' the idea that
the Marxist 'dogma' is obsolete, and so on. In actual fact, however,
there has been no 'diffusion of wealth' since each social class receives
its *former share* of the national income.

We shall arrive at exactly the same 'gratifying' conclusion -- in the
Goschen sense -- by assuming that the concentration of property in the
class of industrialists and landowners has taken place more rapidly than
in the trading class, which is quite possible -- and even highly
probable -- without casting any aspersions on the Marxist 'dogma'.
^[\[120\]](#n120)^

Until now we have assumed that, with the growth of the national income,
the *share* of each social class has remained unchanged. Let us now see
how the *uneven growth of the incomes of the various classes* would be
reflected in the lists of income-tax payers.

Let us suppose that the social income *has quadrupled* and is
distributed as follows: the working class gets 2*A*; the middle class,
4*A* , and the upper class, 6*A*. When the income of the working class
doubles, that class will include -- just as in our former assumption --
two hundred and fifty persons in receipt of incomes of £100 or more.
These persons will now have to pay income tax, thus increasing the
number of 'moderate' payers. Previously the middle class wholly belonged
to this 'moderate' bracket, but now, when the income of the middle class
has quadrupled, a considerable number of its members will go over into
the bracket of big payers. How great will that number be? If we assume
that the middle class formerly contained twenty-five persons getting
between £250 and £500, now each of these twenty-five persons (given an
*unchanged distribution* of middle-class quadrupled incomes among its
members) will be getting between £1000 and £2000, that is, will cross
the line separating the *modest* from the *big* payers of income tax.
However, the same class also contained, according to our former
assumption, twenty-five persons with incomes of between £500 and £1000.
With the income of the middle class quadrupled, these persons will now
be getting between £2000 and £4000 each, and will therefore be included
with greater reason among the *big* payers. Consequently, only fifty
members of the middle class (100 minus 25, minus 25) will remain within
the bracket of 'moderate' payers. By adding the number of such persons
to the number (250) of payers of modest means from the *lower class* we
shall find that the total number of payers of modest means is now 300
(50 plus 250); *it has gone up by 200 per cent*.

If we go over to the *schedule* of big payers, we shall see that, to
their former number of *ten*, we must now add another fifty (twenty-five
persons with incomes of between £1000 and £2000, and another twenty-five
whose incomes range from £2000 to £4000). The total number,
consequently, will be sixty; *it will have gone up by 500 per cent*.

If we assume that *concentration* will reduce the number of modest
payers to 250, and the number of big payers to fifty-five, it will
follow that the aggregate of 'moderate' incomes has gone up by 150 per
cent, and of big incomes, by 450 per cent.

All this reasoning of ours, however, has not taken into account the
*population growth*. The population may grow 1) more rapidly than the
social income; 2) just as rapidly, or 3) more slowly than the social
income. We are concerned here only with the *third instance*, which is
in keeping with capitalist reality. Let us consider that instance.

We shall assume that the number of members of our society has doubled in
the space of fifty years, whereas the social income *has quadrupled*,
and now equals 12*A*, with the working class getting 2*A*, the middle
class, 4*A*, and the upper class, 6*A*. Since the doubled income of the
working class is now distributed among a double number of persons, it
follows that (with the distribution of incomes *within* that class
unchanged) the prosperity of each individual worker will not increase,
which means that *no stratum of the working class will join the ranks of
the payers of income tax*.

Things will be different with the middle class: here the income has
quadrupled while the number of persons has only doubled. Consequently,
each person will be *twice as wealthy* as previously. The number of
persons in receipt of incomes of between £1000 and £2000 will have now
reached fifty. The latter will now belong to the schedule of *big*
payers, the remaining 150 (200 minus 50) remaining in the schedule of
*modest* incomes. *The number of 'moderate*' *incomes will thus have
increased* by 50 per cent.

The *upper class* formerly contained ten payers, who were of course in
the *upper bracket*. The doubling of the population has increased their
number to twenty, to which should be added another fifty persons of the
*middle class*, who have now joined the *upper bracket*. *The* total is
now seventy (20 plus 50); it has *gone up* by 600 per cent.

Even if we suppose that the concentration of property has reduced the
number of big payers to fifty-five, we are nevertheless confronted by
the fact of a vast increase in the number of big payers: an increase of
up to 450 per cent.

What is proved by all these examples, which have probably palled on the
reader?

Among other things, these examples prove the following.

1\. *The growth in the number of payers of modest means -- this as a
result of the increase in the social income -- does not of itself
testify to the 'diffusion of wealth' or to the successes of 'automatic
socialism', inasmuch as it is quite compatible with a vast growth of
inequality in the distribution of social wealth.*

2\. *The greater the concentration of property in the upper class of
society, the more salient is the growth in the number of payers of
modest means. In certain cases, the number of 'moderate incomes' will
grow more rapidly than the number of big incomes, despite the
simultaneous and very considerable growth of social inequality.*

3\. In present-day capitalist societies, the number of moderate incomes
is increasing more rapidly than the overall size of the population.
However, to infer therefrom that wealth has become diffused and social
inequality has decreased would mean revealing a total and shameful lack
of understanding of the matter. For a proper realisation of how the
national income is distributed in present-day societies, one should
first determine *in what measure that income has grown in the period
under consideration*, *and how its accretion has been divided among the
separate classes*. Those who speak of the diffusion of wealth and
compare the growth of the *population* with the growing *number* of
*moderate incomes* have contributed absolutely nothing to that
determination. ^[\[121\]](#n121)^ Their arguments will therefore reveal
nothing except their own feebleness.

If we glance from the point of view of these conclusions at the data
provided by Mulhall in his *Dictionary of Statistics*, we shall readily
understand how and why those data can exist cheek by jowl with data
which obviously have a diametrically opposite significance.

Mulhall says that the number of persons in Britain with property in
excess of £100 is growing far more rapidly than the population. That is
very true, but Mulhall does not ask himself how rapidly Britain's
national income is growing. In fact, that income is growing far more
rapidly than the number of persons in the bracket indicated by Mulhall,
which is why the *growth of that number goes hand in hand with the far
more rapid increase of social inequality*. That is borne out most
explicitly by the data provided by the self-same Mulhall in his book
*Industries and the Wealth of Nations*. True, the data he gives in his
*Dictionary of Statistics* seem to show that 'moderate' incomes are
growing far more rapidly in Britain than the big ones; however, we
already know, in the first place, that even if that were the case, it
would still be a far cry from the 'diffusion of wealth\'; in the second
place, we know that the second half of the 1870s was marked by a deep
industrial depression which temporarily led to a decline in big incomes,
and consequently to a temporary fall in their number. We therefore
understand how and why a comparison of figures referring to 1860 on the
one hand, and to 1880 on the other, are indicative of the more rapid
growth in the number of *moderate* incomes as against *big* ones. But if
we compare the overall results of economic development over a longer
period, we shall see that, despite temporary setbacks, the big incomes
grew far more rapidly in number than did the moderate ones. Indeed, the
Mulhall table we have cited shows that, in 1812, there were 3314 persons
per 1,000,000 inhabitants in Britain with incomes in excess of £200; in
1880, they numbered 6313, that is, their total had *not even doubled*,
whereas the number of persons with incomes of over £5000 rose from 34 in
1812 to 88 in 1880: it *went up* by 163.6 per cent.

These figures completely disprove Mulhall's talk of the diffusion of
social wealth, and fully bear him out when he says that 'fortunes over
£5000 are multiplying much faster than those under *£*5000'.
^[\[122\]](#n122)^

Figures themselves never lie \[said Goschen in the address we have
referred to above\], but everyone must admit that there is no sound and
accurate material which can be so easily handled for the special
purposes of the compiler as statistics can\...

In this case, we are in full agreement with Goschen: indeed, figures do
not lie\...

### VI

In our example, we had recourse to hypothetical figures. We shall now
address ourselves to reality.

We shall ask the reader to pay special attention to the following
figures, which show the growth of income in various brackets in Britain
between the years 1843 and 1879-80:

  --------------------------- -------- ---------
  Incomes in £                1843     1879-80
  Between 500 and 5,000       17,990   42,927
  Between 5,000 and 10,000    493      1,439
  Between 10,000 and 50,000   200      785
  50,000 or more              8        68
  --------------------------- -------- ---------

The number of persons with incomes of between £500 and £5000 *more than
doubled*; the number with incomes of between £5000 and £10,000 *almost
trebled*; the number of rich men pocketing between £10,000 and £50,000 a
year *almost quadrupled*; last, the number of millionaires with annual
incomes of £50,000 or more *increased eightfold*. ^[\[123\]](#n123)^

Thus there can be no doubt: *inequality* in the distribution of
Britain's national income went up considerably in the period mentioned
above. Consequently, the 'diffusion of wealth' is nothing more than a
'pious' falsehood.

True, the number of persons with incomes of between £150 and £500 *more
than* trebled during the same period. It follows that the number of
payers *in this* bracket -- the most modest of the lot -- grew more
rapidly than did the number of payers in the two immediately following
schedules, and lagged behind only the fourth (£10,000 -- £50,000) and
the fifth (£50,000 or more) schedules. ^[\[124\]](#n124)^ Given some
good will, one might say, in this connection, several words on the
diffusion of wealth in the medium strata of payers. But we shall not be
put out of countenance by such words, for now we are already well aware
that the phenomenon we have indicated could have been caused by a
multitude of causes with *absolutely no relation to the 'diffusion of
wealth*'. Besides, we have before us the fact of the far more rapid
growth in the number of payers in the two upper brackets. Consequently,
the increase in social inequality leaves absolutely no room for doubt.
^[\[125\]](#n125)^

We see the same increase in other capitalist countries as well.

Between the years 1848 and 1885, fortunes of various magnitude in the
*Canton of Zurich* increased as follows:

  --------------------------------- ------- -------- ----------
  Size of Fortunes in Francs        1848    1885     Growth %
  From 5,000 to 50,000 (approx)     9,100   17,000   90
  From 50,000 to 500,000 (approx)   930     2,650    185
  Over 500,000 (approx)             30      190      530
  --------------------------------- ------- -------- ----------

In Basle, Glarus, Bremen, Hamburg, the Kingdom of Saxony and Prussia,
one could see the same relation between figures expressing the growth of
fortunes of various magnitude.

In the period between 1879 and 1890, the number of incomes in excess of
9600 marks rose by 100 per cent in the Kingdom of Saxony, while the
number of incomes above 100,000 marks went up by 228 per cent.
^[\[126\]](#n126)^

We also have an amazing table from Engel, referring to *Prussia*.
Between the years 1845 and 1873, the number of payers in various
schedules rose as follows. The number of payers rose: ^[\[127\]](#n127)^

  --------- -------------------- --------
  Bracket   Thalers              Rise %
  1         1,000 -- 1,600       110.2
  2         1,600 -- 3,200       132.3
  3         3,200 -- 6,000       153.9
  4         6,000 -- 12,000      224.8
  5         12,000 -- 24,000     370.6
  6         24,000 -- 52,000     476.3
  7         52,000 -- 100,000    468.4
  8         100,000 -- 200,000   433.3
  9         200,000 or more      2000.0
  --------- -------------------- --------

On all sides you will see one and the same thing: the actual advance in
all countries of the capitalist world follows the same direction as in
our hypothetical society: the *number of payers in the upper brackets
grows everywhere at an incomparably more rapid rate than the number of
payers of modest means*. The results obtained through observation of
reality *coincide amazingly* with those we obtained when we surmised
that the *increase in the social income does not improve the condition
of the working class*. In many cases, however, reality *greatly
outstrips* our hypothetical example, in which the difference in the
growth of the number of payers of various categories is far lower than
in Prussia (according to Engel's table) or at least in the Canton of
Zurich. That is probably because our example did not sufficiently take
into account the concentration of property in the less wealthy strata of
society. It is quite possible that, in reality, such concentration
greatly slows down the growth in the number of 'moderate' incomes.

In short, the nature of our example is in full keeping with the actual
state of affairs in capitalist society. However, our example was based
on the surmise that the *distribution of social income among the various
classes of society becomes ever more uneven*. Obviously, that is what
takes place in reality.

But if that is so, then all the rant on the blunting of social
contradictions, the diffusion of wealth, the 'impoverishment' of the
capitalists and the 'enrichment' of the working people is a bitter
mockery of a class that so keenly feels the existence of social
inequality. The doctrine of Carey -- Bastiat and their offspring
Goschen, Schultze-Gävernitz and their ilk, is nothing more than artful
but unconvincing talk by advocates of a cause which, at least in
principle, is a lost one.

### VII

Having seen the truth of the above, we can now turn our attention to Mr
P Struve.

How does this most estimable 'critic' regard the Carey -- Bastiat
doctrine?

The article he has published in Braun's *Archiv* contains passages which
provide definite grounds at least to give a reply to the question of
what he thinks of the latest variety of the doctrine, that is, that
'diffusion of wealth' which Goschen, Schultze-Gävernitz and Co have
clutched out of thin air. Here is one of those passages.

As is common knowledge, Marx affirmed that, with the development of
capitalism and the higher productivity of labour, the *rate of surplus
value*, and consequently the degree of the exploitation of the workers'
labour by the capitalist, *rises*. Mr P Struve has the following to say
on that thought:

But it is this proposition that is so hard to bring into accord with the
facts. It was probably true, on the whole, in respect of the initial
stage of the development of large-scale capitalism (the initial triumph
of machine production). But it cannot be stated that a higher degree of
exploitation was to be seen at the later stages and will continue into
the indefinite future. The thing is that the rate of surplus value can
rise only when, for some reason, wages fall or surplus value grows.
However, lower wages cannot be called a characteristic feature of the
most recent economic development in the capitalist countries. Besides
lower wages, surplus value can be increased either by longer working
hours or greater intensity of labour. However, we cannot speak of longer
working hours in the capitalist countries\... The reverse is rather to
be seen. A greater intensity of labour indeed exists, but, in the first
place, that increase is often linked, for physiological causes, with
higher wages, and, in the second place, it often comes up against an
impassable boundary. That is why the doctrine of a constant rise in the
rate of surplus value or in the degree of the exploitation of labour in
developing capitalist society seems groundless to me. One can, with
considerable success, defend the reverse thesis, which does not in fact
contradict the general character of recent economic development.
^[\[128\]](#n128)^

That 'reverse thesis' is that very 'thesis' which has been brought
forward by the present renovators of the Carey -- Bastiat doctrine. We
have already seen how totally bankrupt that thesis is. By showing the
*growing* inequality in the distribution of national income, we have
thereby proved that the *share* of that income going to the working
class *decreases*. Having coped with the '*originals*', we could very
well dispense with the '*copy*', and limit ourselves to simply
establishing the more or less consoling and admirable circumstance that
it is a very faithful replica which reveals a strong resemblance to the
originals. But since we must, at least in part, follow in the steps of
our 'critic', we must also examine his arguments. Besides, we have to
admit that, till now, Marx's idea of the greater degree of the
capitalist's exploitation of the worker has been confirmed by us only
*indirectly*, and only through mention of the growing inequality in the
distribution of social wealth. Let us now see whether any *direct*
arguments in favour of that idea can be advanced.

As we have seen, that is impossible, in Mr P Struve's opinion. He claims
that Marx's idea can be considered correct only in respect of the
initial stage of the development of capitalism. That, however, is quite
untrue.

Let us take the United States of America where, for very many reasons,
the terms on which the proletariat sell their labour power are far more
favourable to them than in any European country. How has the *share of*
that country's working class changed in respect of the value created by
its labour?

In 1840, that share was 51 per cent, which fell to 45 per cent in 1890,
consequently, *the smaller share of the working class was accompanied by
a rise in the degree of its exploitation by the capitalists*.

These figures are taken from Carroll D Wright, who, despite all his
conscientiousness, markedly prefers the roseate to the sombre.
^[\[129\]](#n129)^

Carroll D Wright also speaks of the cause for the fall in the share of
the working class. He sees it in the development of machine production,
or, as Marx would have said, in the change in the organic composition of
capital. ^[\[130\]](#n130)^

What has our 'critic' to say on this matter? Does he think that the
United States of America has not yet emerged from the initial stage of
capitalism?

Mr P Struve cites from Carroll D Wright's book, so he should have a
knowledge of it. However, he seems to have failed to see what the
American statistician has had to say about the lower *share* of the
working class. Such near-sightedness is most awkward. ^[\[131\]](#n131)^

Between the years 1861 and 1891, *Britain*'s national income rose from
£832 million to £1600 million, while wages went up from £388 million to
£693 million. That means that the rate of surplus value, which stood at
114.43 per cent in 1861, rose to 130.80 per cent in 1891.
^[\[132\]](#n132)^

I would like to know what Mr P Struve thinks of the 'stage' reached by
British capitalism during that period.

Or perhaps our 'critic' would like to repeat the arguments with the aid
of which Mr Bowley tries to play down the impression created by the
figures we have quoted, and convince the reader that the *share* of the
British working class of the national product has *nevertheless* not
declined. Let him try to do that. We shall have no difficulty in proving
to him how feeble such arguments are. However, we shall now draw his
attention to the following fact.

British statisticians also include under the heading of wages *payments
made to domestic servants*, which actually *come from surplus value*.
Domestic servants are very numerous in Britain. According to L Levi,
they numbered 2,400,000 in 1884, while the total for agricultural
workers did not exceed 900,000. In the same year, according to the same
source, British domestic servants were paid a total of £86 million,
while agricultural workers got no more than £67 million. If we assume
that the aggregate wages paid to domestic servants in 1891 did not
exceed the total for 1884, and if, after subtracting £86 million from
the total wages received by the British working class in 1891, we add
these millions to the overall sum of surplus value for the same year,
then the *rate* of surplus value will rise even more. In general, the
British working class hardly gets over one-third of the national income.

According to calculations made by Andreas Costa for 1899, *France*'s
national income was distributed as follows: ^[\[133\]](#n133)^

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
  Sector                                                                                                                                                                      Million francs
  Agricultural workers                                                                                                                                                        2000
  Industrial workers                                                                                                                                                          3600
  Salaried workers of various kinds                                                                                                                                           1000
  Domestic servants                                                                                                                                                           1400
  Artisans, small farmers, retailers, carriers and forwarding agents, soldiers, sailors, gendarmes, petty officials, clergymen, monks and nuns, men and women teachers, etc   4000
  Capitalists: in agriculture                                                                                                                                                 3500 to 4500
  Capitalists: in industry, trade and the hotel and catering business                                                                                                         3500 to 4500
  Capitalists: rentiers, state pensioners and members of the liberal professions                                                                                              2500 to 3000
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------

By adding up these figures we get about 22,000 million francs, of which
total *not more than one-third* went to workers, artisans and small
farmers, just as was the case in Britain.

So high a degree of exploitation is possible *only given
highly-developed labour productivity*. It was physically impossible 30
to 35 years ago when, according to expert calculations, France's
national income barely reached 15,000 million francs. That is why Mr P
Struve is greatly in error when he links the greater exploitation of the
working class to the initial stage of capitalism.

### VIII

Our 'critic' has misinterpreted the wage rises in many countries and
many branches of industry over the last fifty years. But anyone with the
least knowledge of political economy knows that *higher wages* can go
hand in hand with a lower *price of labour power* and consequently also
with a *greater degree of the workers*' *exploitation*. *Wages* are
higher in Britain than on the Continent, while the *price of labour
power* is higher on the Continent than it is in Britain. That is an old
truth. ^[\[134\]](#n134)^ However, while reiterating that truth, the
apologists for capitalism pass it over in modest silence when, on the
basis of higher wages, they try to prove the so familiar 'thesis' that
the capitalists are becoming 'poorer', and the workers 'richer'. Marx
very aptly remarked in Volume One of *Capital*:

Hence we may understand the decisive importance of the transformation of
value and price of labour-power into the form of *wages*, or into the
value and price of labour itself. This *phenomenal form*, which makes
the actual relation invisible, and indeed, shows the direct opposite of
that relation, forms the basis of all the juridical notions of both
labourer and capitalist, of all the mystifications of the capitalistic
mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty, of all the
apologetic shifts of the vulgar economists. ^[\[135\]](#n135)^

What is remarkable is that, in his capacity of 'critic' of Marx, Mr P
Struve has not only been most forgiving to the apologetic artifices of
the vulgar political economists, but has himself resorted to them. The
most outstanding manifestation of his new propensity is indubitably his
remark that 'surplus value as embodied in the surplus product is
created, not only by living labour' but is a function of all social
capital. ^[\[136\]](#n136)^ This is the *Ultima Thule*
^[\[137\]](#n137)^ of bourgeois apologetics. However, most valuable
pearls of this kind are also to be met in the articles which now hold
our attention. It is to these that the reference belongs regarding the
growth of wages as proof of a *lower level of surplus value*.

That the working day in many leading branches of industry is shorter
today than it was several decades ago is true but hardly convincing. The
shorter working hours were more than made up for by the greater
intensity of labour. All this is again common knowledge. True, the
greater intensity of labour *may*, with the *passage of time*, come up
against insurmountable physiological limits but experience has shown
that such a possibility has not yet become *reality*. ^[\[138\]](#n138)^

Though the fact of higher wages cannot be denied, one might well ask how
high they have risen, for example, in the advanced countries of the
European continent? A quite unexpected reply to this question is often
provided by reality.

According to *Voit*, the following amounts of nutritives are required to
restore the worker's strength.

  --------------------- ---------- ------ ---------------
                        Albumins   Fats   Carbohydrates
  Given moderate work   118g       56g    500g
  Given intense work    145g       100g   450g
  --------------------- ---------- ------ ---------------

If the working man does not consume the above quantities, his organism
is worn down and his labour power is undermined; what he experiences is
a process of *physiological impoverishment*. Is the present-day European
worker far from that impoverishment?

On the basis of data collected by Ducpétiaux, Professor Hector Denis of
Brussels has found that, in 1853, the Belgian worker consumed, on the
average, the following quantities of products.^[\[139\]](#n139)^

  --------------- --------
  Albumins        70.0g
  Fats            26.2g
  Carbohydrates   461.0g
  --------------- --------

That means that, during that period, the Belgian proletarian was far
from able to restore, with the aid of food, the energy spent in the
process of production. It evidently follows hence that the *price of
labour power was then far lower than its value*.

During the thirty-odd years that ensued, Belgian capitalism went through
a brilliant 'stage' of its development but the Belgian worker's strength
was still being sapped by insufficient nutrition. In the 1880s, his
organism received the following:

  --------------- ----------
  Albumins        82.278g
  Fats            77.926g
  Carbohydrates   589.408g
  --------------- ----------

What tremendous progress! What an enviable fate for the working class!
The worker was now getting the handsome quantity of *twelve* extra grams
of albumins, to say nothing of additional fats and especially
carbohydrates. After that, how can one fail to speak of the blunting of
social contradictions? If the improvement in the Belgian workers'
condition continues apace in this fashion, then, in the forthcoming
geological period, they may be getting *almost* as much as is required
for the correct feeding of the organism.

If we take matters seriously, we have no right to speak with confidence
of any improvement, even the *most infinitesimal*, in the Belgian
worker's nutrition. Here everything depends on the relation between his
present daily expenditure of labour power and what it was in the 1850s.
If that expenditure *has grown*, then his nutrition has become perhaps
*even less satisfactory*, despite a certain addition of nutritives.
Consequently, even the extra 12 grams of albumins cannot keep us from
drawing pessimistic inferences regarding the social consequences of
capitalist progress.

All that we know is that the Belgian worker is still economically unable
to restore his labour power through nutrition. Here is what has been
said on the matter by one who can hardly be suspected of the obstinate
'dogmatism' of the orthodox Marxists, namely, the Governor of Western
Flanders:

It is known\... that the minimum ration for the soldier is 1066 grams of
bread, 285 grams of meat and 200 grams of vegetables. Now our workers,
who toil from morning till night, need a still greater amount of food.
However, what they consume does not even approach the soldier's minimum.
^[\[140\]](#n140)^

The Belgian proletarian's labour power is still being sold below its
value, while his wages have undoubtedly risen quite 'considerably'
during the last half-century. We know that the lower the level of wages,
the more impressive any rise in them seems. If the worker gets one penny
a day, then a rise amounting to a farthing may be imposingly called an
*accretion of 20 per cent!* However, it goes without saying that this
'considerable' rise in no way removes the social and physiological
poverty of the working man.

Mr P Struve is most scornful of the iron law of wages,
^[\[141\]](#n141)^ of 'blessed memory'. It is of course quite impossible
to defend that law today; its bankruptcy was too clearly revealed by
Marx. But one cannot but also agree that the law might seem *golden* to
many a Belgian worker, even in the wording given it by Lassalle and
Rodbertus.

### IX

The trolls proposed to Ibsen's Peer Gynt that they would knock his left
eye a little out of shape. 'True, you\'ll have a slight squint after
that', their chieftain added soothingly, 'but then everything that
presents itself to your eye will seem beautiful and gratifying.' Our
critic has undergone a similar operation at the hands of the *Brentano
school*, which cherishes the Carey -- Bastiat tradition like the apple
of their eye. We do not know exactly which eye of his has been knocked a
little out of shape by that estimable school but, to say the least, it
has been done in such a way that the capitalist order now seems to him,
if not most beautiful and gratifying, then at least incomparably more
attractive than it would were his vision unimpaired. One of the many
possible proofs of this is provided by his arguments of the capitalist
exploitation of women and children.

In a polemic with Bernstein, Kautsky expressed the idea that the growing
number of working women and children testified to the impoverishment of
the working class. This idea seems to have been most displeasing to Mr P
Struve:

When I was reading Kautsky \[he remarks caustically\], it seemed to me
that I was listening to a speech by the esteemed Decurtins at the Zurich
Congress\... If I shared Kautsky's view on women's labour, I would also
accept the practical proposals on that labour advanced by the Catholic
social-politicians. ^[\[142\]](#n142)^

Excellent. But how does Mr P Struve himself look upon the matter? You
will now learn.

He acknowledges that the use of women's and children's labour in Germany
rose considerably during the years 1882-95, but goes on to say that such
an increase was especially to be seen in the field of trade, and in
general in such branches of the economy in which members of proprietors'
own families often work. Hence, he has drawn the comforting conclusion
that Kautsky's opinion on this kind of labour should be taken *cum grano
salis*. ^[\[143\]](#n143)^ 'The course of development in general is not
as uniform, and its meaning not the same to such a degree', he says, 'as
is shown in the scheme of the theory of impoverishment.'
^[\[144\]](#n144)^ He continues with a most comforting reference to the
United States of America, where the utilisation of women's labour
decreased *relatively*, and children's labour also *absolutely*, in the
period between 1840 and 1890.

It follows that capitalism is that very spear which heals the wounds it
inflicts: in the 'initial stage', it was indeed somewhat playful,
sparing neither grown-up men, women, nor children, in its striving to
bring under its rule everything living and capable of producing surplus
value. But that was only a passing fancy and error of youth. On reaching
the age of maturity, capitalism grows milder and gradually slackens the
tight reins; then the degree of its exploitation of the proletariat
falls, and the women and children it has driven so hard are at last able
to enjoy leisure at their own homes, in conditions which in their turn
are improving, not only absolutely but also relatively, that is, in
comparison with the home conditions of the capitalists. All this is so
gratifying, admirable, comforting and inevitable that we are unable to
understand why Mr P Struve has come out against the '*monotony*'. Of
course, monotony produces a grievous impression when we come up against
it in the '*scheme of the theory of impoverishment*', *but in the scheme
of the enrichment of the workers and the impoverishment of the
capitalist* it is quite pleasant and even in no way fatiguing, to prove
which we shall make reference to Mr P Struve himself: all his present
economic arguments are very flat and monotonous, but one has to be a
gloomy 'epigone' of Marx to fail to be moved by their ennobling
influence.

The only trouble is that stark reality has so sharply contradicted these
ennobling arguments. Let us consider, at least, the exploitation of
women and children by capital. Mr P Struve has forgotten that the number
of women engaged *in industrial work* -- the number of women
*wage-earners* -- went up *by 82 per cent* in Germany between the years
1883 and 1895, the corresponding increase of male workers being only *39
per cent*. If we are not deceived by our one-sided 'epigonism', then
such figures are indicative of *both an absolute and a relative*
increase in the number of women exploited by capital. But what is it
that drives women under the heavy yoke of capital? Of course, it is not
the alleged '*enrichment*' of the proletariat.

True, Carroll D Wright has said that the number of women engaged in
factory work in the United States was *relatively* greater in 1850 than
it was in 1890, but he himself goes on to remark that *exact* figures on
women's labour have existed only since 1870. ^[\[145\]](#n145)^ But what
do we see, beginning with that year? We see a *constant increase* --
*both absolute and relative* -- *in the extent of women*'s *labour*. In
his Eleventh Annual Report, the self-same Carroll D Wright cited figures
from which it follows, in his own words, that 'the proportion of females
10 years of age or over employed in all occupations in the United States
*rose*\... \[italics ours -- GP\] from 14.68 per cent \[of the overall
figure of the female population -- GP\] in 1870, to 17.22 per cent in
1890, while the males *decreased* in proportion \[italics again ours --
GP\] from 85.32 per cent in 1870 to 82.78 per cent in 1890, fully
corroborating the facts obtained in the present investigation \[that is,
in the Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labour -- GP\] that
the females are to some extent entering into places at the *expense of
the males*'. ^[\[146\]](#n146)^

In 1870, women comprised 14.14 per cent of the workforce in the
manufacturing and mechanical industries; ^[\[147\]](#n147)^ in 1890 the
percentage went up to 20.18: ^[\[148\]](#n148)^ 'The fact is absolutely
demonstrated, therefore, that the proportion of females\... \[working
for wages -- GP\] is gradually increasing.' ^[\[149\]](#n149)^

Mr P Struve will come up against the same conclusion in the well-known
book by Sartorius, *Die nordamerikanischen Gewerkschaften unter dem
Einfluss der fortschreitenden Productionstechnik* (Berlin, 1886). On
page 109, we find the following table showing the *relative* and
absolute growth of female labour in a number of states in the country:

  --------------- ---------------------------- --------- ------------ -----------
                  Women workers in factories             Population   
                  1850                         1880      1850         1880
  Pennsylvania    22,078                       73,046    2,311,786    4,282,891
  New Jersey      8,762                        27,099    489,555      1,131,116
  Illinois        493                          15,233    815,470      3,077,871
  New York        51,612                       137,455   3,097,394    5,082,871
  Ohio            4,437                        18,563    1,980,329    3,198,062
  New Hampshire   14,103                       29,356    317,976      346,991
  --------------- ---------------------------- --------- ------------ -----------

These figures show whose words should be taken *cum grano salis* --
Kautsky's or Mr P Struve's.

And what about *child* labour?

In the period between 1870 and 1880, the number of working children
between 10 and 15 *rose* in the United States from 13.9 per cent of all
children in this age bracket, to 16.82 per cent. On the contrary, the
number *fell* to 10.34 per cent in the years between 1880 and 1890. This
was the outcome of factory legislation, which restricted the use of
child labour. The number of children employed in industry fell, in the
main, in the New England states, where the operation of the law was
particularly efficacious. Where it was less efficacious, child labour
*assumed even more extensive proportion than in the previous decade*.
^[\[150\]](#n150)^

The self-justifying dodges resorted to by the 'critics' of Marx are no
more capable of concealing the truth from the careful researcher than
are the apologetic exercises of the vulgar economists. Anyone with eyes
to see will realise that the development of capitalism leads to those
very results that Marx spoke of: not content with the exploitation of
adult male workers, *capital is striving more and more to subordinate
women and children to itself*. The growing subordination of women and
children to it undoubtedly means a deterioration in the social position
of the working class.

But Mr Struve will tell us that the growth in the number of children
employed at factories was checked by factory legislation, at least in
some states. ^[\[151\]](#n151)^

It did, we shall reply, but that in no way denies or even *modifies* the
overall meaning of the Marxist theory of social development. That
factory legislation can protect some of the interests of the working
class was admitted already in the *Manifesto of the Communist Party*.
^[\[152\]](#n152)^ However, the question is not whether factory
legislation has or has not protected *some* of the workers' interests;
it is a question of what is the *algebraical sum* of those consequences
of factory legislation that are advantageous to the proletariat and
present a *positive* magnitude, and of the trend towards a worsening in
the social condition of the working class, a trend inherent in
capitalism and presenting a *negative* magnitude. According to Marx,
that algebraical sum *cannot be a positive magnitude*, that is, the
worker's social condition grows worse *despite* the advantages he gets
from factory legislation. It is this -- and only this -- that is still
being insisted on by Marx's 'orthodox' followers. His so-called critics
say the *reverse*. They are out to prove that the notorious 'social
reform' *has already improved* the worker's social condition, and will
improve it even more with the passage of time, so that in due course,
probably in the next geological period, the *capitalist mode of
production* will imperceptibly develop *into the socialist*. Who is
right? Everything we have till now learnt, and all the facts and
phenomena we have dealt with emphatically testify in favour of Marx and
the 'orthodox': in *economic* terms the distance between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie has *grown*; the working class has become
*relatively* poorer because its *share* of the national product has
decreased relatively. However important factory legislation and other
palliatives of 'social reform' are to the working class, they have far
from outweighed tendencies of developing capitalism to disparage the
working class. The proletariat has been in the position of a man
swimming against a powerful current: were he to yield to the force of
the current without offering it any resistance, he would be carried
*very* far back; however, he offered resistance and has tried to make
headway, which is why the current cannot carry him *as far back* as it
*might*; *nevertheless*, *the man is carried back* because *the current
is far stronger than his efforts are*. ^[\[153\]](#n153)^

### X

We have till now been dealing with the *relative deterioration* in the
workers' condition. However, we have not forgotten that certain
'critics', these including Mr P Struve, have attempted to prove that
Marx wrote, not of a relative, but of an *absolute* deterioration of
that condition. If one is to believe these gentlemen, all talk by the
'orthodox' regarding a relative deterioration presents nothing but the
sophistries of unbridled wranglers, who feel they have lost their case
in debate but are loth to admit it. But what are the facts of the case?

In a booklet entitled *Wage Labour and Capital*, which, it will be
recalled, was based on lectures he delivered in the Brussels German
Society *in 1847*, Marx showed that even in the instance -- most
favourable to the workers -- when the rapid growth of capital, by
increasing the demand for labour power, leads to higher wages, the
condition of the workers *becomes relatively worse*:

The rapid growth of productive capital brings about an equally rapid
growth of wealth, luxury, social wants, social enjoyments. Thus,
although the enjoyments of the worker have risen, the social
satisfaction that they give has fallen in comparison with the increased
enjoyments of the capitalist, which are inaccessible to the worker, in
comparison with the state of development of society in general. Our
desires and pleasures spring from society; we measure them, therefore,
by society and not by the objects which serve for their satisfaction.
Because they are of a social nature, they are of a relative nature.
^[\[154\]](#n154)^

What is this but the theory of the *relative* deterioration in the
condition of the working class?

Further:

If the income of the worker increases with the rapid growth of capital,
the social gulf that separates the worker from the capitalist increases
at the same time, and the power of capital over labour, the dependence
of labour on capital, likewise increases at the same time.

To say that the worker has an interest in the rapid growth of capital is
only to say that the more rapidly the worker increases the wealth of
others, the richer will be the crumbs that fall to him, the greater is
the number of workers that can be employed and called into existence,
the more can the mass of slaves dependent on capital be increased\... If
capital is growing rapidly, wages may rise; the profit of capital rises
incomparably more rapidly. The material position of the worker has
improved, but at the cost of his social position. The social gulf that
divides him from the capitalist has widened. ^[\[155\]](#n155)^

That Marx did not at all eschew the idea of the *relative* deterioration
in the condition of the working class, as the 'critics' would assure us,
is proved beyond doubt by these excerpts. They also go to show that Marx
would not have ceased from speaking of the *impoverishment* of the
working class even if an *absolute* improvement might have been observed
in its condition. However, it is true that, in his analysis of the
*actual* development of capitalist society as given in the booklet, Marx
found that the growth of capital was far from always linked with an
absolute improvement in the condition of the working class:

*The more productive capital grows, the more the division of labour and
the application of machinery expands* \[he says\]*, the more competition
among the workers grows and the more their wages contract.*
^[\[156\]](#n156)^

He went on to point out that the development of capitalism drove into
the ranks of wage-earners ever new sections of the population, and ended
the booklet with the following overall conclusion:

*If capital grows rapidly, competition among the workers grows
incomparably more rapidly, that is, the means of employment, the means
of subsistence, of the working class decrease proportionately so much
the more, and, nevertheless, the rapid growth of capital is the most
favourable condition for wage labour.* ^[\[157\]](#n157)^

Marx evidently thought at the time that the relative decrease in the
sources of earnings should inevitably lead to lower wages, which is why
he held that the development of capitalism led to a fall in wages. This
was a view he held in common with many socialists of the time.
^[\[158\]](#n158)^

In the booklet we have mentioned, Marx's economic views, however, did
not yet appear in a finalised form. ^[\[159\]](#n159)^ In it, he did not
yet distinguish between profit and surplus value, wages and the price of
labour power. That is why we shall address ourselves to his main work --
*Capital*.

In Volume One of *Capital*, Marx says that, as a result of higher labour
productivity, the price of labour power may *fall*, despite the
simultaneous *increase* in the means of subsistence at the disposal of
the labourer. ^[\[160\]](#n160)^ Consequently, a distinction is here
drawn between the *relative* and the *absolute* worsening in the
labourer's condition. Elsewhere in the same volume, Marx, in mentioning
Gladstone's opinion that the 'intoxicating' growth of Britain's social
wealth had made the poor less poor, noted the following:

If the working class has remained 'poor', only 'less poor' in proportion
as it produces for the wealthy class 'an intoxicating augmentation of
wealth and power', then it has remained relatively just as poor. If the
extremes of poverty have not lessened, they have increased, because the
extremes of wealth have. ^[\[161\]](#n161)^

What is this but the theory of the *relative* impoverishment of the
working class?

True, Marx also indicates in *Capital* the causes that tend *to bring
about a fall in wages*. But, while establishing the highly important
distinction between the *pay* received by the labourer, and the *price*
of his *labour power*, he no longer affirms that a higher degree of the
workers' exploitation must inevitably lead to a fall in his wages. No,
in the direct and clear meaning of his finalised theory, a fall in the
price of labour power, and a relative worsening in the workers'
condition may be accompanied by a rise in his pay. ^[\[162\]](#n162)^
That is why one cannot but be surprised by the dexterity of those who
are out to refute Marx by pointing out that wages went up in the second
half of the nineteenth century. That dexterity deserves the greater
praise for that remark -- inasmuch as it is true -- referring, in
particular, to so-called skilled workers, whereas in *Capital* Marx
cited examples mostly from the life of *unskilled* workers.
^[\[163\]](#n163)^

### XI

Mr P Struve dislikes the passage in *Capital*, in which Marx says that
the higher the productivity of labour, the more the workers are riveted
to the means of the occupation, and the less satisfactory the conditions
of their existence. The reader will remember the following celebrated
passage:

The law, finally, that always equilibrates the relative
surplus-population, or industrial reserve army, to the extent and
*energy of accumulation*, this law rivets the labourer to capital more
firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did Prometheus to the rock. It
establishes an *accumulation of misery*, corresponding with
*accumulation of capital*. Accumulation of wealth at one pole is,
therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil,
slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole,
that is, on the side of the class that *produces its own product in the
form of capital*. ^[\[164\]](#n164)^

Mr P Struve thinks that these lines are not in keeping with the actual
state of affairs in society today, and that, were they in keeping with
it, the 'development towards socialism' would be quite impossible.

Let us examine this opinion of our 'critics'.

*Is it true or untrue* that the labourers' conditions of existence
become more and more insecure with the development of labour
productivity?

People who have made a careful study of this question and, to the best
of our knowledge, have not yet been suspected of 'dogmatism' say that it
is true.

Indeed, let us recall the opinion of the British Commission that studied
the depression in industry. The *majority* of the commission were of the
opinion that the civilised nations can at present turn out far more
manufactures than are needed on the world market. ^[\[165\]](#n165)^ The
discrepancy between productive force and consumer capacity leads to
depression in industry and to lower profits. We leave it to the reader
to judge *how* the workers' conditions of existence must be affected by
such a state of affairs brought about by the highly developed state of
society's productive forces.

The *minority* came out still more decisively and definitely. In their
opinion, a very big change had taken place in the preceding forty years
(the report was published in 1886) in the life of civilised nations.
Labour productivity there had reached such a high level of development
that the main difficulty now lay, not in the expensiveness or the rarity
of products, but in finding employment, in the absence of which the vast
majority of the population were deprived of all means of subsistence.
^[\[166\]](#n166)^

Again, let the reader judge for himself whether all this contradicts or
confirms the above-quoted words of Marx.

The commission left no room for doubt as to the nature of the difficulty
created by the development of labour productivity. As they put it, it
consisted in the fewer sources of wages for the working class, that is,
in the creation of *relative over-population*. *That was exactly what
Marx said*.

Thus, with the development of capitalism, the terms of the sale of
labour power have *changed to the disadvantage of the sellers*, which is
sufficient explanation of the fall we have demonstrated in the *share*
of the working class of the national income. But, in saying that, we in
no way deny higher wages in certain branches of production, but merely
remark that such a rise goes hand in hand with a fall in the price of
labour power, and, besides, it is not as considerable as the apologists
of capitalism would have us believe.

Giffen asserted that the wage level rose by 100 or even more *per cent*
^[\[167\]](#n167)^ in some branches of British industry between the
years 1833 and 1883. This is a staggering exaggeration, which has long
been pointed out in various quarters. Any comparison between the figures
for 1833 and the 1880s will reveal very little, for the simple reason
that in 1833, that is, *prior to the reform of the Poor Laws*,
^[\[168\]](#n168)^ many workers with families were on parish relief,
which no doubt led to an artificial lowering of the wage level.
^[\[169\]](#n169)^ Besides, even this scientifically impermissible
comparison does not always confirm the roseate conclusion drawn by the
'prime British statistician'. Thus, for instance, an able seaman's pay
reached 60 shillings a month in 1833; *in the 1880s, it stood at the
same level*. In 1833 London compositors were earning an average of 36
shillings a weak; in the 1880s, *their wages were no higher*.
^[\[170\]](#n170)^ That, however, was not the main thing; the main thing
was that this wage rise in Britain was accompanied by a series of
phenomena that considerably detracted from its favourable consequences
for the workers. Throughout the period under review, urban development
made great forward strides, as a result of which the worker's essential
expenditures grew considerably, rents became higher ^[\[171\]](#n171)^
and the workers were obliged to travel to work by train or tram, while
previously they had been able to walk to their places of employment,
etc. Besides, adventitious loss of working hours became more frequent
than before. Mr Gay, a secretary of the foundry-men's union, calculated
from the records at his disposal that members were losing up to 20 per
cent of their working time through no fault of their own.
^[\[172\]](#n172)^ This figure is indicative of the size of the reserve
army of workers, whose existence our 'critic' is prone to *deny*.
^[\[173\]](#n173)^ Hobson thinks that 'the general condition of
employment in England is one of greater irregularity and that the waste
of time and energy is larger than it was half a century ago or during
the eighteenth century. ^[\[174\]](#n174)^ This of course has escaped
the attention of 'scholars' who prattle about 'automatic socialism' in
capitalist society.

How *frivolous* the most '*estimable*' representatives of the
bourgeoisie become when they begin to speak about the 'enrichment' of
the workers is to be seen from the example of the self-same Goschen. To
back his argument in favour of the 'automatic socialism' he has
invented, Goschen refers to the fact that, in the period between 1875
and 1886, the number of houses producing *less than £10* of rent grew
far more slowly than the number of houses with rents of between £10 and
£20. He attributed this to a considerable part of the working class
having grown more prosperous and therefore presenting demands for more
expensive housing. However, he himself has foreseen that objectors will
point to the *higher rents*, a fact of common knowledge.

To this unavoidable objection he makes reply in advance: 'At least, the
working men\... can afford to pay them.' ^[\[175\]](#n175)^ -- that is,
higher rents. There is no out-arguing such 'objective' researchers!

The 'well-intentioned' economists are no less aware than we are that
higher wages do not of themselves equate to an improvement in the
workers' conditions. However, they often pass the fact over in silence,
probably in the interests of the '*social peace*'. In other and less
delicate cases, they speak out frankly. As an example, we can refer to
the renowned *Levasseur*, who, in his book *La Population de la France*,
points out very reasonably:

When they leave their villages, workers allow themselves to be tempted
by the prospect of higher pay; they lose sight of the unemployment, the
high prices of dwellings and food, and the temptation to spend more;
many of them have changed their condition without improving their lot.
^[\[176\]](#n176)^

Elsewhere in the same book, the esteemed scholar, who has confessed,
incidentally, to a weakness for 'Bastiat's philosophical views on social
harmony', ^[\[177\]](#n177)^ loses sight of these reasonable
considerations and, on the basis of a rise in wage levels, speaks of the
all-round improvement in the workers' conditions of life.
^[\[178\]](#n178)^

If the reader does not wish to follow the example of such 'objective'
scholars but will *always* take account of *all* aspects of the workers'
conditions of life, he will agree with us that, even in Great Britain,
the improvement in the material condition of the proletariat has been
quite insignificant. The usual reference is to the decline in
*pauperism* in that country as outstanding proof of '*progress of the
working classes*'. But Marx in his time remarked that 'the official
statistics become more and more misleading as to the actual extent of
pauperism in proportion as, with the accumulation of capital, the class
struggle, and, therefore, the class-consciousness of the working-men,
develop'. ^[\[179\]](#n179)^ To this it should be added that the fall in
the number of poor people on public relief was also brought about by a
series of laws which *more and more* hampered *home aid* to all poor
people in general, and especially to *adult workers* with at least some
earnings. As a result of such laws, which were administered with
remorseless callousness, the number of poor people in receipt of such
aid fell in England and Wales from 955,146 (5.5 per cent of the
population) in 1849 to 600,505 (1.95 per cent of the population) in
1897. During the same period, however, the number of workhouse inmates
*rose* from 133,513 to 214,382. True, the share of the poor of that
category in respect of the entire population remained practically
unchanged: 0.77 in the first case, and 0.70 in the second.
^[\[180\]](#n180)^ But it is this very constancy in the relative number
of workhouse inmates that should prompt the thought that the bruited
decrease in British pauperism is a *fiction that can deceive only those
who would be deceived*, *and have eyes but not to see with*. Miss Edith
Simcox is quite right in saying that the statistics of British pauperism
are far from a true measure of poverty in that country:

More than 10 per cent of those who die in a year \[she says\] die in
workhouses or \[charity-maintained -- GP\] hospitals, and this mortality
represent a population of two and a half millions; so that nearly three
and a half million of the population are either actual paupers, or in
such poverty as to have been driven across the borders of pauperism by
illness. ^[\[181\]](#n181)^

### XII

This is a very gloomy picture but even so gloomy a picture cannot fully
convey the sombre nature of reality. From other sources we learn that
pauper mortality is much higher than Miss E Simcox thought. *One-sixth*
of the population of London, the world's richest city, *die* at
workhouses or hospitals attached to them. But that is not all. There are
grounds to believe that between 20 and 25 per cent of the British
population die in conditions so close to beggary that funeral expenses
have to be borne by the parish. ^[\[182\]](#n182)^ About 20 per cent of
all those who reach the age of sixty-five in England and Wales have to
apply for public charity, according to figures provided by Charles
Booth, the well-known researcher. ^[\[183\]](#n183)^ Since there are, of
course, classes in the English population in which few aged people fall
into poverty, if they ever do, it follows that the working class
accounts for an even higher relative number of the aged poor. *Between
40 and 45 per cent of all proletarians fall into extreme poverty in
their old age* in London and the Home Counties. ^[\[184\]](#n184)^

This is terrible in the literal sense of the word! And with the
existence of such horrible things, apologists for the bourgeoisie speak
of the diffusion of wealth, the blunting of social contradictions, and
the like. Truly, it may be said that their *cynicism* reaches the
*sublime*! One cannot but be amazed at the 'critics' of Marxism being
unable to be *critical* of such cynicism and yielding, ever more to the
influence of the apologists!

Anyone familiar with the condition of the English working class will not
be surprised to learn that the *percentage of suicides* in England is
particularly high among elderly people of 55 or over. ^[\[185\]](#n185)^
After a lifetime of back-breaking toil reflecting a labour intensity
only the Anglo-Saxon worker is capable of, aged proletarians voluntarily
leave this earthly paradise for the celestial. And the more educated the
English worker becomes, the more frequently he resorts to suicide as the
best means of escaping from poverty. In counties up to 27 per cent of
whose inhabitants cannot even sign their names, the number of suicides
reaches 57.5 per million; in counties where between 17 and 25 per cent
of the population cannot sign their names, the number of suicides rises
to 69.2 per million inhabitants. Finally, the highest number of
suicides, 80.3 per million inhabitants, refers to areas where the
percentage of illiteracy does not exceed 17. ^[\[186\]](#n186)^ The
reason is obvious: the more educated a man is, the harder he finds it to
put up with the humiliation inflicted by poverty, and in general with
the hardships of life. Or perhaps another explanation is more in place
here? Perhaps it may be supposed that the number of persons who cannot
sign their names declines -- as we have seen in Russia -- together with
the growth of *industrial development*, so that the mounting number of
suicides is thus the beneficent outcome of the growth in '*social*'
*wealth*? In both cases, we arrive at a conclusion that is quite
unflattering to capitalist society and to all those gentlemen who raise
their voices in a chorus of comfort about the *blunting* of social
*contradictions*.

Despite the ruthless ferocity with which the British bourgeoisie
practise their 'charity', the number of the poor people on relief in
rich London is outpacing the population growth. ^[\[187\]](#n187)^ How,
after such things, can Marx and Engels be accused of exaggeration when
they say in the *Communist Manifesto*: *'The modern labourer\... becomes
a pauper*, *and pauperism develops more rapidly than population and
wealth*.' ^[\[188\]](#n188)^

If such is the state of affairs in Great Britain, which, as a result of
her long years of supremacy on the world market, has yet been able at
least somewhat to improve the condition of some sections of its
proletariat, what must the position be in other lands which do not enjoy
the advantages of industrial monopoly? Some idea of that can be provided
by the fact, quoted above, that the *Belgian* worker is obliged to sell
his labour below its value. We shall cite several facts characterising
the condition of the *French proletarian*.

In the period between 1833 and 1843, the price of white bread in France
was 34.5 centimes a kilogram. In 1894, a kilogram of bread cost between
37.5 and 40 centimes in Paris. ^[\[189\]](#n189)^ In 1831-40, the
wholesale price of a kilogram of beef was 1 franc 5 centimes, and that
of a kilogram of pork 78 centimes; in 1894, the price of beef was 1
franc 64 centimes a kilogram, with pork costing 1 franc 54 centimes.
^[\[190\]](#n190)^ In 1854, the price of a thousand eggs was 52 francs;
today they cost 82 francs. ^[\[191\]](#n191)^ In 1849 a hectolitre of
potatoes (low-grade) cost between 3.5 and 4.5 francs; today's price is
between 7 and 12.5 francs. A kilogram of butter cost between 1 franc 28
centimes and 1 franc 90 centimes in 1849; today's price bracket is
between 2 francs 5 centimes and 4 francs 26 centimes. Finally, the price
of beans doubled between 1849 and 1892. ^[\[192\]](#n192)^

Again according to Pelloutier, the price of foodstuffs has risen in
France by between 22 and 23 per cent during the last 30 years, while
average wages have not increased by more than 17 per cent.
^[\[193\]](#n193)^ If you add to this the soaring rents in the big
cities, you cannot but arrive at the conclusion that the French
proletarian's material condition *has deteriorated not only relatively
but absolutely* during the three decades. The conclusion is fully
corroborated by the statistics, which show that the French worker gets
less nourishment than he did 50 years ago. ^[\[194\]](#n194)^

The absolute deterioration in the French proletariat's economic
condition naturally brings *greater pauperism* in its train: '*The
modern labourer\... becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more
rapidly than population and wealth*.' In the five years between 1886 and
1891, the population of the French capital increased by 4.01 per cent;
during the same period, the number of paupers in this *ville lumière*
^[\[195\]](#n195)^ rose by 23.1 per cent. The five-year period was no
exceptional one: the following table shows that the growth of pauperism
has long assumed shocking proportions in Paris: ^[\[196\]](#n196)^

Years

Expenditures on Paris Paupers

Population

1850

5,000,000

1,532,622

1870

10,000,000

1892

18,000,000

2,386,232

1895

20,000,000

Do not think that all this refers to Paris alone. The situation is much
the same all over France. In 1873, there were 6715 'charity bureaux' in
France, rendering relief to 806,000 poor people; in 1860, 11,351 bureaux
supported 1,115,900 persons; in 1888, such bureaux numbered 15,138, the
number of the poor maintained by them standing at 1,647,000.
^[\[197\]](#n197)^ In 28 years (1860-88), the number of paupers went up
by 42 per cent, with the population increase being only 5.4 per cent.
'*The modern labourer\... becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more
rapidly than population and wealth\...*'

### XIII

Bourgeois economists, who raise their heads in pride at the sight of
decrease in the official number of paupers in Britain, modestly lower
their eyes in the face of the statistics on French pauperism, and very
conveniently recall, at the same time, that the figures of official
pauperism, taken by themselves, do not prove anything. We, too, think
that, taken separately, these figures cannot serve as an infallible
indicator of the proletariat's economic condition. We therefore consider
it necessary to *verify* the testimony of such figures with the aid of
statistics of another kind.

In the half-century between 1838 and 1888, *crime* increased in France
as follows. ^[\[198\]](#n198)^

  -------------------------------- ---------------------
  Number of Convictions            Percentage increase
  Crimes of violence               51
  Offences against property        69
  Offences against public morals   240
  Vagrancy and begging             430
  -------------------------------- ---------------------

The amazing increase in the number of convictions for begging and
vagrancy emphatically confirms the official testimony of the statistics
on pauperism in France, regarding which we may have harboured some
doubt. Consequently, we have to acknowledge the truth of the statistics.

Let the objection not be raised that France is a country on the decline;
she is still one of the wealthiest countries in Europe. It is not only
in France that a rapid growth of pauperism is to be seen. Here is a
table which shows the growth in the number of people on relief in
Brussels and its important adjacent urban communities, between the years
1875 and 1895. ^[\[199\]](#n199)^

 

One person on relief per

1875

1894

Bruxelles

9

4

Schaerbeek

16

12

Molenbeek

11

10

Laeken

16

25

Anderlecht

35

8

Saint-Josse

24

15

Saint-Gilles

25

20

Ixelles

20

17

With the exception of Laeken, we can see an extremely rapid growth of
pauperism in all the communities. In Anderlecht, there was one person on
charity per 35 inhabitants in 1875; in 1894, there was one person on
relief per eight inhabitants. Brussels had gone still further; a quarter
of the population were reduced to beggary. In the provinces -- in
Bruges, Ypres, Enghien, Nivelles and Tournai, things were no better, but
*even worse* in places: in some of these towns there was one pauper on
relief *per two or three inhabitants*. ^[\[200\]](#n200)^ Thus we see
that in Belgium too the 'labourer\... becomes a pauper, and pauperism
develops more rapidly than population and wealth'.

The author we have taken these figures from hastens to make a
reservation already made several times in this article: the number of
the poor on relief does not show the actual extent of poverty.
^[\[201\]](#n201)^ That is, of course, something nobody will dispute,
but it is indubitable that the extraordinary rapid growth of this number
does not show any improvement in the condition of the working class:
what worker will appeal for alms unless poverty has overcome his sense
of human dignity and pride of class?

In Germany, where the extent of official pauperism is far lower than in
Belgium, we meet with the following interesting phenomenon: in towns
with under 20,000 inhabitants, the percentage of paupers on relief is
4.75; in cities of between 55,000 and 100,000 it rises to 6.39; finally,
where the population is over 100,000, it already stands at 6.51 of the
total population. ^[\[202\]](#n202)^

Here again we see that poverty develops more rapidly than population, if
not more rapidly than wealth. What has Mr P Struve to say to this?

Perhaps he will say that the number of poor people on charity in Germany
has fallen considerably in recent years. That will be true. But why has
the number fallen? Simply because there has been a *change in the system
of administering relief*. It is a long way from that change to an
*improvement* in the condition of the workers.

We shall also ask our 'critic' to note that *crime is* growing, not only
in France but also in all the capitalist countries which have been
studied in this respect. ^[\[203\]](#n203)^ In 1882, there were 1043
convictions per 100,000 inhabitants of Germany over 12 years old and not
serving in the armed forces; in 1895, the number was already 1251.
^[\[204\]](#n204)^ What brought about this growth of crime? The French
socialists (for example, Louis Blanc in his *Organisation du travail*)
have long linked it with the *growing difficulties in the struggle for
existence, and in particular with the impoverishment of the working
class*. Experience has fully confirmed this indication. Professor Liszt,
whom we have just quoted, says that the dependence of crime on the
economic condition is common knowledge and is questioned by none.
^[\[205\]](#n205)^ He goes on to remark that by the economic condition
one should understand, first and foremost, the *general condition* of
the working class -- '*die Gesammtlage der arbeitenden Klassen*' -- that
is, in all respects, not only in the 'financial'. We already know that
higher wages -- something that bourgeois economists keep harping on --
do not yet bring about an overall improvement in the proletarian's
conditions of life. Crime, which is growing far more rapidly than
population, is a reminder of this indisputable truth. Indeed, note that
*juvenile delinquency is growing far more rapidly than adult crime*.
Between 1826 and 1880, the overall figure for criminal offences
committed by adults in France *trebled*, while the number of cases of
juvenile delinquency quadrupled. ^[\[206\]](#n206)^ Juvenile delinquency
grew even more rapidly after 1880. At present, according to Fouillé,
over half of all those arrested in Paris on various charges, are
juveniles.

Parallel with juvenile *delinquency*, there has been a growth in
juvenile *prostitution and suicides*, which were previously extremely
rare. This is to be seen not only 'In Paris, in its busy boulevards,
Where vice and dissipation seethe', but all over France, and beyond her
borders too. In pious Germany the number of young criminals rose *almost
by 50 per cent* ^[\[207\]](#n207)^ between 1882 and 1895. In respect of
*prostitution*, that pious country was not marking time either: between
1875 and 1890, the population of Berlin increased by *three to four per
cent* annually, with the number of prostitutes going up by *six to seven
per cent*. ^[\[208\]](#n208)^

Is it necessary to expatiate on the causes of the growth of crime and
vice among juveniles? To understand those causes, it is sufficient to
recall, for instance, that in France sixty per cent of juvenile
'delinquents' are made up of *beggars and vagrants*, while twenty-five
per cent are hauled into bourgeois courts *for theft*.
^[\[209\]](#n209)^ In consequence of the *lack of care*, which is itself
connected with the more extensive use of women's hired labour, children
acquire habits of *vagrancy*, and are then forced to beg and steal so as
not to starve. *The growth of crime in general, and of juvenile
delinquency in particular*, testifies *irrefutably to the worsening
social position of the proletarian*.

We shall remark, in passing, that recognition of this indisputable fact
does not obligate Social-Democrats to support the Christian Socialists'
demand for a ban on women's employment at factories. The
Social-Democrats hold that such a ban, far from improving the workers'
social condition, would make it worse by giving a new and very powerful
impulse to the grossest and cruellest forms of the exploitation of women
by capital. The appearance and consolidation of such forms of
exploitation have as yet never helped improve the condition of the
toiling masses. That is why the Social-Democrats are utterly opposed to
the reactionary proposal emanating from the Christian Socialists. This
is most logical, and if mockery is in place here, it should be addressed
to Mr P Struve, who has made so bold as to wax ironical over the alleged
inconsistency of Kautsky, who has seen, in the development of women's
employment in industry, proof of the impoverishment of the working
class, but at the same time has no approval for the practical proposals
advanced by a Decurtins.

### XIV

In speaking of crime, one should remember that its rapid growth goes
hand in hand with the soaring *number of recidivists*.
^[\[210\]](#n210)^ 'Our punishments', F Liszt has remarked in this
connection, 'exert neither a bettering nor an intimidating influence; in
general, they do not prevent crime, that is, do not hold anybody back;
rather they enhance an inclination towards crime.' ^[\[211\]](#n211)^

That is true, but it is no less true that recidivists comprise a milieu
that is morally quite distinct from so-called *fortuitous delinquency*.
It is unfortunately a milieu where, if not ignorance, then at least
*coarsening and degradation of morals* hold almost full sway. And not
only coarsening and degradation of morals. Many of its members
undoubtedly bear the stamp of *degeneration*, and it is to them that the
words of Maudsley apply with particular force: 'There exists a class of
criminals marked by defective physical and mental organisation\... the
proportion is considerable of those that are feeble-minded or epileptics
who go mad or are descended from families where madness has existed.'
^[\[212\]](#n212)^ We shall refer anyone who wants proof of these words
to a highly interesting book by Dr E Laurent entitled *Les habitués des
prisons de Paris*, which came out last year in Paris, with a no less
interesting preface by Lacassagne. ^[\[213\]](#n213)^ Laurent is just as
far removed from the ridiculous exaggerations of the *Lambroso school*
^[\[214\]](#n214)^ as Lacassagne is. Anyone who goes through his book
carefully will gain an unshakeable conviction that, when it punishes
recidivists, society often penalises *degenerates*, who are a *passive
and pathological product of the socio-historical process*. If the number
of such people is growing, together with the number of beggars, tramps,
prostitutes, pimps and other representatives of the lumpen-proletariat,
then is it not clear that we still have the right to say, together with
Marx: '*Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same
time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance,
brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole\...'*
^[\[215\]](#n215)^ This is a fact that the present-day Brentanoists and
the 'critics' of Marx will not be able to *talk away* (*wegschwatzen*)
any more than Bastiat and his immediate followers were able to. In view
of this unquestionable fact, we are greatly surprised by those people
who consider as an extreme exaggeration the thought expressed by Marx
and Engels that the workers' social condition in the Middle Ages was
better than it is in capitalist society today. This thought may be
unpalatable to those who would *blunt* the contradictions inherent in
society today. The truth of the statement is, however, recognised not
only by the 'epigones' of Marx. ^[\[216\]](#n216)^

At this point, Mr P Struve stops us to remind us of an argument of his
which he considers irresistible: if the accumulation of wealth at one
pole goes hand in hand with the accumulation of poverty, physical
degeneration and moral debasement at the other, then how can the
socialist revolution take place? Is a degenerate working class capable
of effecting the greatest of all revolutions known in history?
^[\[217\]](#n217)^

To this we shall reply that Marx and Engels *never counted on degenerate
elements of the proletariat as a revolutionary force*. This is
categorically stated both in the *Manifesto of the Communist Party* and
the Preface to Engels' *Der deutsche Bauernkrieg*. ^[\[218\]](#n218)^
However, the development of capitalism brings in its wake, not only a
relative (and in places, also an absolute) deterioration of the
proletariat's condition, it not only creates '*passive products of
social decay*', but also gives food for thought to those proletarians
who do not constitute part of those passive products; out of such
proletarians it forms the ever-growing *army of social revolution*.
Pointing to the growth of pauperism, etc, Marx also spoke of '*the
indignation of the working class, which is constantly growing and
constantly training, is united and organised by the very mechanism of
the capitalist process of production*' (our italics). Consider France or
Germany: despite the rapid growth of crime, prostitution and other signs
of the spiritual degradation of *some elements* of the toiling masses,
the working class, *taken as a whole*, is becoming ever more
class-conscious and ever more imbued with the socialist spirit. *The
worsening of the proletariat*'s *social condition is in no way
tantamount to the creation of conditions that hamper the development of
its class consciousness*. Of course, only anarchists *à la* Bakunin
could imagine that *poverty in itself* is the finest of all possible
socialist agitators. But taken by itself, *prosperity* is far from
always an '*inspirer*' of the revolutionary spirit. *Everything depends
on circumstances of time and place*.

The 'critics', who consider a worsening in the social position of the
working class incompatible with the development of class consciousness,
simply do not understand the materialist explanation of history, to
which, however, they are fond of making reference. This
non-understanding also affects their reasoning *on the economic
conditions necessary for the political victory of the proletariat over
the bourgeoisie*. The political strength of any given class, say these
gentlemen, is *determined* by its economic and social force. That is why
an increase in the proletariat's political strength must presuppose an
increase in its economic strength and, conversely, a weakening of the
latter of necessity leads to a lessening of the political significance
of the proletariat. That is the opinion, in Germany, of David, Woltmann,
Kampffmeyer and many other adherents of the 'new methods'.
^[\[219\]](#n219)^ It is doubtful whether Mr P Struve adheres to this
view in all its plenitude, for it is a kind of conservative variety of
*Bakuninism*; ^[\[220\]](#n220)^ neither is he in agreement with
Kautsky, who, in his reply to Bernstein, spoke of its theoretical
bankruptcy. Necessary for the victory of the proletariat, in Mr P
Struve's opinion, is an 'organisational force', which can be acquired
only by degrees, on the basis of the economic organisation and economic
institutions. ^[\[221\]](#n221)^ The truth is closely intertwined with
error in this opinion. That an organisational force is necessary to the
proletariat, just as it has been necessary for any other social class
striving for new production relations, is indisputable: it has never
been questioned by 'orthodox' Marxists. But why does Mr P Struve think
that such force can be acquired only on the basis of 'economic
organisation', that is -- if we have correctly understood him -- on the
basis of cooperative societies and similar 'economic institutions\'? If
the proletariat's organisational force could develop only in the measure
in which its 'economic institutions' do, that force *would never develop
to a degree necessary and sufficient* for victory over the bourgeoisie
because, in *capitalist society*, such workers' institutions will always
be infinitesimal in comparison with the 'institutions' controlled by the
bourgeoisie.

Further, our 'critic' is also right in saying that the organisational
force of the proletariat -- like any other force -- can be acquired only
*by degrees*. But why should this correct idea preclude the notion of
*social revolution*? After all, the French bourgeoisie *also* acquired
its organisational force by degrees, yet it was able to carry through
its social revolution.

Incidentally the consideration that the *gradual* acquisition of
organisational force is inevitable is only one of the smaller cannon
placed by Mr P Struve next to some very big-calibre siege guns in the
theoretical battery that holds under fire, in his article, the concept
of *social revolution*, which is so repugnant to him. According to our
original plan, we were to have attacked that battery in the article now
lying before the reader, but then we saw ourselves constrained to
analyse in detail the theory of the blunting of social contradictions
from the economic point of view. That is why we have had to put off to
our next article our attack against the battery erected against the
concept of social revolution. In that article we shall finally settle
accounts with our 'critic', and we shall see with greater clarity the
kind of 'Marxism' he is now preaching.

### Article Three

### I

Mr P Struve is known to be given to dilating on '*epistemology*'. True
he has not to date found it necessary (or possible) to set forth his
'epistemological' views with any degree of coherence and consistency. It
is even doubtful whether he has any coherent views of that kind, which
does not prevent him from making reference to 'epistemology' in all
suitable and, which is far worse, all unsuitable cases. In view of that,
one cannot be surprised at 'epistemological' considerations comprising
his main weapon in the struggle against '*social revolution*'.

To show us how groundless that 'theoretical pseudo-notion' is, our
'critic' explains how 'evolutionism' should be understood by anyone who
does not wish to sin against the *theory of knowledge*. Here is what we
have learnt from him on this score.

The principle of evolution, while saying nothing on *why* changes take
place, does tell us most definitely *how* they take place. It acquaints
us with their form, and form can be defined by a single word:
*continuity* (*die Stetigkeit*). It is only uninterrupted change that we
can understand. That is why the old proposition *natura non facit
saltus* (Nature does not make leaps) should be supplemented with another
proposition *intellectus non patitur saltus* (the intellect does not
tolerate leaps). After crossing a certain limit, *quantitative changes*
turn into *qualitative*, says Hegel. This formula is often referred to
by orthodox Marxists, who naively imagine that it gives a real
explanation of the course of social revolution. In fact, however, it
does not explain phenomena but merely describes them with the aid of
logical categories, ^[\[222\]](#n222)^ emphasising the continuous nature
of change. That is why references to it lack all conviction. We must
inevitably arrive at the conclusion that the notion of social revolution
does not stand up to criticism and has to be bracketed together with the
notion of freedom of will (in the sense of action without cause), the
substantiality of the soul, and so on; since the times of Kant, we have
known that these notions are very important in the practical sense, but
are wholly groundless from the angle of theory.

That is the line of argument followed by Mr P Struve, who is most
industrious in bolstering his arguments with quotations from the
writings of Schuppe, Kant, Sigwart, Ziehen and even\... Mr F
Kistyakovsky. ^[\[223\]](#n223)^ Though Heine was right when he said
that quotations embellish writers, we more and more arrive at the
conviction, as we follow the reasoning of our 'critic', that far from
all writers who 'adorn' themselves with quotations are marked by clarity
and consistency of thought.

If the notion of *social revolution* does not stand up to criticism,
then the question arises: what about those social revolutions which have
already taken place in history? Should they be considered as *never
having taken place*, or should it be admitted that they were not
revolutions in the meaning attached to the word by orthodox Marxists?
But even if we said that, for instance, the French Revolution never took
place in fact, that would hardly be believed by anyone. And were we to
assert that that great revolution in no way resembled the one that
orthodox Marxists speak of, those obstinate people would at once
interrupt us, indicating that we were distorting the facts. In the
opinion of orthodox Marxists, the French Revolution was a social
revolution in the full sense of the word. True it was a *revolution of
the bourgeoisie*, and -- in the opinion of orthodox Marxists -- it is
now the turn of the *proletarian revolution*. But that does not change
matters. If the notion of *social revolution* is groundless because
Nature makes no leaps and the intellect does not tolerate them, then
such firm arguments should apply in equal measure both to the
*revolution of the bourgeoisie and that of the proletariat*. And if the
bourgeois revolution took place long ago, although leaps are
'*impossible*' and changes are '*continuous*', then we have every reason
to think that the proletarian revolution will also take place in due
time if only, of course, it does not come up against obstacles more
serious than those indicated by Mr P Struve in his 'epistemological'
arguments.

But let us take a closer look at those arguments.

The Hegelian 'formula' *does not explain* phenomena but only *describes
them*. That is so, but that is not the question. It is whether the
*description* given by the 'formula' is *right or wrong*. If it is
right, then the 'formula' is obviously correct; if the 'formula' is
correct, then it is no less obvious that Hegel was right; if it is
obvious that Hegel was right, then it is just as obvious that the
*continuous nature of changes* -- which, as Mr P Struve himself
acknowledges, is *indicated* by Hegel's 'formula' -- does not preclude
the possibility of those very '*leaps*' which, it is asserted, Nature
does not make and the intellect does not tolerate.

### II

It should be noted that, in general, '*leaps*' make mock of our
'critic', and irresistibly penetrate even into the area of his own line
of reasoning. That is best of all brought out by an excerpt he has made
from Sigwart.

Sigwart says that if something changes before our eyes, for example, if
blue paper turns red, or a piece of wax placed in a stove melts, then we
are dealing with a *continuous process* that gives us no reason to
suppose that a given substance is replaced by another one. On the
contrary, the continuity of changes taking place here convinces us that
the thing has remained the same even when there has been a change in all
its immediately perceptible properties, such as temperature, colour,
external appearance and so on.

These arguments of Sigwart's are quoted by our 'critic' as revealing the
groundlessness of the notion of *social revolution*. Actually, far from
destroying that notion, they support it. They reply -- inasmuch as they
do reply -- to the question: *in what conditions and why a given object
continues to remain that very object for us despite the changes it has
undergone*. However they contain not the slightest proof of the idea
that rapid and radical changes we are entitled to call leaps are
impossible in the objects about us. The reverse is true: one of the
examples given by Sigwart reminds us most convincingly that such changes
are quite possible, fully natural and not at all amazing. When a piece
of wax placed in a stove melts, an entire revolution takes place in its
state: it *was* hard, but *has become* liquid. And although this
fundamental change, of course, presupposes a more or less '*continuous*'
process or a more or less '*gradual*' heating of the wax,
^[\[224\]](#n224)^ that change itself takes place, not '*gradually*' but
*suddenly* as soon as the temperature necessary for melting is reached.
What undoubtedly does take place here is a most indubitable *saltus*,
yet Mr P Struve has undertaken to prove to us that Nature makes no leaps
and that the intellect does not tolerate them. How can that be? Or
perhaps he has in view only his own intellect, which indeed *does not
tolerate leaps* for the simple reason that he, as they say, '*cannot
tolerate*' *the dictatorship of the proletariat*.

If, after going to the trouble of gaining a correct understanding of
Sigwart's arguments, we will wish to apply them to human societies, we
shall have to say, for instance, the following: we are convinced that,
in the early nineteenth century, France remained France ('t*hat very*'
*country*) although, at the end of the eighteenth century, there took
place in it a social upheaval known by the name of the Great Revolution;
we are sure of that, in the first place, because all the changes in that
country during and after the revolution took place continuously in a
definite territory (\'in a given place'); secondly, because in many
respects (for instance in respect of race and language), the population
of that country was the same in the nineteenth century as it was before
the revolution; in the third place, because\... but there is no need for
us to enumerate all these 'becauses\'; we have only to show that the
question of why and when a given thing (or country) continues to *remain
for us 'the very same*' is one thing, while the question of whether the
rapid and radical changes called revolutions (or similar to them) are
possible and thinkable in the organisation of human societies (or in the
properties of things) is something else. Even if the authors quoted by
Mr P Struve gave us a most exhaustive reply to the *first* of these
questions, that gratifying circumstance would nevertheless give us no
right, or even any semblance of right, to decide the *second* question
in a negative sense.

Mr P Struve may perhaps object that, however matters may stand with the
Sigwart quotation and with several of his other quotations, the excerpt
from Kant is a reply to the second question. Let us read through that
passage, which we shall quote in full:

Any change\... is possible only because of the continuous operation of
causality\... There is no distinction of the real in a phenomena just as
no distinction in the magnitude of times even of the smallest; thus a
new state of reality arises from the first, where it did not exist,
through all the infinite degrees, all the distinctions between which
from one another are always less than the distinction between *O* and
*A*. ^[\[225\]](#n225)^

It may seem to follow hence that 'leaps' are impossible and there again
arises before us the vexing question of what we are to do with the
'leaps' that have already taken place in history. However, after some
reflection we discover that this awesome quotation is not as
intimidating as our 'critic' imagines.

Kant is speaking of *states* that differ from one another *only in
magnitude*. ^[\[226\]](#n226)^ What is meant by a series of consecutive
states that differ from one another only in magnitude? It is a series of
*quantitative changes*. Kant says that the series is *continuous* in the
sense that *leaps* in it are unthinkable. Let us assume that that is
true; but what has that to do with the question of whether leaps are
possible *when quantitative changes develop into qualitative ones?*
Nothing at all: the question is in no way solved by our learning from
Kant that leaps are impossible in a continuous process of changes in
quantity. We noted above that, according to the self-same Mr P Struve,
Hegel's 'formula' also speaks of the continuous nature of changes. We
can now add that it recognises changes as continuous in the measure that
they remain *quantitative*, but it declares that leaps are inevitable
when quantity develops into quality. If Mr P Struve wished to disprove
Hegel -- and, together with him, the orthodox Marxists -- he should have
aimed his critical blows at this very spot. He should have shown that
quantity does *not* develop into quality, or -- if it does develop --
that there is no leap in this case, nor can there be one. In fact, Mr P
Struve has limited himself to quoting from the *Critique of Pure Reason*
a passage that says that leaps are impossible *in cases of changes of
quantity*. What strange logic! What an amazing 'critic\'!

Kant goes on to say that a given magnitude of reality arises by passing
through the ever lesser degrees lying between finite moments of change.
But *what kind* of emergence, and emergence of *what*, is he referring
to? To this question he replies in categorical terms: what arises is not
Substance, whose quantity always remains invariable in Nature, but *only
a new state of Substance*. ^[\[227\]](#n227)^ Very good. Let us remember
that, and ask ourselves: is the emergence of a new *state* (of
Substance) the only thinkable kind of emergence? Cannot a new *relation*
(between the parts of Substance) arise? It not only can arise, but it is
constantly arising. Not only is it constantly arising, but it should
constantly arise in consequence of those very changes in the state of
Substance that Kant is in fact referring to, that is, *in consequence of
its motion*. It is this emergence of new relations that is the area in
which quantity develops into quality, and '*continuous change*' leads to
'*leaps*'.

### III

When oxygen unites with hydrogen, does the newly-formed molecule of
water go through 'all the innumerable degrees' separating it from a
molecule of hydrogen (or oxygen)? We do not think so, for the simple
reason that one cannot even imagine intermediate '*degrees*' between
water and its component elements. *That kind of continuity is
unthinkable*; *'the intellect cannot tolerate*' *it*.

Let us take another example. Let us suppose that a country has passed a
law limiting the working day to nine hours, but the workers find that
their labour still lasts too long and demand that the working day be
reduced to eight hours. Their demand is finally met by the legislators
and from such and such a date, say 1 January of the following year, the
eight-hour working day becomes law. The question is whether one can
speak here of any 'innumerable stages' between the new law and the old
one? Of course, not: there have been no such stages; the legislators
moved the limit of the working day by one hour, and *immediately*. This
was a *saltus*, though, of course, of less awesome proportions than a
social revolution, and if we, '*without tolerating leaps*', begin to
speak of '*continuity*', we shall soon have to admit that none existed
*here*, which is why the intellect '*does not tolerate*' it *here*. It
follows that even in '*social reform*' one cannot do without leaps.

And here is another example, somewhat more '*revolutionary*': on 24
February 1848, the *Republic* was proclaimed, in the Paris Hôtel de
Ville. Let Mr P Struve tell us what the 'innumerable degrees' between
the July monarchy and the Second Republic did and *could* consist in.
Could it have been in the revolutionary movement of the insurgent people
of Paris who, gradually and by overcoming the resistance of the troops,
thereby gradually decreased the chances of the preservation of the
monarchy? However, it would be very strange to refer to this victorious
*uprising* of the people as proof that *leaps* are impossible. By
resorting to such references, Mr P Struve would be proving the reverse
of what he is out to prove.

Kant himself has remarked that *change is undergone* only by those
objects that '*remain*', that is, continue to exist. Inception -- like
disappearance -- is *not at all a change in what arises or disappears*.
^[\[228\]](#n228)^ But if that is so -- and indeed it is so -- then it
is obvious that change in general, and consequently, gradual and
*continuous* change, explains *neither emergence nor disappearance*. And
if we can explain neither the emergence nor the disappearance of
objects, we *do not understand them* in general, and there can be no
talk of a scientific attitude towards them on our part.

The continuity Kant speaks of is that very continuity that Leibnitz
elevated to the law which he named *Loi de continuité*. But that very
Leibnitz recognised that, when dealing with '*choses composées*', we
discover that a small change sometimes brings about very great action,
that is, in other words, causes a *break in gradualness, a leap*. Such
leaps are impossible, in Leibnitz's words, only in 'simple things' (\'*à
l\'égard des principes ou des choses simples*'), because that would
contradict the Divine Wisdom. ^[\[229\]](#n229)^ Leaving aside the
matter of Divine Wisdom, we shall note that all the examples cited by us
above have been taken from the field of '*des choses composées*', which
means that Leibnitz himself would not have set about objecting to them
from the viewpoint of the 'law of continuity'. But are we saying that he
would not have set about objecting? It seems to us that, had he foreseen
the kind of use that his 'law' would be put to by certain would-be
philosophers of a certain future period, he would have added, in respect
of them, some kind of caustic reservation, if only he would not have
been afraid to give offence to those always numerous conservative
gentlemen whose 'intellect' had for so long eschewed '*leaps*',
especially where it comes to the '*chose composée*' called
socio-political relations.

We shall note, in passing, that, in '*choses simples*' too, the question
of leaps is not solved quite as simply as it seemed to Leibnitz and
Kant. Let us take, for instance, the reasoning made already familiar to
us by the author of *Critique of Pure Reason*.

He says that a new magnitude of reality (*A -- B*) arises through all
the lesser degrees contained between *A* and *B*. Let us assume that
this is so, and take two immediately consecutive degrees of those lying
between the points indicated. The question is: how does that magnitude
of reality arise which is equal to the difference between these two
degrees? Here only two things can be supposed: 1) that it arises
*immediately* or 2) that it arises *gradually*. If it arises
*gradually*, that means that it itself goes through many intermediate
degrees. But that is contrary to the condition of our task, since we
have taken two degrees that are *immediately* consecutive. Consequently,
there remains only the second supposition, according to which the
difference between the two degrees we have taken arises *at once*. That
arising *at once* is one of those *leaps* which are alleged to be
impossible. That means that it is *not leaps* that the intellect *does
not tolerate*, but *continuity*.

*To the thesis* that *leaps do not exist, but only continuity*, can be
contraposed with full justice the *antithesis* in the meaning of which
*change always takes place* in reality *by leaps*; *however, a series of
small and rapidly successive leaps merges for us into one 'continuous'
process*.

A correct theory of knowledge should of course reconcile this *thesis*
and *antithesis* in a single *synthesis*. We cannot examine here how
they can be reconciled in the area of '*choses simples*', for that would
be taking us too far. ^[\[230\]](#n230)^ At this point, it is sufficient
for us to know and remember that, in the '*choses composées*' we so
often have to deal with in the study of Nature and history, *leaps
presuppose continuous change*, *while continuous change inevitably leads
to leaps*. These are two necessary *aspects* of one and the same
*process*. Eliminate one of them mentally, and the entire process will
become impossible and unthinkable. ^[\[231\]](#n231)^

### IV

'All is flux, nothing is stationary', said the 'obscure' philosopher of
Ephesus. ^[\[232\]](#n232)^ All is flux, everything changes, the
adherents of the dialectical method have always repeated. But if
everything is flux and everything changes, and if phenomena are
constantly passing into each other, it is not always easy to designate
the *borderlines* separating one phenomenon from another.

For everyday purposes \[says Engels\], we know and can say, for example,
whether an animal is alive or not. But, upon closer inquiry, we find
that this is, in many cases, a very complex question, as the jurists
know very well. They have cudgelled their brains in vain to discover a
rational limit beyond which the killing of the child in its mother's
womb is murder. It is just as impossible to determine absolutely the
moment of death, for physiology proves that death is not an
instantaneous, momentary phenomenon, but a very protracted process.

In like manner, every organic being is every moment the same and not the
same; every moment it assimilates matter supplied from without, and gets
rid of other matter; every moment some cells of its body die and others
build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time the matter of its
body is completely renewed, and is replaced by other molecules of
matter, so that every organic being is always itself, and yet something
other than itself. ^[\[233\]](#n233)^

Mr P Struve, who is familiar of course with these considerations, is out
to ascribe to orthodox Marxists something they have never thought or
wished to say. He rebukes them for their expecting to find a gulf where
in fact there can be only a level and almost imperceptible crossing. He
has described as lacking any reasonable foundation in theory their talk
of the social revolution, one that would mean a sharp -- and, in fact,
impossible -- line of demarcation between two social systems, the
capitalist and the socialist.

Such arguments can disconcert only that Marxist who has not yet evolved
a coherent world-outlook. The Marxist who has given careful thought to
the basic propositions of his theory knows that, in fact, development
does not take place exactly as the 'critics' would like it to. If I see
that heating turns ice into water, and water into steam, then I will
have to make a considerable effort to fail to notice the *leaps*
prepared here by *gradual change*. Of course, it is not everywhere that
such leaps take place. But even where they do not take place, or where
what we see as a leap consists, in fact, of a series of gradual but
imperceptible transitions -- even in such cases we often have every
possibility of distinguishing between phenomena with a degree of
precision sufficient for the definite purpose we are pursuing. Thus,
though death is a *process* that takes place more or less slowly and is
not a sudden *act*, we are able, in the vast majority of cases, to
distinguish between the living and the dead, so that if Ivan beheads
Semyon with a stroke of an axe, we can say, without fear of falling into
error, that the severance of Semyon's head from his body is an act that
has deprived him of life. It is the same in the field of socio-political
phenomena. Social evolution in no way precludes social *revolutions*,
which are *moments* in the former. A new society burgeons 'within the
womb of the old one', but when the time of '*delivery*' arrives, the
slow course of development breaks off and the 'old order' ceases to
contain the new one within its 'womb', for the simple reason that *it
disappears together with the latter*. That is what we call *social
revolution*. If Mr P Struve wants to get a graphic idea of the social
revolution, we would again refer him to the great social upheaval in
France that put an end to the existence of that *ancien régime* within
which the third estate had so long developed. Mr Struve holds that the
capitalist order is not fated to die such a rapid and violent death. We
will let him think exactly as he wishes, but would ask him to produce,
in defence of that opinion, something more convincing than his clumsy
and feeble considerations regarding '*continuity*'.

While these arguments of our 'critic' do not hold water on the plane of
logic, they present interest in the *psychological* aspect. It is from
this angle that a comparison with certain arguments used by Herr
Bernstein will present interest.

In his *Ludwig Feuerbach*, Engels said that the world is a totality of
processes in which things and their images in the mind, that is,
*notions*, undergo constant change. Herr E Bernstein has found it
necessary to subject this proposition of Engels' to '*criticism*',
declaring that 'in principle' (*prinzipielle*) he 'of course' recognises
the proposition as correct (*sicherlich*, *richtig*), but feels doubt as
to the measure that the underlying idea is correct (*welche Tragweite
dürfen wir dem ihm zu Grunde liegenden Gedanken beilegen*) and how the
words *constant change* should be understood. To explain what has seemed
doubtful to him, Herr Bernstein has cited the following example:
according to the physiologists, the components of the human organism
undergo constant change: during a period that does not exceed ten years
a complete replacement of the entire substance takes place in that
organism. It may therefore be said that, at any given minute, any person
is not exactly what he was a minute before, and after the expiration of
a certain period of time he has undergone complete material change.
Despite all this, however, he remains the same *person* as before. True,
he ages and undergoes change. He develops, but that development is
determined by the properties of his organism, and though it could be
slowed down or speeded up, it cannot lead to a particular man turning
into a creature of another kind. It is on this basis that Herr E
Bernstein has thought that Engels' proposition cited above should be
modified as follows: the world is a totality of ready-made things and
processes. We see in it processes, for the completion of which less than
a single second is necessary, but also such processes for which
centuries or even millennia are essential and which, from the practical
point of view, can be termed *eternal*. It is sometimes not only
possible but even necessary to abstract ourselves from certain specific
features in things, for the sake of certain aims of research or
exposition. However, the dialectical formulas, Herr E Bernstein thinks,
prompt such abstraction even when it is quite impermissible, or
permissible only within certain limits. Therein lurks the danger of
dialectical formulas.

We would not like to deal here with the question of the measure in which
the *amendment* made by Herr Bernstein *amends* Engels. Neither shall we
expatiate here on the amazing and purely schoolgirl naïveté of Herr
Bernstein's 'critical' remarks. The main distinctive feature in him as a
'critic' of the philosophical and sociological foundations of Marxism
consists in general in a non-understanding of the object he is
criticising. ^[\[234\]](#n234)^ But we are not in the least concerned
with that here; we only want to find out the meaning of the rebuke
addressed by Herr Bernstein to dialecticians in general, and Marxists in
particular. In brief, they are rebuked for giving insufficient
consideration to the specific features of things. In noting that, let us
recall what Mr P Struve rebukes the orthodox Marxists for.

With him, these people focus too much attention on the specific features
of the opposite concepts of *capitalism* and *socialism*, and betray
dialectics by losing sight of the gradual and continuous development of
the forms of social life. ^[\[235\]](#n235)^

Thus we have before us *two diametrically opposite reproofs*: according
to Herr Bernstein, it is *development* that prevents the orthodox
Marxists from seeing ready-made *things*; according to Mr Struve, they
do not see *development* because of their sharply delineated *concepts*.
According to Herr Bernstein, they are too loyal to dialectics; according
to Mr Struve they are insufficiently loyal to it.

Both these reproofs emanate from one and the same source -- an incorrect
idea of dialectics.

For some reason, Herr Bernstein thinks that dialectics ignores what
Hegel called the *rights of the mind*, that is, does not show concern
for a precise definition of notions. For some reason, Mr P Struve
imagines that taking the 'rights of the mind' into account means
betraying dialectics.

In actual fact, however, it is a distinctive feature of people capable
of dialectical thinking that they are free of both these shortcomings:
they know that the development of any 'thing' leads to its *negation*
and its transition into *another 'thing*'. But they also know very well
that this process of transition of one thing into another can be
understood by us only when we learn to distinguish between them, and do
not allow our notions of them to merge into one indifferent whole: in
fact, it is a question of the *emergence of various things*, *not of
constant change in one and the same thing*. To express the matter in
Hegel's words, it can be said that only he remains loyal to the
dialectical method who is able to give both *reason* and mind their due.
He who forgets the rights of 'reason' becomes a *metaphysician*, he who
loses sight of the rights of 'the mind' falls into *scepticism*.
^[\[236\]](#n236)^

Anyone who imagines that the adherents of the dialectical method
*disregard* the rights of the 'mind' have just as poor an understanding
of the actual nature of that method as one who sees in a *considerate
attitude* to those rights a betrayal of dialectics. The first instance
is that of Herr Bernstein; the second, that of Mr P Struve.

Incidentally, what is this all to Messieurs Struve and Bernstein? It
would be most mistaken to imagine that what is called criticism of
Marxism is out to meet some serious theoretical need. In essence the
'critics' care very little for theory. What they want is to overcome, or
at least to weaken, a certain practical trend -- the *revolutionary
trend* of the class-conscious proletariat. To them, 'criticism' serves
as a weapon in the 'spiritual struggle' against that trend; their
arguments present value to them only inasmuch as they help to present in
an unfavourable light a concept that is so obnoxious to them -- that of
the *social revolution*. This practical aim justifies all and any
theoretical means, and if one 'critic' advances against the orthodox
Marxists an accusation that is wholly incompatible with an accusation
simultaneously advanced against them by another 'critic', there is no
*contradiction* here, but only *variety in unity*. Both 'critics' are in
full accord between themselves that Carthage, that is, the concept of
*social revolution*, should be destroyed. It is this that makes them
*fellow-thinkers* and creates the mutual sympathy between them. As for
the *pretext* to be chosen for this destruction of Carthage, that is
something each of them decides in his own manner, nothing embarrassed by
the pretext chosen by him personally stripping of any meaning the
pretext chosen by his ally. It is with good reason that the 'critics'
rebel against what is 'stereotype\'!

As we have seen, the theory of evolution which Mr Struve defends has, on
the plane of theory, the basic shortcoming that it *leaves room only for
change in things that have already arisen, but not for the inception of
new ones*. But this is a shortcoming to which a blind eye is willingly
turned both by Mr P Struve himself and the entire learned and
semi-learned, big and petty bourgeoisie, who are out to overcome, with
the aid of the 'spiritual weapon', the socio-revolutionary strivings of
the proletariat. The conservative class instinct, which always makes
mock of the ideologists of the upper classes, is now making mock of the
bourgeois 'epistemologists'. It makes them take pride in their numerous
and glaring theoretical errors, flaunt them in the way a peacock spreads
its magnificent tail, and look down on those who have avoided such
mistakes.

### V

The reader will probably tell us that there can be no talk of Messieurs
P Struve and E Bernstein harbouring the *conservative* instinct because,
whatever their attitude to *social revolution*, they are firm supporters
of *social reform*. The trouble is that a firm defence of social reform
today exists cheek by jowl with the *conservative instinct of the
bourgeoisie*.

Here, for instance, is what Herr Werner Sombart has to say about this:

A thought that, during the second half of the present century, has
engaged the finest minds, that is, the possibility, within the near
future, of social production without the capitalist entrepreneur -- that
thought lives today only in the representatives of a dying generation of
social visionaries. We now know that the entrepreneur can become
superfluous only through a slow organic process\... There is room for
intensive and extensive work by capitalism for entire centuries to
come\... And we take pleasure in welcoming the prospects, for many years
to come, of seeing at the head of our economic progress people who today
too are guiding social life: masterly entrepreneurs, imperial merchants
and directors of big joint-stock companies, and further, almost just as
important -- the leaders of our state, urban and cooperative businesses.
^[\[237\]](#n237)^

The prospect of seeing masterly entrepreneurs, the directors of big
joint-stock companies, imperial merchants and their like in the van of
economic progress is wholly inseparable from the prospect of seeing that
estimable fraternity '*at the head*' *of the exploiters of wage labour*.
A man who 'takes pleasure in welcoming' one prospect will be just as
gratified to greet the other. Such a man indubitably adheres to the
standpoint of the bourgeoisie, whose interests he holds dear. Its
instinct of self-preservation speaks through him, yet he is an ardent
defender of '*socialism*'.

But that does not at all mean \[he assures us\] that socialist ideals
should capitulate to the colossal sphere of activities of present-day
capitalism: *rather the reverse*; *it is along the capitalist road that
they get the possibility of realisation*. This is true in two cases: if
we consider as the socialist ideal the planned management of production
and the unbridled forces of market circulation with the aid of an
alliance of cartels; also when we bring into the foreground the defence
of the interests of labour against those of property. The latter ideal
is achieved through the slow transformation of the dominant economic
order; to this refer factory legislation, the state insurance of workers
and, in general, all reforms in legislation and administration which
replace the initial private compact on the hiring of workers with a
relationship based on public law. ^[\[238\]](#n238)^

What is meant by 'the interests of property', that is, the interests of
capitalist property, that of those merchants, shareholders and
entrepreneurs to whom Herr Werner Sombart has with such pleasure
foretold so lengthy a predominance? They mean the interests of the
exploitation of wage labour. To defend the interests of wage labour
against those of property means lowering the level of worker
exploitation by the capitalists. The question arises: has that level
fallen as a result of the reforms in the relation between labour and
capital which has been dinned into our ears by the adherents of the
theory of the gradual 'voiding' of capitalism? No, that has not been the
case till now! On the contrary, we know very well that, despite all
these reforms, the *relative share* of the working class in the social
income has *fallen* in all the advanced capitalist countries. But that
means a *higher level of the exploitation of the working class and a
growth in its dependence on the capitalists*. Consequently, the
above-mentioned reforms have not brought about any *tangible* changes in
the capitalist relations of production and do not at all restrict *the
essential rights of capitalist ownership*. And if the entire 'socialism'
possible today boils down to such reforms, then it is in no way
surprising that the 'socialist ideals' are best of all achieved on a
*capitalist* foundation. The advanced industrial bourgeoisie of the
capitalist countries realised long ago that the achievement of *such
'*ideals', *far from harming them, brings them considerable benefit*.
That is why, after coming out so resolutely in the past against state
intervention in the attitude of labour to capital and against worker
trade unions, they are now themselves ready to call for such
intervention and help such unions to appear. They have realised that, as
one of the bourgeois Pindars of trade unionism has put it, 'in the big
machine-shop, the retail buying of labour is nonsense and absurdity'.
^[\[239\]](#n239)^ That is why the bourgeoisie's publicists and scholars
have come out as convinced propagandists of a 'socialism' of that kind.
^[\[240\]](#n240)^

As a scholarly bourgeois, who knows a good thing when he sees one, Herr
Werner Sombart waxes highly eloquent when he speaks of *socialism\... on
a capitalist basis*. But note, dear reader, that this kind of socialism
is the self-same and well-publicised '*social reform*' so insistently
recommended and so skilfully depicted by Messieurs E Bernstein, P Struve
*e tutti frutti*. ^[\[241\]](#n241)^ We shall not say that Herr W
Sombart's 'socialist ideals' fully coincide with the plans our of
'critics' of social reform. They may even differ in some things, but we
can confidently say that Herr W Sombart's 'socialism' is distinct from
Mr P Struve's 'social reform' no more than two varieties of one and the
same species are. *This is a variation on one and the same theme*. That
is why Mr P Struve lauds Herr W Sombart to the skies, while the latter
places such great hopes on Mr P Struve's 'neo-Marxism'.
^[\[242\]](#n242)^ Birds of a feather flock together: these two birds
are guided by one and the same class instinct.

In his well-known book, Mr Berdyaev has given excellent expression to
that concept of the gradual reform of capitalist society which is
peculiar to 'critics' *à la* P Struve. 'The corrections made by
capitalist development itself', he says, 'will darn the holes of
existing society until the entire social fabric all becomes entirely
new.' ^[\[243\]](#n243)^ It would be difficult to put things more
neatly. The trouble is that giving neat expression to an idea does not
yet mean eliminating the elements of error in it. The appearance of a
*new '*social fabric' as a consequence of a thorough darning of the
*old* one is the *only instance, recognised by the 'critics*', *of a
transition of quantity into quality*. But this case is a dubious one. If
I darn *stockings*, they will remain stockings and will not turn into
*gloves*, even in the extreme case of the entire fabric undergoing a
hundred per cent renovation. It is the same with darning the holes in
capitalist society. The capitalist mode of production became established
thanks to the *elimination* of the feudal-guild system, and not as a
result of any *darning* of the latter. It is wholly incomprehensible how
and why darning the capitalist 'fabric' can and should (even through the
slowest of changes) lead to the *elimination of capitalist production
relations and their replacement by socialist ones*. The figurative
expression employed by Mr Berdyaev can only serve to bring out in higher
relief the untenability of the kind of theory of evolution defended by
the 'critics'. We have already seen that this theory is capable of
explaining *only a change* in already existing 'things', not the
*emergence* of new ones. We can now clearly see that it can serve as
theoretical guidance *only to those whose 'socialist ideals*' *do not go
farther than 'continuous*' *darning of the holes in capitalist society*.
To those who would create a new social system, that theory is
*absolutely pointless*. It is a theory of bourgeois *social reform*
brought out in opposition to the theory of the *socialist revolution of
the proletariat*.

*'*Continuously' to darn the old, and just as 'continuously' to think
that the darned *old stuff '*continuously' turns into something quite
*new*, means 'continuously' believing in a miracle that frankly and
'continuously' sets all the laws of human thinking at naught. And this
*faith*, which, on the plane of theory, is nothing but an *unnatural
vice*, is now ascribed to what is called the utopianism of the orthodox
Marxists! What 'critics\'!

In actual fact, it is the theorists of '*darning*', not the orthodox
Marxists, that are the utopians. However, the utopianism of such
theorists is a special and new brand of utopianism, one that has never
existed in the history of social theories. A faith in the thaumaturgical
force of 'darning' coexists peacefully in the minds of the 'critics'
with a thorough and ineradicable 'sobriety' which so reasonably contents
itself with the joyful consciousness that -- as Gleb Uspensky
^[\[244\]](#n244)^ said in one of his works -- postage stamps will
become cheaper by a whole kopek in some future period of history. But
that is not all. That utopia is just as unthinkable without that
sobriety, as '*bottom*' is unthinkable without '*top*', and a *positive*
pole without a *negative* one. The philistine and sober 'minds' of the
theorists of darning 'do not tolerate' any other 'leaps' except cheaper
postage stamps in all the distant future. And they unreservedly obey the
voice of their 'intellect' in everything pertaining to practical
activities. They have, in practice, ushered in the epoch of that
*conscious* opportunism which is the more self-satisfied, the more fully
and conveniently its demands fit into the scheme of '*darning*'. But the
more proudly aware they become of their sobriety, the more unshakeable
is their conviction that they are permitted to indulge in *pipe dreams*.
They have complacently permitted themselves *to believe* that patches
superimposed on other patches will produce a new 'social fabric' and
that cheaper postage stamps will mark the onset of a golden age.
However, the faith of the 'critics' in no way resembles the vulgar and
blind faith of ordinary mortals: it is *thoroughly imbued with
disbelief*, since the 'critics' *believe* in what they themselves have
*declared to be theoretically untenable*. It is a faith of which only
the Kantians are capable, people who first show themselves and others
that not a single of the arguments advanced to prove the existence of
God stands up to criticism, and then acquire a sudden 'faith' in God.
The psychology of such 'believers' is somewhat reminiscent of the
psychology of Gogol's Podkolesin, a man who is well aware, in his heart
of hearts, that he has not the least wish to marry and that he will
never take himself a wife. His distaste for the bonds of matrimony will
yield to no Kochkarevs. That, however, does not prevent him from saying:
'When you begin to think, when you are at leisure, you realise that it
is time to marry after all. Why not? You go on living and then you begin
seeing things in such a gloomy light\... Indeed, you begin to feel a
twinge of conscience\...' ^[\[245\]](#n245)^ The only difference is that
Podkolesin lacks that 'critical' education that marks the reformers of
the new school. Under the influence of his own words, Podkolesin becomes
marriage-minded at least at times and briefly, whereas the 'critics' in
no wise go beyond 'darning', for they are never abandoned by the thought
that the *renovation of the social fabric is a utopia*. If the 'critics'
are not making mock of readers who are not blessed with 'critical' grace
and if they really believe in what, in their words, precludes belief,
then what we have before us is a highly interesting case of '*dual
consciousness*'.

Any socialist \[Mr P Struve writes\] proceeds from socialism as a
politico-moral ideal; to him, socialism is a regulative idea with whose
aid he subjects individual events and actions to politico-moral
appraisal and measurement. It is no different with a whole class which,
organised in a party, operates\... as a single politico-moral subject.
In the ideal, the Social-Democratic movement should subject itself to an
ultimate aim, for otherwise it will disintegrate. Faith in an ultimate
aim is the religion of Social-Democracy; that religion is no 'private
matter' but a most important social interest of a party.
^[\[246\]](#n246)^

And this is said with the theoretical consciousness that the 'ultimate
aim' is a utopia! No, say what you will, such '*religion*' is impossible
without a 'dual consciousness'. But we Social-Democrats are in our right
minds; we suffer from no 'dual consciousness', and we have not the
slightest need of Mr P Struve's 'religion'. We are very grateful to him
for his '*regulative idea*', but we stand in no need of it either. We
speak of our ultimate aim, not because it is a piece of *edifying
deception*, but because we are *firmly convinced of the inevitability of
its achievement*. To us, a patently unachievable ideal is not an ideal
but simply an immoral *trifle*. It is the *reality of the future* that
is *our ideal*, that of revolutionary Social-Democracy. That it will
come about is guaranteed to us by the entire course of present-day
social development; that is why our confidence in its future advent is
as little related in our eyes to religion as is the confidence of the
'critics' -- one that we share with them -- that the sun which has 'set'
today will not fail to 'rise' tomorrow. That is the question of more or
less infallible knowledge, not one of more or less firm religious
belief.

### VI

But why is our 'critic' so firmly convinced that our '*ultimate aim*'
can be *only* an object of '*faith*' to *us*? Why does he permit us to
speak of it only in view of our 'divine right' to a sizeable chunk of
utopia? It is because, when we speak of it, we abandon the *ground of
realism*.

But what is realism? It is a Marxism revised, corrected, purified and
supplemented by Mr P Struve:

The realistic view set forth in this article is also based on the ideas
of Marx and especially on the fundamental proposition of historical
materialism regarding the constantly proceeding adaptation of law to the
economy, as well as the unrealistic view that operates with the
theoretical pseudo-concept of the 'social revolution'. Marx against
Marx. ^[\[247\]](#n247)^

In the first of our articles dealing with a critique of our 'critics',
we showed how deplorably feeble is Mr P Struve's understanding of the
'fundamental proposition' of historical materialism regarding the causal
dependence between law and the economy. Anyone who has attentively read
that article is aware that the 'realistic view' of our 'critic' is based
on a 'fundamental' misunderstanding. Anyone aware of that will
understand what is to be expected from such a 'realistic' criticism of
our '*ultimate aim*'. But it will do no harm to subject that criticism
as well to detailed and careful criticism.

Mr P Struve is mistaken in calling Marx's doctrine of the relation
between the economy and law the *fundamental* proposition of historical
materialism. In actual fact, it is *only one of the fundamental
propositions of that theory*. Side by side with it should be placed
Marx's doctrine of the relation between the economy and people's *views
and sentiments* and the *aims* people set themselves in their historical
advance.

Why do some of those aims appear *utopian* to us? In general, what does
the criterion of '*reality*' consist in? Let us hear what Mr P Struve
has to say:

Movement is an historical Prius \[he says\]. Socialism always possesses
reality in the measure in which it is contained in a movement engendered
by the present-day economic order -- no more and no less.
^[\[248\]](#n248)^

Socialism is contained in a movement engendered by the present-day
economic order. It is '*real*' only inasmuch as it is contained in the
latter. Well and good. But how is socialism contained in that movement?
That can be understood in either of two ways: 1) socialism is contained
in it in the measure in which it forms part of the views and sentiments
of participants in the movement; 2) it is contained in it in the measure
in which the participants in the movement *succeed, at a given time, in
altering the reality about them in accordance with their views and their
sentiments*. If we accept the first interpretation, we shall arrive at
the conclusion that socialism is 'real' inasmuch as *it is aspired
towards by participants in a movement* engendered by the present-day
historical order, that is, in the measure in which it is their 'ultimate
aim'. This is a perfectly logical conclusion; only it deprives our
'critics' of any semblance of the right to call a *utopia* the ultimate
aim of present-day Social-Democracy: an aspiration to that aim
undoubtedly colours the views and sentiments of a vast part of those who
have now joined the 'movement engendered', etc.

What is the conclusion the *second* interpretation leads us up to? It is
that socialism is real in the measure that it can be implemented at the
present time, that is, at a time when you and I, dear reader, engage in
an argument over its reality -- 'neither more nor less'. Anything that
cannot be carried out in that period proves a *utopia*. Well and good.
In that case, however, we shall have to refer to the *realm of utopia,
not only the ultimate aim of present-day Social-Democracy but also all
those of its aims which cannot be effected by its current forces*. Thus
the area of utopia is vastly extended, while the area of '*realistic*'
activities, on the contrary, is greatly narrowed. Moreover, with us
*any* social figure becomes a utopian if he sets himself any other aim
than that of being nonchalant about any other aims at all. Any other aim
must assuredly *be designated for the future*; any other aim
*presupposes*, of necessity, *dissatisfaction with the present*, so that
the fact of any given individual setting himself that aim clearly shows
that he is not satisfied with *what is taking place at the present time
due to the existent alignment of social forces*; any other aim implies a
desire to change that alignment in one direction or another; any other
aim thus leaves the boundaries of '*reality*'. This, too, is a fully
logical conclusion, but it is not the one arrived at by Mr P Struve or
his 'critically minded' fellow-thinkers. Though they adhere to the view
regarding the 'basic' condition of the 'reality' of socialism, from
which that conclusion must inescapably follow, the reasoning has not
been carried through to the end; they have stopped half-way and
recognise as 'real' the kind of 'socialism' which, though dissatisfied
with the existing order of things, lacks the courage to go further than
the 'darning of holes' in its 'reformative' aspirations. Here all tasks
for whose accomplishment the *elimination of capitalist relations of
production* is necessary must prove *utopian*.

Now that we have learnt what the criterion of 'reality' we are searching
after consists in, we are confronted by another and even more 'accursed'
question: whether that criterion can be brought into accord with the
*genuine* -- not the 'critic\'-distorted -- theory of Marx regarding the
*aims of mankind*'s *historical advance*.

To that question we are compelled to answer in the negative. Mr P Struve
has presented to us, in a somewhat modified aspect, that pseudo-realist
confusion of notions which was most vividly expressed in the *Credo*
^[\[249\]](#n249)^ of sad memory, and which boils down to a repetition
in various keys (but always with a claim to scholarship) of the thought
that our ultimate aim ceases from being a utopia only when -- and, more
precisely, only *if* -- the entire working class, in the process of its
independent development and without any participation of the
*revolutionary* '*bacillus*', arrives at the conviction that its
interests call for the immediate achievement of that aim.

This mishmash of notions, which has misled so many ^[\[250\]](#n250)^ in
our country, could be taken for a malicious parody of the celebrated
*Preface to Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*, if those who indulge
in it did not maintain an air of the most unruffled and unfeigned
gravity.

### VII

Their error stems from the following passage in that Preface:

No social order is ever destroyed before all the productive forces for
which it is sufficient have been developed, and new superior relations
of production never replace older ones before the material conditions
for their existence have matured within the framework of the old
society. Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only such tasks as it is
able to solve, since closer examination will always show that the
problem itself arises only when the material conditions for its solution
are already present or at least in the course of formation.
^[\[251\]](#n251)^

Thus mankind always takes up only such tasks as it can solve.
Consequently, if it has not yet set itself some particular task -- say
that of the complete elimination of the capitalist relations of
production -- that means that such a task cannot yet be accomplished.
Consequently, only one who has abandoned the ground of *reality* and
sets out for the realm of *utopia* can aspire to accomplish tasks that
are beyond the capacity of our times.

That is the way many 'critics' reason, and, once fortified in that view,
they have no great difficulty in distinguishing between the 'realistic'
element and the 'utopian' in the programme of Social-Democracy. As is
common knowledge, it is the working class that today represents
mankind's progressive aspirations towards transforming the economic
relations. What, then, are the practical tasks whose accomplishment it
is now engaged in? They are: a shorter working day; better hygienic
conditions in the workshop; the organisation of trade unions,
cooperative societies, and so on and so forth. The elimination of
capitalist relations of production has not yet been included by the
proletariat in the number of the *practical* questions of the day. It is
this that shows that the material conditions required for the
accomplishment of that task have not yet matured.

True, there is, in the proletariat, a stratum that is working for the
socialisation of the means of production and the distribution of
products, and has given that aim top priority in its programme. That
stratum consists of *Social-Democrats*, who hope to win leadership of
the *entire* proletariat. That hope may come true at some time, but
until that comes about, the socialisation of the means of production and
of the distribution of products will remain a *utopian* element in the
Social-Democratic programme. Only those tasks are realistic for whose
accomplishment the means *already* exist.

Its *metaphysical nature* is the main feature of this chain of
syllogisms. Those who have thought it up reason after the manner of all
metaphysicians: 'Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these
cometh of evil.' With them, the material conditions for the
accomplishment of any particular social task *either do or do not*
exist. Marx's words that such conditions may be *in the process of
formation*, produce not the least impression on them, or at least in no
way help them to determine where '*real*' socialism ends and where
'utopian' socialism begins.

The formation of the material conditions for the accomplishment of a
particular social task cannot be discerned simultaneously by *all that
'*mankind' which will have to accomplish that task in due course. That
'mankind' consists of strata and individuals, these being marked by a
dissimilar degree of development (the strata) or even unequal natural
gifts (the individuals). What has been understood by some as an
historical necessity is often not even suspected by others. Any group of
people following one and the same road will almost always contain those
who are *far-sighted* and see objects at a considerable distance, and
those who are *near-sighted* and make out those objects only when they
are close at hand. But does that mean that the far-sighted should be
referred to as 'utopians', while only the near-sighted can be considered
'realists\'? It would seem that it does not mean so. It would seem
rather that the far-sighted distinguish the direction better than the
rest, so that their judgement of it is closer to *reality* than that of
the near-sighted. Some may be found who may wish to reproach the
far-sighted for their raising the question ahead of time regarding the
objects that the entire company will have to pass by later. However, in
the first place, speaking too early *of* an *actual object* does not yet
mean leaving the *ground of reality*; besides, how is one to judge
whether or not it is time to raise any particular subject? Imagine to
yourself that the earlier the far-sighted begin to speak, say, about a
house that stands on the road and where the travellers may expect to get
the rest they need, the sooner they will approach that house, because
the prospect will make them increase their pace. In that case, *it
cannot be too soon* for the far-sighted *to speak up*, if only the
travellers hold their time at all dear.

Indeed, the role of the far-sighted would in that case greatly resemble
the part played by the Social-Democrats in the overall advance of the
working class:

The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by
this only. 1: In the national struggles of the proletarians of the
different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common
interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality.
2: In the various stages of development which the struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always
and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most
advanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of every
country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other
hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat
the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian
movement\...

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the
movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the future
of that movement. ^[\[252\]](#n252)^

What Marx and Engels have said here about the *Communists* of the 1840s
is fully applicable to the revolutionary Social-Democrats of today.

They are fighting for the attainment of the immediate aims of the
working class, but they are also taking care of the future of the
movement. Taking care of the future of the movement means fighting for
its 'ultimate aim', fighting now -- today, tomorrow, and on the next
day, and at any minute. If the future of the movement has been correctly
understood -- and it is correctly understood by those who have been able
to understand the course of present-day economic development -- then
defending the ultimate aim does not contain a jot of utopianism. To
speak of utopianism in that case means giving words a completely
arbitrary meaning. Here, the 'ultimate aim' is just as '*real*' as is
present-day economic development.

Revolutionary Social-Democracy presents in practice the most resolute
and always forward-looking part of the proletariat in all civilised
lands. They refer to the rest of the proletariat almost in the same way
as the *far-sighted* people in our example refer to the near-sighted.
^[\[253\]](#n253)^ They *already* see what other proletarians *do not
yet* see, and, in explaining to the latter the road to be followed in
the future, they *achieve a comprehension* of their movement and
*accelerate* it. Where, for goodness sake, can one discern a '*utopia*'
here? In what way is this not '*real*\'?

The fact that the revolutionary Social-Democrats are able to explain to
the proletariat the future of its own movement, its '*ultimate aim*',
proves that the material conditions necessary for the achievement of
that aim are already in the process of formation and that the process
can be discerned by those with keener sight. That is how the matter
stands from the viewpoint of Marx's historical theory. Yet our 'critics'
have understood that theory in such an absurd way that they see as
utopian any attempt made by the keen-sighted to take a closer look at
the process, and determine its final result. Goodness gracious, how such
gentlemen have failed to see the obvious! ^[\[254\]](#n254)^

### VIII

But perhaps the 'critics' *à la* Struve have as yet failed to realise
exactly where they have made a 'bloomer\'? Let us deal a little longer
with these sagacious 'realists'. We shall follow the elementary but
sometimes quite essential pedagogical device that was so often and so
successfully used by the great Russian educator NG Chernyshevsky. It
consists in reducing words to letters and syllables: *em-a*: *ma*;
*em-a*: *ma* -- *mama*, and so on.

Economic relations determine people's *views* and their *actions*.
However, people do not always realise the nature of their own economic
relations, and their views do not always develop as rapidly as does the
development of their economic relations. It more often happens that
*views* lag behind the *economy* more or less considerably. It is only
with the passage of time and only gradually that the *new economic
relations* undermine the *old views* and give rise to *new ones*. A
cause always appears sooner than its effect does. Due to this
indisputable circumstance, persons or groups of persons who are gifted
with vision are able to play an active part in mankind's advance. Having
realised the significance of existing economic relations, they explain
it to those less keen of vision, thereby influencing the latter's views,
and through those views also their actions, which in their turn promote
the further development of a given economic order. ^[\[255\]](#n255)^
However, all is flux, nothing is stationary. To understand what
undergoes change means realising what it will come to at the *last*
stage of its development. Otherwise there can be no complete
understanding, as has been known since the times of Aristotle. A
striving to determine the final stage, the ultimate outcome, of a given
process of development is not only quite lawful but obligatory upon all
those who wish to achieve an understanding of it. That is why people who
wish to understand the economic relations in contemporary civilised
societies should use all the forces of their minds to learn whither the
development of those relations is proceeding and *how* the process of
their development *will end*. If such people are confident that it will
end in the elimination of the *capitalist relations of production and
their replacement by the socialist*, and if their sympathies or their
class position give them reason to rejoice at that outcome, then they
*will point it out to others and will induce them to use all means to
help bring about that outcome*, which will become the *ultimate aim* of
all their efforts and the foundation of all their programme. And if they
are not in error on that score, and if the 'course of things' is indeed
directed towards their ultimate aim, then they can well say that they
stand on the firm ground of reality, and that *it is not they who are
utopians but those who consider their ultimate aim a utopia*.

The ultimate aim of the revolutionary Social-Democracy of our times is
nothing but a conscious expression of an unconscious trend inherent in
the development of society today. Present-day socialism, under whose
banner the revolutionary Social-Democrats are marching, has the right to
be called *scientific* for the sole reason that it has at last
accomplished that supremely important theoretical task which Schelling
^[\[256\]](#n256)^ in his time set social science in his *System des
transcendentalen Idealismus*, a work so rich in content, namely, the
task of explaining how the conscious (\'*free*') historical activities
of people, far from precluding what is called *historical necessity*,
presupposes it as an essential condition. The *utopian socialists*
proceeded from some abstract principle or another, and based themselves
on it. The adherents of *scientific socialism* proceed from a
consciousness of historical necessity, and base themselves on it. Both
have an 'ultimate aim', but the 'ultimate aim' of the utopians referred
to reality in quite a different way than does the 'ultimate aim' of the
adherents of scientific socialism. That is why the two are separated by
a gulf, and why the adherents of scientific socialism find it so hard to
make their peace with the utopian elements which are still often to be
met in the programmes of socialists of a 'broader' mode of thought. They
do not tolerate utopias, so they have been dubbed *sectarians* and
*dogmatists*, or given other flattering names.

The existing economic order has to be understood if one would exert an
influence on the historical advance. To understand the existing economic
order means realising the process of its development up to and including
its *final outcome*. Once that *outcome* has been ascertained, that
outcome inevitably becomes our 'ultimate aim' at our very first attempt
at a *positive participation* in the historical advance. Drive the
'*ultimate aim*' out of the door, and it will break in through the
windows, if only you do not shutter them up so as to keep out any
attempt to *understand* a given process of social development and any
temptation to *act* in accordance with the understanding you have
achieved.

For the 'ultimate aim' to become, for the socialist, a more or less
pious utopia which I am firmly convinced is impossible of achievement,
it is necessary that I should first convince myself that the development
of the present economic order will not, and cannot in its essence, have
any final outcome. Once that outcome has been found impossible, then the
striving to arrange all of one's activities so as to bring it closer
must thereby be recognised as theoretically groundless. The
impossibility of a final outcome *strips the 'ultimate aim' of any
foundation in reality*. But what is meant by such a recognition of the
impossibility of a final outcome? It is the conviction that the *process
of capitalism's development will continue constantly*, that is, in other
words, that *capitalism will exist always or at least for such an
interminably long time that it is not worth while even to give thought
to its abolition*. This, as you will see, is the familiar conviction of
Herr W Sombart, who has brought us the great and joyous news that
socialism does not exclude capitalism, that is, that *even the
development of socialism will not put an end to the capitalist mode of
production*. This is also the conviction of Mr P Struve and other
'critics'. ^[\[257\]](#n257)^ If such a conviction has arisen in a
socialist's mind, nothing indeed remains for him but to lay aside his
party's '*ultimate aim*' as a pious utopia and recognise the *darning of
holes* as the only social activity standing on the *ground of reality*.
That, however, can mean only that, to the socialist, the 'final aim'
becomes a utopia only when he *ceases to be a socialist*.

### IX

Mr P Struve himself senses that a conviction of the practically
boundless strength and 'adaptability' of the capitalist mode of
production is an essential *preliminary condition* of that attitude to
the '*ultimate aim*' which he has recommended as the only one worthy of
any thinking man. It is to inculcate that conviction in us that he has
set about 'criticising' the concept of *social revolution* with the aid
of profound 'epistemological' considerations designed to show us the
complete groundlessness of that 'pseudo-concept', and so well summed up
in the celebrated question asked by Kozma Prutkov: ^[\[258\]](#n258)^
'*Where is the beginning of that end with which the beginning ends?*' To
prepare us to accept that conviction, he has set about assuring us that
social contradictions are gradually becoming '*blunted*' and that, if we
look at things without the prejudices imparted to us by orthodox
Marxism, we shall see that the surplus value, embodied in the surplus
product, is a function of all social capital. ^[\[259\]](#n259)^ Given
so '*realistic a view*' the concept of the worker's exploitation by the
capitalist is enveloped in such a thick fog of 'criticism' that we
completely cease to understand for what reason and to whom -- except the
'utopians', the 'epigones', the 'dogmatists' and the like -- the
elimination of the capitalist relations of production is necessary, in
which case the question of the socialists' '*ultimate aim*' is
automatically decided: at best, we shall treat that aim slightingly as a
piece of elevating deception. *Mr P Struve*'s *'criticism*' *is full of
errors and misunderstandings* but it has the undoubted merit of
*remaining from beginning to end true to its own 'ultimate aim*'.

Those who adhere to Mr P Struve's '*realistic view*' -- and their name
is legion in our country -- are constantly speaking of 'criticism',
without which they cannot take a single step, for the demon of
'criticism' tempts them day and night. But what seems very strange at
the first fleeting glance is that the criticism our 'critics' indulge in
makes them highly susceptible *to an absolutely uncritical perception of
the theories of the most recent representatives* of bourgeois economics,
right down to some Böhm-Bawerk, ^[\[260\]](#n260)^ that Bastiat of our
times. And the more assiduously the weapon of 'criticism' is wielded,
the stronger and more complete becomes the *identity of ideas* between
our 'critics' on the one hand, and the professional defenders of the
bourgeoisie, on the other. The demon of 'criticism' which has tempted
the 'critics' proves the '*hobgoblin*' *of today*'s *bourgeoisie*.

This is strange only at a first and brief glance. On closer examination,
the entire matter proves very simple and comprehensible.

The historical mission of our 'critics' consists in a 'revision' of Marx
so as to empty his theory of all its socio-revolutionary content. Marx,
whose name is so popular among the revolutionary proletariat of all
civilised lands; Marx who called upon the working class *forcibly* to
overthrow the present social order; Marx who, as Liebknecht so
splendidly put it, was a revolutionary *both by sentiment and logic* --
*that* Marx is heartily disliked by our educated petty bourgeoisie,
whose ideologists the 'critics' are. That bourgeoisie is repelled by his
extreme conclusions; it is frightened by his revolutionary ardour.
However, as things are today, it is hard to get along quite without
Marx: *his* critical weapon is essential in the struggle against
conservatives of all reactionary hues and utopians of the most varying
Populist shades. That is why its revolutionary nature has to be weeded
out of Marxist theory; to Marx the *revolutionary* must be contraposed
Marx the *reformer*, Marx the '*realist'.* What we have is '*Marx
against Marx*\'! And so the 'critics' swing into action. From Marx's
theory are ejected, one by one, all propositions that can serve the
proletariat as a spiritual weapon in its revolutionary struggle against
the bourgeoisie. Dialectics, materialism, and the theory of social
contradictions as stimulating social progress; the theory of value in
general and the theory of surplus value in particular, social
revolution, and the dictatorship of the proletariat -- all these
essential components of Marxist scientific socialism, without which it
loses all its essential content -- are proclaimed *secondary details*
that do not correspond to the present day of science, tendentious,
utopian, and therefore to be amputated in the interests of the
unfettered development of that thinker's fundamental propositions. 'Marx
against Marx\'! The work of 'criticism' proceeds 'continuously'. There
gradually emerges from the crucible of such 'criticism' a Marx who,
after proving to us in masterly fashion the historical necessity of the
*rise of the capitalist mode of production*, reveals great scepticism in
everything that refers to the replacement of capitalism by socialism.
The 'critics' have contrived to turn Marx the *revolutionary into a Marx
who is almost a conservative*; all this seems to be done with the aid of
his propositions. It may well be said that a similar transformation was
experienced only by Aristotle, whom the medieval Scholastics turned from
a pagan philosopher into something resembling a Father of the Christian
Church\...

In its mystified form \[says Marx\], dialectic became the fashion in
Germany, because it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing
state of things. In its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to
bourgeoisdom and its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its
comprehension and affirmative recognition of the existing state of
things, at the same time also, the recognition of the negation of that
state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards every
historically developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore
takes into account its transient nature not less than its momentary
existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence
critical and revolutionary. ^[\[261\]](#n261)^

To the end of his days, the real Marx remained true to this spirit of
*dialectics*. It is this circumstance that is so displeasing to the
'critics', who have 'revised' Marx's theory from the angle of
'*realism*'. Their 'revision' has resulted in a theory which, *while
giving a 'positive explanation*' *of capitalism, at the same time
refuses to explain its 'inevitable break-up*', and to analyse it in its
'*transient aspect*'. From this angle, *Marx, as 'revised*' *by our
'critics*', *analyses only the old pre-capitalist modes of production
and the political forms that developed on their foundation*. Thus, our
'neo-Marxism' is the most reliable weapon of the Russian bourgeoisie in
their struggle for spiritual supremacy in our country.
^[\[262\]](#n262)^

Mr P Struve stands for 'social reform'. That notorious reform, as we
already know, does not go further than the darning of the bourgeois
social 'fabric'. As presented in Mr P Struve's theory, this reform, far
from threatening the rule of the bourgeoisie, promises it support, and
helps consolidate '*social peace*'. If our big bourgeoisie are still
opposed to this 'reform', that does not prevent our '*neo-Marxism*' from
being the best and most advanced expression of the overall specifically
political interests of the bourgeois class *as a whole*. The theorists
of our petty bourgeoisie see farther and have a better judgement than
the men of business who stand at the head of the big bourgeoisie. It is
therefore clear that it is the theorists of our petty bourgeoisie to
whom will belong the leading role in the emancipatory movement of our
'*middle*' *class*. We shall not be in the least surprised if some of
our 'critics' *will, in this sense, go a very long way and, for
instance, will assume leadership of our liberals*.

A fair number of years ago, we voiced in our journal *Sotsial-Demokrat*
^[\[263\]](#n263)^ the thought that the Narodist theory had completely
outlived its time and that our bourgeois intelligentsia, after parting
with Narodism, stood in need of a *Europeanised* version of their views.
^[\[264\]](#n264)^ Today that Europeanisation has, in the main, taken
place, but in a form we did not expect. When we spoke of its necessity,
we did not think it would take place under the banner of even a
'*revised' Marxism*. Live and learn, as the saying goes.

Now that we know, not only Mr P Struve's errors but also their *raison
d\'être*; now that we have understood him, not only from the angle of
his muddled concepts but also of his historical mission -- we can part
with him and wish him all prosperity. Awaiting us is another task. We
have seen, in particular, the groundlessness of this 'criticism' of
Marx's theory of social development, as invented by Mr P Struve. In
particular, we have seen the failure of his attempt to show the
impossibility of '*leaps'* in the area of thought and of life. We must
now show how the founders of scientific socialism understood those
'*leaps'* which are called *social revolutions*, and how they saw the
future *social revolution of the proletariat*. We shall do that in our
next article, which will be the beginning of the *second* part of our
*Critique of Our Critics*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} 'As soon as some question becomes clear, opponents
arise who, on the pretext of novelty, try to confuse and muddle the
issue. I have often met such opponents and opposing opinions.' --
Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} 'All these gentlemen go in for Marxism, but of the
kind you were familiar with in France ten years ago and of which Marx
said: "All I know is that I\'m no Marxist!" And of these gentlemen he
would probably have said what Heine said of his imitators: "I sowed
dragons and reaped fleas.\"' The correct date is 27 August 1890
(Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue, *Correspondence*, Volume 2
(Moscow, 1960), p 386) -- Editor.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} *Archiv für soziale Gesetzgebung und Statistik*
(*Archive of the Social Legislation and Statistics*) -- a journal
founded in 1888 by the German Social-Democrat G Braun -- Editor.
\[Referred to hereon as *Brauns Archiv* -- MIA.\]

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} Italics are ours.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p 62,
italics are ours.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
663-64.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Mr P Struve's original reads, not '*0B*' but 'kein
*B*'. As the reader will understand, that is one and the same thing.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} The inverted commas belong to Mr P Struve himself.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Here Mr P Struve explains parenthetically that the
superstructure is made up of legal and political institutions, to which
definite forms of social consciousness correspond.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), pp 20-21 -- Editor.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} Mr P Struve's italics.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
666-67.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} Of course, there are different kinds of wealth. Mr
P Struve's wealth consists in his errors; one should not envy that kind
of wealth. \[Note to second edition -- Editor.\]

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 113 -- Editor.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), pp 113-14 -- Editor.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), pp 118-19 -- Editor.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} We are referring to the German original because the
Russian translation is so unsatisfactory. The passage we are referring
to is on page 733 of the Russian edition of Volume 3. \[Karl Marx,
*Capital*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1974), pp 248-50 -- Editor.\]

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} The reference is to Stammler's book, *Wirtschaft
und Recht nach der materialistischen Geschichts-Auffassung*. *Eine
sozial-philosophische Untersuchung* (*Economy and Law from the Point of
View of the Materialist Understanding of History: Social-philosophical
Research*, Leipzig, 1896), in which the author criticised Marxism from
the neo-Kantian stand. Rudolph Stammler (1856-1939) -- German jurist and
neo-Kantian philosopher -- Editor.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
668, italics are ours.

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
669, italics are ours.

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
669-70, italics are ours.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} For greater precision, let us put it this way:
according to Marx, *a certain part* of the production relations forms
what the jurist would call *property relations*. Below we shall see why
this term cannot be applied to the sum of the production relations.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Civil Code -- *Code Civil* -- the French legal code
-- the Napoleonic Code -- was promulgated in 1804. It established the
abolition of feudal relations and legalised the rule of bourgeoisie. It
was based on the principles of equality of all citizens before the law
and the unrestricted domination of private ownership -- Editor.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} Nikolai Alexeyevich Nekrasov (1821-1878) -- Russian
poet, revolutionary democrat -- Editor.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} We shall explain later in what sense we use the
epithet *revolutionary* here.

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
673.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
676-77.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} It would be useful to contrapose to this
indigestible mishmash Marx's own words: 'No social order is ever
destroyed before all the productive forces for which it is sufficient
have been developed, *and new superior relations of production never
replace older ones before the material conditions for their existence
have matured within the framework of the old society*. (*Zur Kritik*,
etc, Vorwort, italics are ours) \[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 21 -- Editor.\]

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} From Mikhail Lermontov's poem *Mtsyri* -- Editor.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} Lujo Brentano (1844-1931) -- German bourgeois
vulgar economist, one of the chief representatives of Katheder socialism
-- Editor.

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} Euripides (c480-406 BC) -- Greek tragic poet and
dramatist -- Editor.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} We have made that supposition on the basis of the
following words of Mr P Struve: 'Jedenfalls aber ist für die Marxsche
Theorie die Annahme einer Steigerung der Wiedersprüche zwischen den
ökonomischen Phenomenen und Rechtsnormen charakteristisch!' \[\'In any
case, Marxist theory is marked by the assumption of the mounting
contradiction between economic phenomena and legal works.\'\] (*Brauns
Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p 671) Consequently, the focus of
the Marxist theory here is the contradiction between '*legal norms*',
and '*economic phenomena*', the notion of which is not fully defined by
the notion of *the economy*.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} The permits system of establishing joint-stock
companies provided for any new joint-stock company obtaining permission
from the appropriate state bodies. This system hindered the
establishment of joint-stock companies. In the 1860s and 1870s, it was
replaced by the so-called *fait-accompli* system: a newly-established
company had only to apply to the appropriate ministry for registration
-- Editor.

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} *Fou à lier* -- barking mad -- MIA.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} Alexei Stepanovich Khomyakov (1804-1860) -- Russian
public figure and writer, Slavophile -- Editor.

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} Cuno Fischer (1824-1907) -- German neo-Kantian
philosopher, historian of philosophy -- Editor.

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} 'The totality of these relations of production
constitutes the economic structure of society, *the real foundation, on
which arises a legal and political superstructure*\...' (*Zur Kritik*,
etc, Vorwort, italics are ours) \[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 20 -- Editor.\]

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} A reservation is in place here! Of late, many
'critics' (including Mr Tugan-Baranovsky) have pointed out that crises
have shed the acute form they formerly had, and that consequently they
no longer play that part in the development of social life which Marx
with good reason ascribed to them. To that we shall reply as follows:
whatever the current *form* of the phenomenon indicated by Marx, its
*essence* has remained unchanged. The phenomenon is caused by the
contradiction between society's productive forces and its property
relations. What the British call 'trade depressions' \[these two words
are in English in the original -- Editor\] bear very little resemblance
*in form* to *crises* in the proper sense of the word, but they have
quite the same significance *in essence*. To realise that, one has only
to read, for instance, the conclusions arrived at by the British Royal
Commission set up to study the causes of the depression in trade and
industry. 'During the past forty years', we read in a note drawn up by
several dissenting members of the Commission, 'a great change has been
wrought in the circumstances of all civilised communities by the
application of mechanical and scientific aids to the production and
transport of commodities, the world over\... The great difficulty
consists no longer, as of old, in the scarcity and dearness of the
necessaries and conveniences of life, but in the struggle for an
adequate share of that employment which affords to the great bulk of the
population their only means of obtaining a title to a sufficiency of
those necessaries and conveniences, however plentiful and cheap they may
be\... The growing difficulty (the struggle for an adequate share of
employment in presence of the abundance and cheapness of commodities)
finds its expression in the system of tariffs, export bounties and other
commercial restrictions, adopted and maintained by all civilised nations
except our own.' (*Final Report of the Royal Commission* etc, p lv; cf
also p lxiv) \[This passage is cited by Plekhanov in English --
Editor.\] The productive forces of civilised societies have reached such
a degree of development that those who have no other commodity to sell
except their labour power are finding it very hard to find themselves
*occupations*, that is, *to sell that labour power* and thereby acquire
the wherewithal to *buy* the cheap *products* now prepared in abundance.
*Hardship* is born of *plenty*; *poverty, of wealth*. This is the very
same contradiction pointed out by Marx and Engels with reference to
crises. The only difference is that, in the opinion of the authors of
the *Report* we have quoted from above, this contradiction has arisen
during the past forty years, while the authors of the *Manifesto* think
that it appeared earlier. Do not think that the majority of the Royal
Commission deny the existence of that contradiction. No, the majority
have expressed the same view as the minority, only their wording is
different: 'The world's capacity of production', they say, 'will
naturally be in excess of its ordinary requirements.' (Ibid, p xvii)
\[This sentence is in English in the original -- Editor.\] This is quite
equivalent to the idea that trade depressions \[these two words are in
English in the original -- Editor\] are caused, like crises, by the
absence of correspondence between the consuming capacity of the market
and the present-day productive forces. But that market capacity is
restricted by the property relations of present-day society. Thus we
again come up against the fundamental contradiction in that society --
the contradiction between its property relations, on the one hand, and
its productive forces, on the other. \[Mikhail Ivanovich
Tugan-Baranovsky (1865-1919) -- Russian bourgeois economist, in the
1890s prominent representative of 'legal Marxism', later member of
bourgeois Constitutional-Democratic (Cadet) Party, active
counter-revolutionary -- Editor.\]

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} From Ivan Krylov's fable *The Inquisitive One*.
Ivan Andreyevich Krylov (1769-1844) -- Russian fabulist -- Editor.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 137 -- Editor.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} *Razvitiye nauchnogo sotsializma* (Geneva, 1892), p
26. \[Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian translation of Engels' book;
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,* Volume 3 (Moscow,
1973), p 134 -- Editor.\]

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} With Mr P Struve, the realisation of that
convenience is naively expressed in the following words: 'Die von mir
vorgetragene Ansicht schliesst sowohl den Marxschen als auch den
Stammlerschen Begriff der "sozialen Revolution" aus. Die Anpassung des
Rechtes an die Sozialwirthschaft hört keinen Augenblick auf und die
Entwicklung der jeweiligen Gesellschaftsordnung ist es eben, welche
diesen Rahmen umform und ausweitet.' \['the view I have set forth
precludes both Marx's and Stammler's notions of the "social revolution."
The adaptation of law to the social economy does not cease for an
instant and it is the development of a given social structure that
transforms and extends that framework.\'\] (*Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14,
Book 5/6, Part 1, p 672). How right you are, O 'critic\'! It would have
been far better if your 'Ansicht' coincided with Marx's; it would have
been better still and smoother if your Ansicht, which does not coincide
with Marx's, were in keeping with historical reality. Alas, far from
being in keeping with it, it '*contradicts*' it.

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} *Der Kampf um*'s *Recht* (thirteenth edition), pp
6-8. \[Rudolph von Ihering (1818-1892) -- German bourgeois jurist --
Editor.\]

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
675.

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} In 1798 the British government, fearful of the
revolutionary events in France, had the so-called Sedition Acts passed,
according to which any attack against the government or laws, whether
oral or in print, was severely punishable. The Acts were repealed in
1800. In 1799-1800 Parliament passed the Combination Acts which banned
workers' unions. The growing working-class movement led to the repeal of
these laws in 1824 -- Editor.

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} *Attentats* -- politically motivated attempts on
someone's life -- Editor.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} Georges Howell, *Le passé et l*\'*avenir des
Trade-Unions* (translated by Ch Le Cour Grandmaison, Paris, 1892), pp
40, 45. \[Plekhanov is referring to the French translation of George
Howell's *Trade Unionism New and Old*. George Howell (1833-1910) --
British trade unionist, member of General Council of First
International, subsequently renegade -- Editor.\]

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} Beatrice and Sidney Webb: 'The common law and
ancient statutes were ruthlessly used to supplement in Combination Acts,
often by strained constructions. The Scotch judges in particular\...
applied the criminal procedure of Scotland to cases of simple
combination\... The whole system of repression which had characterised
the statesmanship of the Regency culminated at this period in a tyranny
not exceeded by any of the monarchs: of the "Holy Alliance."' (*History
of Trade Unionism* (London, 1894), pp 84-85) Kulemann: *'*Erschwert
wurde die Lage für die Arbeiter noch durch die nach dem Frieden von 1815
in Verbindung mit dem niedrigen Stande der Preise einsetzende
ausserordentliche Herabdrücking der Löhne. Es ist deshalb begreiflich,
dass sich überall Geheimbunde bildeten und Verschworungen stattfanden,
die mit blutigen Verfolgungen endeten.' \['the conditions of the worker
after the peace of 1815 became even harder in consequence of the
unparalleled fall in wages in connection with the overall drop in
prices. That makes one understand the causes of universal formation of
secret societies and the conspiracies, which evoked harsh
repressions.\'\] (*Die Gewerksschaftsbewegung* (Jena, 1900), Book 3-3)
Indeed, what 'blunting' of contradictions! \[The Regency (1811-20) --
the period during which the Prince of Wales, the future George IV, was
regent for George III, his father. The Holy Alliance -- a reactionary
union of three emperors (Russia, Austria and Prussia) concluded in 1815
in Paris after Napoleon's defeat. Its aim was the mutual support of the
European monarchs in preserving the European state borders established
after the Napoleonic wars, and in countering the revolutionary movement.
Beatrice Webb (1858-1943) and Sidney Webb (1859-1947) -- English public
figures, founders of Fabian Society. Wilhelm Kulemann (1851-1926) --
magistrate and briefly Reichstag deputy representing the National
Liberal Party, author of book *Die Gewerksschaftsbewegung* (*The Trade
Union Movement*) -- Editor/MIA.

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} The Anti-Socialist Law was passed in 1878 in
Germany to ban the social-democratic organisations in the country, the
workers' press and the dissemination of socialist literature. The law
was repealed in 1890 under the impact of the working-class movement --
Editor.

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
674.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} 'Machinery is no more an economic category than the
bullock that drags the plough. Machinery is merely a productive force.
The modern workshop, which is based on the application of machinery, is
a social production relation, an economic category.' (*The Poverty of
Philosophy*, p 107) \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976, p 183 -- Editor.\]

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} At this point, however, the reader's attention
should be drawn to the following feature of the terminology used by the
writers just named. When they are speaking of the main contradiction
that impels social development forward, they use the words *relations of
production* in the narrower sense of *property relations*. An instance
is the excerpt we gave in a previous remark and taken from the Preface
to *Zur Kritik*. It states that the new relations of production do not
take the place of the old ones before the material conditions for their
existence are evolved. By the material conditions for the existence of
the new relations of production (property relations) are meant, in this
context, also those immediate relations between producers in the process
of production (that is, the organisation of labour at the factory or
textile mill) which, in the broader sense, should also be called
*relations of production*. It is this circumstance that might very well
have misled the superficial 'critic'.

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} Better late than never -- MIA.

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} Gavriil Romanovich Derzhavin (1743-1816) -- Russian
poet -- Editor.

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} 'Elle \[la Révolution\] a pris, il est vrai, le
monde à l\'improviste et cependant elle n\'était que le complément du
plus long travail, la terminaison soudaine et violente d\'une oeuvre que
avait passé sous les yeux de dix générations d\'hommes.' \[\'It \[the
Revolution\], it is true, took the world by surprise, though it was only
the completion of a very long labour, the sudden and violent termination
of a work that had been taking place before the eyes of ten
generations.\'\] (A de Tocqueville, *l*\'*Ancien régime et la
Révolution* (second edition, Paris, 1856), p 55) \[Alexis Tocqueville
(1805-1859) -- French publicist, reactionary politician, historian of
bourgeois liberal trend -- Editor.\]

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} 'D\'époque en époque la législation a été amenée
ainsi à toucher aux attributs seigneuriaux. Cela s\'est vu partout, et
partout il a sonné une heure où il ne s\'est pas agi d\'y porter la
réforme uniquement, de les déplacer ou de les restreindre, mais de les
faire disparaître sans retour.' \[\'From one epoch to another
legislation had come to encroach on the privileges of the nobility. This
was to be seen everywhere, and everywhere the hour had struck when it
was not solely a matter of reforms, of replacing or restricting them,
but of destroying them for all and good.\'\] (Henri Doniol, *La
Révolution française et la Féodalité* (second edition, Paris, 1876), p
6) \[Jean Henri Antoine Doniol (1818-1906) -- French bourgeois
historian, member of French academy -- Editor.\]

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} 'C\'est pourquoi ce siècle avait tant de répulsion
vis-à-vis de la féodalité et des droits seigneuriaux.' \['that is why
this century has had such a repulsion against feudalism and seignorial
rights.\'\] (Doniol, *La Révolution française et la Féodalité*, p 6)

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} Doniol, *La Révolution française et la Féodalité*,
p 72

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} This is all the truer because there was a time when
the feudal system did not *hold back* the advance of society, but, on
the contrary, *promoted* it. Fustel de Coulanges was right in pointing
out, with reference to the feudal castles: 'Dix siècles plus tard les
hommes n\'avaient que haine pour ces forteresses seigneuriales. Au
moment où elles s\'élevèrent, ils ne sentirent qu\'amour et
reconnaissance. Elles n\'étaient pas faites contre eux, mais pour eux.'
\['ten centuries later the people had nothing but hatred for these
feudal fortresses. When they were being built the people felt only love
and gratitude towards them: they had been built not against but for
them.\'\] (*Histoire des institutions politiques de l*\'*ancienne
France*, Volume 4, pp 682-83) The same can be said of the entire
organisation of agriculture and industry.

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} *Histoire des institutions politiques de
l*\'*ancienne France*, Volume 4, pp 143, 154-56.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} *Histoire des institutions politiques de
l*\'*ancienne France*, Volume 4, pp 156-57.

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} Doniol, *La Révolution française et la Féodalité*,
p 44; compare also with page 42: 'Que plus est, tout cela est signalé
pour avoir pris récemment une intensité nouvelle.' \[\'Moreover, all
this is significant because it has recently taken on a new
intensity.\'\]

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} Alfred Rambaud, *Histoire de la civilisation
française*, Volume 2 (sixth edition), pp 599-600. Rambaud is in full
agreement with the opinion of Chérest he has quoted from, who says: 'Our
political institutions had the strange fortune of not improving after
Henri IV; instead of advancing with the passage of time and the progress
in ideas and morals, they moved backwards despite the morals, ideas and
the times\... The government of the *ancien régime* had become \[on the
eve of 1789\] more imperfect and more hostile to the aspirations of the
educated class than it had been in the Middle Ages.' \[Alfred Nicolas
Rambaud (1842-1905) -- French historian of liberal trend -- Editor.\]

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} *Proiskhozhdeniye Sovremennoi Demokratii* \[*The
Origin of Modern Democracy*\], Volume 1, p 59. \[Serfdom in tsarist
Russia was abolished only in 1861. Maxim Maximovich Kovalevsky
(1851-1916) -- Russian scientist, jurist, historian, sociologist and
politician with liberal bourgeois leanings -- Editor.\]

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} *Proiskhozhdeniye Sovremennoi Demokratii*, Volume
1, pp 124-25.

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} *Proiskhozhdeniye Sovremennoi Demokratii*, Volume
1, p 49.

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} Mr P Struve says: 'Somit blieb es unserer Zeit
vorbehalten, hinter den sozialen Reformen Fallstricke des Opportunismus
zu wittern.' \['thus it has fallen to our times to suspect social
reforms as snares laid by the opportunists.\'\] (*Brauns Archiv*, Volume
14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p 679). The reference is to the 'orthodox'
Marxists. From what we have said in the text, the reader will see that,
in respect of us at least, his reproach is wholly groundless, yet he
considers us among the most orthodox of the orthodox.

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} Adolf Held, *Entwicklung der Grossindustrie*.
\[Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian translation of Held's book, p 19
-- Editor.\]

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} I stake on 'no' and the world belongs to me --
Editor.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} From Goethe's poem *Vanitas! Vanitatum Vanitas!* --
Editor.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} 'Denn das ganze Leben ist eine kontinuelle Kette
von Bewegungserscheinungen der organischen Materie, welche immer mit
entsprechenden Formveränderungen verknüpft ist.' \[\'For all life is an
unbroken chain of evolution of organic matter, always linked with
corresponding changes of form.\'\] (Häckel, G*eneralle Morphologie der
Organismen*, Chapter 17) This law manifests itself with amazing clarity
and explicitness in the embryology of animals that develop through
metamorphosis, for example, certain insects (Diptera, Lepidoptera, etc).
As is common knowledge, metamorphosis can be *incomplete* or *complete*.
In the latter case, a *larva* turns into a *pupa*, and is then encased
in a special *husk* that *protects* it from any unfavourable impact from
the outer world. When the series of transformations within the pupa's
organism ends, the protective husk becomes *superfluous*; it hampers the
further vital functions of the organism, *contradicts* them, and
therefore bursts open when the contradiction reaches the appropriate
degree of intensity. Consequently, what we have here is a revolutionary
explosion, a *break in gradualness*. In general, Nature is a great
revolutionary, and shows little concern over the 'blunting of
contradictions'.

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} *Das Kapital*, Volume 3, Part 2, pp 420-21. \[Karl
Marx, *Capital*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1974), pp 883-84 -- Editor.\]

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} *Das Kapital*, Vorwort zur zweiten Auflage, p xix.
\[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 29 -- Editor.\] In
view of these explanations by Marx, one must consider strange but at the
same time highly characteristic of critics *à la* P Struve, the
circumstance that these gentlemen have declared Marxist dialectics the
weakest link in Marx's theory: 'In der Entwicklungslehre welche
unstreitig das Charakteristikum und die Glanzleistung des Marxschen
Sozialismus bildet', says Mr Struve, 'liegt auch seine verwundbare
Stelle, und sie liegt eben in der angeblich unüberwindlichen
"Dialektik\"\...' \[\'In the theory of development, which is
indisputably the most characteristic and brilliant aspect of Marx's
socialism, also lies its vulnerable point, and that lies mainly in its
allegedly invincible "dialectics\"\...\'\] (*Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14,
Book 5/6, Part 1, p 686) The actual reason for this statement is clearly
shown by the words immediately following this passage from the self-same
Mr Struve: 'Man wierd die vielen Wieldersprüche nicht los, wenn man
nicht ganz entschieden den gedanken der "sozialen Revolution" als
theoretischen Begrift fallen lässt.' \['these innumerable contradictions
can be got rid of only if one entirely rejects "social revolution" as a
theoretical concept.\'\] Goethe's Faust says to Mephistopheles: 'Das
Pentagramma macht dir Pein!' \['the Pentagram is tormenting you!\'\] It
can be said of our 'critical' mind that what *macht Pein* to him is the
concept of the social revolution (otherwise the 'Zusammenbruchstheorie')
in connection with the concept of a *political revolution which
signifies the dictatorship of the proletariat*.

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} The Russian reader can get acquainted with Carey's
reasoning from his book *Principles of Social Science*, which came out
in a Russian translation by Prince Shakhovskoy in 1869. The *table* on
page 506 of this book refers to the question that now interests us.
\[Henry Charles Carey (1793-1879) -- American vulgar economist, author
of reactionary theory of harmony of class interests in capitalist
society -- Editor.\]

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} Bastiat, *Harmonies économiques* (second edition),
p 206. \[Frédéric Bastiat (1801-1850) -- French vulgar economist --
Editor.\]

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} Bastiat, *Harmonies économiques*, pp 206-07.

[[78.]{.info}]{#n78} Bastiat, *Harmonies économiques*, p 209.

[[79.]{.info}]{#n79} *Die geschichtliche Entwicklung der
Nationalökonomie und ihrer Literatur*, Part 2 (Wien, 1860), p 578.
\[Julian Kautz (1829-1909) -- Hungarian economist -- Editor.\]

[[80.]{.info}]{#n80} *Die geschichtliche Entwicklung der
Nationalökonomie und ihrer Literatur*, Part 2, p 578.

[[81.]{.info}]{#n81} *Histoires des doctrines économiques* (Paris,
1899), p 336. \[Luigi Cossa (1831-1896) -- prominent Italian professor
of political economy -- Editor.\]

[[82.]{.info}]{#n82} The text in the inverted commas is in English in
the original -- Editor.

[[83.]{.info}]{#n83} *The Distribution of Products or the Mechanism and
the Metaphysics of Exchange* (fifth edition), pp 23-24. \[Edward
Atkinson (1827-1905) -- US economist and statistician -- Editor.\]

[[84.]{.info}]{#n84} *The Distribution of Products or the Mechanism and
the Metaphysics of Exchange*, p 335. \[The text in the inverted commas
is in English in the original -- Editor.\]

[[85.]{.info}]{#n85} Gerhart von Schultze-Gävernitz, *Der Grossbetrieb*
(translated into Russian by LB Krasin, edited and prefaced by PB Struve,
St Petersburg, 1897), Preface, p 1. \[Gerhart von Schultze-Gävernitz
(1864-1943) -- German bourgeois economist; tried to substantiate
possibility of social peace in capitalist society -- Editor.\]

[[86.]{.info}]{#n86} Schultze-Gävernitz, *Der Grossbetrieb*, p 229.

[[87.]{.info}]{#n87} Schultze-Gävernitz, *Der Grossbetrieb*, p 229.

[[88.]{.info}]{#n88} Gerhart von Schultze-Gävernitz, *Zum sozialen
Frieden*. *Eine Darstellung der sozial-politischen Erziehung des
englischen Volks im neunzehnten Jahrhundert* (Leipzig, 1890).

[[89.]{.info}]{#n89} Schultze-Gävernitz, *Zum sozialen Frieden*, Volume
2, p 493.

[[90.]{.info}]{#n90} See *The Increase of Moderate Incomes*, being the
Inaugural Address of the President of the Royal Statistical Society, the
Right Honourable GI Goschen, in *Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society*, December 1887. \[Sir Robert Giffen (1837-1910) -- British
bourgeois economist and statistician; George Joachim Goschen (1831-1907)
-- British liberal, member of parliament, in 1880s Chancellor of the
Exchequer -- Editor.\]

[[91.]{.info}]{#n91} To each his own -- MIA.

[[92.]{.info}]{#n92} Proceedings on 6 December 1887, *Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society*, December 1887, p 613. \[Mark Wilks Collet
(1816-1905) -- British banker, Governor of the Bank of England during
1887-89 -- Editor/MIA.\]

[[93.]{.info}]{#n93} *Was verstehen wir unter dem Mittelstande? Hat er
im 19 Jahrhundert zu-oder abgenommen?* (Gottingen, 1897), p 27. Mention
of Goschen's speech is also made by Robert Meier in his *Handwörterbuch
der Staatswissenschaften*, Volume 2 (second edition), p 366. \[Gustav
Friedrich Schmoller (1838-1917) -- representative of German historical
school in political economy -- Editor.\]

[[94.]{.info}]{#n94} *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*,
December 1887, p 604.

[[95.]{.info}]{#n95} *Socialism: True and False*, *Fabian Tract*, no 51,
p 3. \[The Fabian Society -- a reformist organisation founded in Britain
in 1884, its mainly intellectualist membership including Sydney and
Beatrice Webb -- Editor.\]

[[96.]{.info}]{#n96} Under this heading were registered incomes obtained
from industrial and commercial business, from capitals invested in
foreign and colonial undertakings, and from the liberal professions.
Non-periodic cash revenues were also registered under this heading.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n97} AA Isayev, *Nachalo Politicheskoi Ekonomii*
\[*Foundations of Political Economy*\], fourth edition, p 619. \[Andrei
Alexeyevich Isayev (1851-1924) -- Russian bourgeois economist and
statistician -- Editor.\]

[[98.]{.info}]{#n98} R Giffen, 'Accumulation of Capital in the United
Kingdom', *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*, March 1890, p 151.

[[99.]{.info}]{#n99} See *Final Report of the Royal Commission Appointed
to Inquire into the Depression of Trade and Industry*, the opinion of
the minority on the Commission, p xlii.

[[100.]{.info}]{#n100} *Final Report of the Royal Commission*, p xlix.
The comparatively good state of trade was the result of a tremendous
fall in factory prices.

[[101.]{.info}]{#n101} *Final Report of the Royal Commission*, p l.

[[102.]{.info}]{#n102} *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*,
December 1887, p 591.

[[103.]{.info}]{#n103} *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*,
December 1887, p 597.

[[104.]{.info}]{#n104} E Bernstein, *Istoricheskii Materializm*
\[*Historical Materialism*\], p 84 (translated into Russian by Kantzel).

[[105.]{.info}]{#n105} *Final Report of the Royal Commission*, p xviii.

[[106.]{.info}]{#n106} *Final Report of the Royal Commission*, p lvii.

[[107.]{.info}]{#n107} *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*,
December 1887, p 602.

[[108.]{.info}]{#n108} *Final Report of the Royal Commission*, p lxxii.

[[109.]{.info}]{#n109} The figures referring to the years before 1860
are for Great Britain; after 1860 -- for the United Kingdom.

[[110.]{.info}]{#n110} *Dictionary*, p 321. \[Michael Mulhall
(1836-1900) -- English economist and statistician -- Editor.\]

[[111.]{.info}]{#n111} Michael G Mulhall, *Industries and Wealth of
Nations* (London, 1896), p 100.

[[112.]{.info}]{#n112} The preceding conclusions are based on data
referring to five years ending December 1893.

[[113.]{.info}]{#n113} Below we shall see that this calculation is a
feeble expression of the actual course of development.

[[114.]{.info}]{#n114} Mulhall, *Industries and Wealth of Nations*, pp
100-01.

[[115.]{.info}]{#n115} Mulhall, *Industries and Wealth of Nations*, p
101.

[[116.]{.info}]{#n116} Mulhall, *Industries and Wealth of Nations*, pp
101-02.

[[117.]{.info}]{#n117} A *person* is the head of a household and
recipient of a definite income.

[[118.]{.info}]{#n118} To simplify our calculation, we shall first
assume that the population has not grown during that period.

[[119.]{.info}]{#n119} The words in inverted commas are in, English in
the original -- Editor.

[[120.]{.info}]{#n120} 'The retail trade is today passing through an
industrial revolution similar to that which manufacture experienced in
the early years of this century and the small Keeper is the analogue of
the handloom weaver', says HW Macrosty in his interesting book, *The
Growth of Monopoly in English Industry* (*Fabian Tract*, no 88, p 3).
\[This passage is in English in the original -- Editor.\] Today, when
the petty tradesman is passing through an 'industrial revolution',
concentration will proceed apace in that retail trade, as is borne out
by Macrosty's booklet. But until the retail trade was affected by the
'industrial revolution', concentration could not but have taken place in
it far more slowly than in industry. This circumstance, too, must have
influenced the growth of 'moderate' incomes. \[Henry William Macrosty
(1865-1941) -- British economist, worked for the Board of Trade as a
statistician dealing with trade and industry, Fellow of the Royal
Statistical Society -- Editor/MIA.\]

[[121.]{.info}]{#n121} See, for instance, E Bernshtein, *Istorichesky
Materializm*, p 87 *et seq*. Last year, Luigi Negri brought out a work
specially devoted to the question of concentration in capitalist society
(*La centralizzazione capitalistica*, Torino, 1900). In it, all the
causes *slowing down* concentration are carefully enumerated. It is
strange, however, that he makes no mention of causes that *camouflage*
it. However, such causes do exist, the chief of them being the rapid
amassment of wealth in the upper strata of society.

[[122.]{.info}]{#n122} Mulhall, *Industries and Wealth of Nations*, pp
100-01.

[[123.]{.info}]{#n123} See Supplement A to a highly interesting note by
Miss E Simcox, 'Loss or Gain of the Working Classes During the
Nineteenth Century', published in the *Proceedings of the Industrial
Remuneration Conference* (London), pp 96-97.

[[124.]{.info}]{#n124} In 1843, the number of payers in the lowest
bracket was 87,946; in 1879-80 it reached 274,943.

[[125.]{.info}]{#n125} The figures we have quoted *refute* Goschen to
such a degree that we will not tire the reader by engaging in a detailed
analysis of the significance of the fact brought forward by the British
Chancellor of the Exchequer, namely, that the number of incomes under
Schedule *E* increased sharply between 1875 and 1886. We shall only say
that the growth of capitalism of necessity presupposes a growth in the
number of *employees* both of private persons and joint-stock companies.
But it is this that leads to the increase in social inequality; it is
this that leads to *big* incomes growing, on the whole, far more rapidly
than '*moderate*' ones.

[[126.]{.info}]{#n126} See *Wirtschaftliche Grundbegriffe* by Neumann in
Schönberg's *Handbuch der Politischen Oekonomie*, Volume 1 (fourth
edition), p 186, Appendix. 'In general', says Böhmerth, 'the Saxon
statistics give reason to admit that although middle-class incomes of
between 2100 (2200) and 9500 (9600) marks grow considerably in the
absolute sense, their percentage of the overall incomes falls quite
considerably. Thus, we seem to have here the same course of development
that might be established for medium-size production on the basis of
imperial statistics.' (*Die Vertheilung des Einkommens in Preussen und
Sachsen* (Dresden, 1898), p 12)

[[127.]{.info}]{#n127} *Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften*, Volume
2 (second edition), p 36. \[Ernst Engel (1821-1896) -- German
statistician, from 1860 till 1882 director of Prussian Bureau of
Statistics in Berlin -- Editor.\]

[[128.]{.info}]{#n128} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
694.

[[129.]{.info}]{#n129} See his *Industrial Evolution of the United
States* (New York, 1895), p 192. Atkinson's having arrived at different
conclusions in his calculations is simply due to his *having taken the
fall in the rate of profits for a lesser norm of surplus value*. The
example he has cited shows very well how a knowledge of *economic
theory* is essential to the statistician. \[Carroll Davidson Wright
(1840-1909) -- US economist and statistician, Commissioner of Labor from
1885 to 1905, and sat on commissions investigating several major strikes
-- Editor/MIA.\]

[[130.]{.info}]{#n130} Wright, *Industrial Evolution of the United
States*, p 192.

[[131.]{.info}]{#n131} A modification of a quotation from Alexander
Griboyedov's play *Wit Works Woe* -- Editor.

[[132.]{.info}]{#n132} Arthur Lyon Bowley, 'Changes in Average Wages in
the United Kingdom Between 1860 and 1891', *Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society*, June 1895. \[Arthur Lyon Bowley (1869-1957) --
British statistician and economist, author of many works on British
economic statistics -- Editor/MIA.\]

[[133.]{.info}]{#n133} See V Turquan, 'Evolution de la fortune privée en
France', *Revue d*\'*Economie politique*, February 1900. \[Andreas Costa
(1851-1910) -- Italian politician, socialist reformer -- Editor.\]

[[134.]{.info}]{#n134} 'But I maintain, unhesitatingly, that daily wages
are no criterion of the actual cost of executing works\...' (Thomas
Brassey, *Work and Wages* (London, 1873), p 66)

[[135.]{.info}]{#n135} *Capital*, Volume 1 (St Petersburg, 1872), p 468
\[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp 505-06 -- Editor.\]

[[136.]{.info}]{#n136} In an article entitled 'The Fundamental Antinomy
of the Theory of Labour Value', *Zhizn* (*Life*), February 1900. The
article was courteously but ruthlessly analysed by Karelin, in an
article 'Notes' published in the October and November issues of
*Nauchnoye Obozreniye* (*Science Review*).

[[137.]{.info}]{#n137} Ultima Thule -- Ancient geographers' concept of
the most northern region of the habitable world; in this context, the
most extreme idea held by bourgeois thinkers in respect of this topic --
MIA.

[[138.]{.info}]{#n138} Labour in the United States is far more intensive
than in Europe. French working men who went to the Chicago World
Exhibition were amazed by the intensity of the American workers' labour
(see *Rapports de la délégation ouvrière à l*\'*exposition de Chicago*,
Paris, 1894). But even in America, the natural limit to intensification
has not yet been reached, though the intensity of labour is growing very
rapidly. On this, see Emile Levasseur, *L*\'*Ouvrier américain*, Volume
1 (Paris), p 97 *et seq*. Neither has that limit been exceeded in
*Australia*: *'*Je n\'ai trouvé en Australie personne qui fût contra la
journée de huit à neuf heures; chacun donnait pour expliquer cette
opinion la même raison: que l\'intensité du travail est plus grande avec
la journée courte.' \[\'I have not found anyone in Australia opposed to
an eight- or nine-hour day; the explanation generally given was the
same: shorter hours mean greater intensity of labour.\'\] (Albert Metin,
*Le socialisme sans doctrines, Australie et Nouvelle Zélande* (Paris,
1901), p 132) There the greater *intensity of labour* is a source of
*unemployment* for the *weaker* workers, who cannot keep pace with the
stronger (ibid, p 146). True, a *minimum wage* had also to be
established there so as to bring about such a state of affairs.

[[139.]{.info}]{#n139} Hector Denis, *La Dépression économique et
sociale* (Brussels, 1895), p 145. \[Hector Denis (1842-1913) -- Belgian
economist and socialist politician, pioneer in field of labour
statistics -- Editor/MIA.\]

[[140.]{.info}]{#n140} Cited from Hector Denis, *La Dépression
économique et sociale*, p 144. The reference is to the 1880s.

[[141.]{.info}]{#n141} *The iron laws of wages* -- a dogma of the
bourgeois political economy, thus designated by Lassalle. Basing
themselves on the proposition that wages have 'natural' limits in the
growth of population, bourgeois economists maintained that it is Nature,
not social conditions, that causes poverty and unemployment in the
working classes. For criticism of this law see Marx's works *The Gotha
Programme* and *Capital*. Karl Johann Rodbertus-Jagetzow (1805-1875) --
German vulgar economist, preached 'state socialism' -- Editor.

[[142.]{.info}]{#n142} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
732-33. \[The reference is to the speech by Decurtins, a representative
of the Swiss Catholic Party, delivered by him at the 1897 Zurich
International Congress on the regulation of the workers' question \[sic,
some words seem to be missing here -- MIA\]. Decurtins proposed that the
congress should demand the banning of female labour at factories, the
aim being the protection of the family. His proposal was rejected as
reactionary -- Editor.\]

[[143.]{.info}]{#n143} *Cum grano salis* -- with a pinch of salt, that
is, not to be taken too seriously -- MIA.

[[144.]{.info}]{#n144} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
734.

[[145.]{.info}]{#n145} Wright, *Industrial Evolution of the United
States*, p 204

[[146.]{.info}]{#n146} *Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner of
Labor* (Washington, 1897), p 21.

[[147.]{.info}]{#n147} These last four words are in English in the
original -- Editor.

[[148.]{.info}]{#n148} *Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner of
Labor*, p 22.

[[149.]{.info}]{#n149} *Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner of
Labor*, p 22.

[[150.]{.info}]{#n150} Levasseur, *L*\'*Ouvrier américain*, Volume 1, p
198.

[[151.]{.info}]{#n151} See his remark on the possible influence of
'social reform' on female labour, *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6,
Part 1, p 733.

[[152.]{.info}]{#n152} 'It compels legislative recognition of particular
interests of the workers, by taking advantage of the divisions among the
bourgeoisie itself. Thus the ten-hours' bill in England was carried.'
(*Manifesto of the Communist Party*, p 117, Chapter 1, 'Bourgeoisie and
Proletarians') \[Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 117 -- Editor.\]

[[153.]{.info}]{#n153} On the basis of a careful study of figures
referring to the city of York, Rowntree has arrived at the following
conclusions: 1) ten per cent of the population of the city get under 21s
8d per week and therefore live in conditions of what he calls 'primary
poverty\'; 2) 17.93 per cent of the population live in conditions of
'secondary poverty', that is, though having earnings of over 21s 8d a
week, they incur various extra -- productive or non-productive --
expenditures (*Poverty*: *A Study of Town Life*, second edition, p 298).
In Rowntree's opinion, between 25 and 30 per cent of the aggregate urban
population live in poverty (ibid, p 30). There's 'automatic socialism'
for you! Such poverty, Rowntree goes on to say, has been prevalent,
despite the growth of the national wealth, even during 'unprecedented
prosperity' (ibid, p 304). Indeed, Goschen was right: 'Figures do not
lie.' \[Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree (1871-1954) -- English industrialist
and philanthropist -- Editor.\]

[[154.]{.info}]{#n154} *Wage Labour and Capital* (Geneva, 1894), pp
33-34. \[Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian translation published in
Geneva; Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,* Volume 1
(Moscow, 1973), p 163 -- Editor.\]

[[155.]{.info}]{#n155} *Wage Labour and Capital*, p 39. \[Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 163 --
Editor.\]

[[156.]{.info}]{#n156} *Wage Labour and Capital*, p 47, italicised in
the original. \[Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,* Volume
1 (Moscow, 1973), p 173 -- Editor.

[[157.]{.info}]{#n157} *Wage Labour and Capital*, p 48. \[Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,* Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 174 --
Editor.

[[158.]{.info}]{#n158} Cf, for example, Louis Blanc, *Organisation de
travail* (fifth edition), p 40.

[[159.]{.info}]{#n159} Cf Engels' remark in the Introduction to the
booklet *Wage Labour and Capital*.

[[160.]{.info}]{#n160} *Capital*, Volume 1, p 454 \[Russian edition;
Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp 489-90 -- Editor.\]

[[161.]{.info}]{#n161} *Capital*, Volume 1, p 562. \[Russian edition;
Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 610 -- Editor.\]

[[162.]{.info}]{#n162} *Capital*, Volume 1, p 556. \[Russian edition;
Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 604 -- Editor.\] Cf the
quotations made by Mr P Struve in his 'Randglossen' in *Neue Zeit*, Year
9, p 571.

[[163.]{.info}]{#n163} Thus, in discussing British workers' housing and
food he made the following reservation: 'The limits of this book compel
us to concern ourselves chiefly with the worst paid part of the
industrial proletariat, and with the agricultural labourers, who
together form the majority of the working class.' (*Capital*, Volume 1,
p 563) \[Russian edition; Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974),
p 611 -- Editor.\]

[[164.]{.info}]{#n164} *Capital*, Volume 1, p 556. \[Russian edition;
Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 604 -- Editor.\]

[[165.]{.info}]{#n165} See p xvii in the *Final Report of the
Commission*, which we have so often quoted from.

[[166.]{.info}]{#n166} *Final Report of the Commission*, p liv.

[[167.]{.info}]{#n167} 'The Progress of the Working Classes in the Last
Half-Century', a speech delivered to the Royal Statistical Society and
published in *Essays in Finance* (second series, London, 1886); cf his
'Further Notes on the Progress of the Working Classes', etc, in the
*Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*, March 1886. The 'Notes' were
also published in *Essays in Finance*.

[[168.]{.info}]{#n168} Under the Poor Law passed in Britain in 1834,
vagrants and street beggars were sent to workhouses, which were actually
barracks and prisons for the poor -- Editor.

[[169.]{.info}]{#n169} Cf the relevant remark by Benjamin Jones in
'Discussion on Mr Giffen's Paper', *Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society*, March 1886, p 96. It is self-evident that the greater the
artificial reduction in the level of wages *prior* to the law of 1834,
the more immense the impression from the *seemingly* improved material
condition of the worker *after* the promulgation of the law, when wages
became the sole means of subsistence for the toiling masses.

[[170.]{.info}]{#n170} The remark by the self-same Benjamin Jones,
'Discussion on Mr Giffen's Paper', *Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society*, March 1886, p 96. Numerous highly forceful objections to
Giffen were also made at the Industrial Remuneration Conference, at
which Lloyd Jones revealed the poetical licence practised by certain
other British statisticians. See the *Industrial Remuneration Conference
Report*, p 35.

[[171.]{.info}]{#n171} According to Chadwick, rents *doubled* in London
(*Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*, March 1886, the 'Discussion
on Mr Giffen's Paper', p 97). Miss Edith Simcox finds that higher rents
swallow up to three-fifths of the increase in workers' wages due to
higher pay levels (*Industrial Remuneration Conference Report*, p 92).
\[Edith Jemima Simcox (1844-1901) -- British trade union activist and
writer, one of the first female delegates to the TUC conference --
MIA.\]

[[172.]{.info}]{#n172} *Industrial Remuneration Conference Report*, p
30.

[[173.]{.info}]{#n173} Of course, this proneness is not inherent in him
alone. Here is the consolatory remark Levasseur has to make: 'En temps
ordinaire, on peut dire vaguement qu\'il se trouve sans ouvrage moins du
dixième des ouvriers de l\'industrie et probablement moins du vingtième
des salariés (femmes et enfants compris).' \[\'One might say that in
ordinary times under one-tenth of all industrial workers are unemployed,
and probably under one-twentieth of all hired workers in general
(including women and children).\'\] (*L*\'*Ouvrier américain*, Volume 1,
p 584) That is not so little, Mr Professor! '*Moins du dixième*' is a
tremendous and *irreplaceable loss* brought about by the contradiction
in society's property relations and the state of its productive forces.

[[174.]{.info}]{#n174} Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian book
entitled *Problems of Poverty and Unemployment* (St Petersburg, 1900), p
239 in which John A Hobson's works *Problems of Poverty* and *The
Problem of the Unemployed*, translated into Russian, were included --
Editor.

[[175.]{.info}]{#n175} *Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*,
December 1888, p 602.

[[176.]{.info}]{#n176} Emile Levasseur, *La Population française*,
Volume 2, p 413. Cf also Henri Joly, *La France criminelle* (Paris,
1889), p 350. \[Pierre Emile Levasseur (1828-1911) -- French bourgeois
economist and historian; Henri Joly (1839-1925) -- French philosopher
and psychologist -- Editor.\]

[[177.]{.info}]{#n177} Levasseur, *L*\'*Ouvrier américain*, Volume 1, p
593.

[[178.]{.info}]{#n178} Levasseur, *La Population française*, Volume 3, p
86 *et sec*. Cf also Levasseur, *L*\'*Ouvrier américain*, Volume 2, p
215 *et sec*.

[[179.]{.info}]{#n179} *Capital*, Volume 1, pp 563-64. \[Russian
Edition; Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 612 --
Editor.\]

[[180.]{.info}]{#n180} PF Aschrott, *Das englische Armenwesen* (Leipzig,
1886), p 422. Cf his *Die Entwicklung des Armenwesens in England seit
dem Jahre 1885* (Leipzig, 1886), p 64.

[[181.]{.info}]{#n181} *Industrial Remuneration Conference Report*, p
89.

[[182.]{.info}]{#n182} *Fifth and Final Report of the Royal Commission
of Labour*, Part 1 (London, 1894), Report by W Abraham, M Austin, I
Mawdsley and T Mann, p 128.

[[183.]{.info}]{#n183} *Pauperism* (1892), p 54; *The Aged Poor in
England and Wales* (London, 1894), p 38.

[[184.]{.info}]{#n184} *Charles Booth*, p 39. But, again, that is not
all. There are rural areas in which *every aged worker dies in penury*.
\[Charles Booth (1840-1916) -- English public figure known for his study
of life of the London poor -- Editor.\]

[[185.]{.info}]{#n185} Cf Ogle, 'On Suicides in England and Wales',
*Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*, March 1886.

[[186.]{.info}]{#n186} Ogle, 'On Suicides in England and Wales',
*Journal of the Royal Statistical Society*, March 1886, p 112.

[[187.]{.info}]{#n187} Hobson, *Problems of Poverty and Unemployment*, p
21.

[[188.]{.info}]{#n188} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 6, p 495 -- Editor.

[[189.]{.info}]{#n189} Fernand Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*
(Paris, 1900), p 183. \[Fernand Pelloutier (1867-1901) -- prominent
figure in French trade union movement -- Editor.\]

[[190.]{.info}]{#n190} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, p 186.

[[191.]{.info}]{#n191} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, p 189.

[[192.]{.info}]{#n192} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, p 191.

[[193.]{.info}]{#n193} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, p 194.

[[194.]{.info}]{#n194} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, pp 187,
190, 194.

[[195.]{.info}]{#n195} *La ville lumière* -- the City of Light, a
nickname for Paris, because of its reputation for enlightened thinking
and early use of street lighting; Plekhanov is being sarcastic here --
MIA.

[[196.]{.info}]{#n196} Pelloutier, *La vie ouvrière en France*, p 289.

[[197.]{.info}]{#n197} Leroy-Beaulieu, *Traité théorique et pratique
d\'économie politique*, Volume 4 (Paris, 1896), p 468.

[[198.]{.info}]{#n198} H Joly, *La France criminelle*, p 20. Another
source gives the growth in the number of convictions for begging and
vagrancy as follows: 16 per 100,000 inhabitants of France in 1838; in
1887, the number of convictions stood at 85 (see the interesting Report
'Criminalité et vagabondage', presented by Cavalieri to the Geneva
Congress of Criminalists and published in its *Compte Rendu*).

[[199.]{.info}]{#n199} See Louis Bertrand, *L*\'*organisation de la
bienfaisance publique* (Brussels, 1900), p 16.

[[200.]{.info}]{#n200} Bertrand, *L*\'*organisation de la bienfaisance
publique*, p 17.

[[201.]{.info}]{#n201} Bertrand, *L*\'*organisation de la bienfaisance
publique*, p 16.

[[202.]{.info}]{#n202} Leroy-Beaulieu, *Traité théorique et pratique
d\'économie politique*, Volume 4, p 471.

[[203.]{.info}]{#n203} See Enrico Ferri, *La Sociologie criminelle*
(Paris, 1883), p 163 *et seq*.

[[204.]{.info}]{#n204} Dr Franz von Liszt, *Das Verbrechen als
sozial-pathologische Erscheinung* (Dresden, 1899), pp 12-14. \[Franz von
Liszt (1851-1919) -- German criminologist -- Editor.\]

[[205.]{.info}]{#n205} Liszt, *Das Verbrechen als sozial-pathologische
Erscheinung*, p 19.

[[206.]{.info}]{#n206} Alfred Fouillé, 'Les Jeunes criminels', *Revues
des deux mondes*, January 1897, p 418.

[[207.]{.info}]{#n207} Liszt, *Das Verbrechen als sozial-pathologische
Erscheinung*, p 17.

[[208.]{.info}]{#n208} Paul Hirsch, *Verbrechen und Prostitution*
(Berlin, 1897), p 7. Cf an interesting book by d\'Hausonville, *Salaires
et misères des femmes* (Paris, 1900), which shows the close link between
poverty and prostitution.

[[209.]{.info}]{#n209} Ferdinand Dreyfus, *Misères sociales* (Paris,
1901), p 8.

[[210.]{.info}]{#n210} An exception to the general rule is presented
only by several Swiss cantons, where both the overall figure and the
percentage of recidivists are falling. However, such cantons cannot be
taken into account because of their *exclusive position*, for which, for
example, see John Cuénod, *La criminalité à Genève au dix-neuvième
siècle* (Geneva, 1891), pp 116-17. Cf Zuercher, 'Die Selbstmorde im
Kanton Zürich in Vergleichung mit der Zahl der Verbrechen', in
*Zeitschrift für schweizerische Statistik* for 1898, Part 6. Zuercher is
out to prove that the fall in *crime* is accompanied by a rise in the
number of *suicides*.

[[211.]{.info}]{#n211} Liszt, *Das Verbrechen als sozial-pathologische
Erscheinung*, p 16.

[[212.]{.info}]{#n212} *Le crime et la Folie* (Paris, 1880), p 30.
\[Henry Maudsley (1835-1918) -- English psychiatrist -- Editor.\]

[[213.]{.info}]{#n213} Written in 1901.

[[214.]{.info}]{#n214} The Lombroso School was named after the Italian
criminologist Cesare Lombroso (1835-1909), who considered that criminal
behaviour was inherited biologically and represented a throwback to
primitive humans and even apes -- MIA.

[[215.]{.info}]{#n215} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p
604 -- Editor.

[[216.]{.info}]{#n216} 'La condition de l\'ouvrier était donc alors \[in
the Middle Ages\] très supportable, et j\'ajouterai, avec les
enseignements que la critique moderne nous fournit, qu\'elle devait être
supérieure à celle de nos ouvriers\... Ce serf prétendu\... avait une
situation que sollicitent comme très enviable les ouvriers de notre
temps.' \['the worker's condition in those days \[in the Middle Ages\]
was quite tolerable, and I would add, on the basis of data provided by
modern practice, that it must have been better than our workers'
condition is. That so-called slaves\... lived in conditions that today's
workers would call enviable.\'\] (P Hubert-Valleroux, *Les Corporations
d*\'*arts et métiers* (Paris, 1885), pp 44-45) Cf also Alfred Franklin,
*La Vie privée d*\'*autrefois*. *Arts, moeurs, usages des Parisiens du
XIIe au XVIIIe siècle*. *Comment on devenait patron* (Paris, 1889), p
65: 'La vérité qui se dégage d\'une étude approfondie et impartiale du
régime des corporations, c\'est que la condition de l\'ouvrier au
treizième et au quatorzième siècle était supérieure à la condition
actuelle.' \['the truth revealed by a profound and impartial study of
the corporation system is that the worker's condition was better in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries than it is today.\'\]

[[217.]{.info}]{#n217} *This* argument, like the vast majority of all
the others, has been borrowed by our 'critic' from Marx's bourgeois
opponents. Cf, for example, Kirkup's *History of Socialism*, p 160. (We
are quoting from the second edition, but the argument we are referring
to is also to be found in the first edition.)

[[218.]{.info}]{#n218} It is noteworthy that Bakunin accused Marx and
Engels for their not wishing to place any hopes on an '*impoverished
proletariat*'. See *The State and Anarchy*, p 8.

[[219.]{.info}]{#n219} Cf Kampffmeyer, *Wohin steuert der Ökonomische
und staatliche Entwicklung?* (Berlin, 1901), pp 32, 33, 35 and
elsewhere. \[Eduard David (1863-1930) -- economist, a right-wing leader
of German Social Democratic Party, revisionist, social-chauvinist; Paul
Kampffmeyer (1864-1945) -- German reformist and revisionist, SPD
archivist, pioneer of the Deutschen Gartenstadt-Gesellschaft (Garden
City Society), prolific author; Ludwig Woltmann (1871-1907) -- German
sociologist, revisionist, neo-Kantian, subsequently social-Darwinist
whose ideas of German racial superiority influenced the Nazis --
Editor/MIA.\]

[[220.]{.info}]{#n220} For a characteristic of Bakunin's view in respect
of politics and the economy, see my booklet *Anarchismus und
Socialismus* (Berlin, 1894). \[Available on the MIA at \<
[http://www.marxists.org/archive/plekhanov/1895/anarch/index.htm]{.underline}
\>.\]

[[221.]{.info}]{#n221} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
735.

[[222.]{.info}]{#n222} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
679.

[[223.]{.info}]{#n223} Wilhelm Schuppe (1836-1913) -- German
philosopher, subjective idealist, head of reactionary immanent school;
Christoph von Sigwart (1830-1904) -- German idealist logician,
neo-Kantian; Theodor Ziehen (1862-1950) -- professor of philosophy in
Halle, physiologist and psychiatrist, known for his attacks against
materialism; Alexander Fyodorovich Kistyakovsky (1833-1885) --
well-known Russian professor of law -- Editor

[[224.]{.info}]{#n224} The reader will understand that continuity of
heating is not a must. If, after raising the temperature of the wax to
*a* degrees I stop heating it and let it cool to *a* ÷ 2, and then begin
heating it again until it melts, the result will be the same as when the
heating is continuous; only it will take more time and more calories.

[[225.]{.info}]{#n225} *Critique of Pure Reason* (translated by NM
Sokolov, St Petersburg), p 184. \[Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian
book -- Editor.\] Mr P Struve quotes from the second German edition
published by Dr Karl Kehrbach, where the above-quoted lines may be found
on pp 194-95.

[[226.]{.info}]{#n226} '*If state B differs from state A only in
magnitude, then\...*', etc (*Critique of Pure Reason*, p 183 of the
Russian translation by Sokolov -- italics are ours).

[[227.]{.info}]{#n227} *Critique of Pure Reason*, pp 182, 183 of the
same translation (italics are again ours).

[[228.]{.info}]{#n228} 'Veränderung ist eine Art zu existieren, welche
auf eine andere Art zu existieren eben desselben Gegenstandes erfolgt.
Daher ist alles, was sich verändert, *bleibend* und nur sein Zustand
wechselt.' \[\'Change is a kind of existence which follows another kind
of existence of the same object; therefore, everything that changes,
*continues to exist* and only its *condition* changes.\'\] (*Kritik der
reinen Vernunft*, herausgegeben von Kehrbach, second edition, p 179)

[[229.]{.info}]{#n229} Since we do not have the works of Leibnitz on
hand, we shall refer at least to *Grundriss der Geschichte der
Philosophie* by Ueberweg, Part 3 (Berlin, 1880), p 130. \[Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibnitz (1646-1716) -- prominent German mathematician and
idealist philosopher -- Editor.\]

[[230.]{.info}]{#n230} We shall note, however, that we would have to
consider here, in the first place, the *dialectical nature of motion*.

[[231.]{.info}]{#n231} Hegel long ago showed the groundlessness of
current arguments on the theme that Nature makes no leaps. 'Es hat sich
aber gezeigt \[he says\] dass die Veränderungen des Seins überhaupt
nicht nur das Uebergehen einer Grösse in ein andere Grösse, sondern
Uebergang vom Qualitativen in das Quantitative und umgekehrt sind: ein
Anderswerden, das ein Abbrechen des Allmähligen und ein
Qualitative-Anderes gegen das vorhergehende Dasein ist.' \[\'But we have
shown that, in general, changes of the Being are not only the transition
of one magnitude into another, but also the transition of the
Quantitative into the Qualitative, and vice versa\...\'\]
(\'Wissenschaft der Logik', *Hegels Werke*, Volume 3, second edition, p
434) Mr P Struve imagines that the quotations so ill-advisedly culled by
him from various authors, refute this idea of Hegel's. In fact, however,
they do not contain even a hint at its refutation. For a more detailed
exposition of Hegel's theory of leaps, see our booklet *A New Defender
of the Autocracy, or the Woe of Mr Tikhomirov*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov,
*Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp 363-97;
available on the MIA at \<
[http://www.marxists.org/archive/plekhanov/1889/champ/index.htm]{.underline}
\> -- MIA.\]

[[232.]{.info}]{#n232} The obscure philosopher of Ephesus -- Heraclitus
of Ephesus, a major philosopher of antiquity and founder of dialectics,
was called 'obscure' because his statements were hard to understand --
Editor.

[[233.]{.info}]{#n233} *The Development of Scientific Socialism*
(translated by V Zasulich, second edition, Geneva, 1893), p 18.
\[Plekhanov is quoting from the Russian translation by Vera Zasulich,
published in Geneva; Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), pp 128-29 -- Editor.\]

[[234.]{.info}]{#n234} For his exploits in the field of 'criticism', see
our article 'Cant Against Kant or Herr Bernstein's Will and Testament'
in No 2-3 of *Zarya*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical
Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 353-78; available on the MIA at \<
[http://www.marxists.org/archive/plekhanov/1901/xx/cant.htm]{.underline}
\>.

[[235.]{.info}]{#n235} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
688.

[[236.]{.info}]{#n236} On this, see Hegel's 'Big' Encyclopaedia, § 81
and the Supplement to it. Cf also *Die Phenomenologie des Geistes*
(Bamberg and Würzburg, 1807), pp 134ff. Hegel has aptly remarked that
'das Etwas ist die erste Negation der Negation' (*Werke*, Volume 3, p
114).

[[237.]{.info}]{#n237} W Sombart, *Without Fail! From the Theory and
History of the Trade Union Movement*, translated from the German and
published in the supplement to the Russian translation of the book by W
Kulemann, *The Trade Union Movement* (St Petersburg, 1901), pp 95-96.
\[Werner Sombart (1863-1941) -- German vulgar bourgeois economist,
ideologue of German imperialism, depicted capitalism as harmonious
system of economy -- Editor.\]

[[238.]{.info}]{#n238} Sombart, *Without Fail! From the Theory and
History of the Trade Movement*, p 96, italics by Sombart.

[[239.]{.info}]{#n239} Paul Bureau, *Le Contrat de travail, le rôle des
syndicats professionnels* (Paris, 1902), p 257. \[Pindar (522-443BC) --
Greek lyric poet noted for his florid style -- MIA.\]

[[240.]{.info}]{#n240} Incidentally, it should be noted that, in
Britain, the attitude of bourgeois public opinion to trade unions has
begun of late to undergo a sharp change. Now practically every issue of
*Justice* contains some fresh news on the course of the 'war' on the
trade unions. The British bourgeoisie seem to be returning to the idea
that the trade unions are hampering their competitiveness with other
countries on the world market. If this 'war on the trade unions' does
not cease soon, the British bourgeoisie's 'socialism' will recede into
oblivion, after showing that even with all its innocuousness it can live
side by side with capitalism only *up to a certain limit*. \[*Justice*
-- weekly organ of the British Social-Democratic Federation, published
from 1884 till 1925 -- Editor.\]

[[241.]{.info}]{#n241} *E tutti frutti* -- literally 'and all the
fruits\'; here meaning disparagingly saying 'and all the rest of them'
-- MIA.

[[242.]{.info}]{#n242} See the third edition of his *Sozialismus und
soziale Bewegung im XIX Jahrhundert* (Jena, 1900), pp 126-27.

[[243.]{.info}]{#n243} *Subjectivism and Individualism*, p 260.
\[Nikolai Alexandrovich Berdyaev (1874-1948) -- Russian reactionary
idealist philosopher and mystic, opponent of Marxism. In 1922 he was
deported abroad -- Editor.\]

[[244.]{.info}]{#n244} Gleb Ivanovich Uspensky (1843-1902) -- Russian
writer; brilliantly depicted suppression and lack of rights of urban
poor and peasants -- Editor.

[[245.]{.info}]{#n245} From Nikolai Gogol's comedy *The Marriage* --
Editor.

[[246.]{.info}]{#n246} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, pp
698-99.

[[247.]{.info}]{#n247} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
690.

[[248.]{.info}]{#n248} *Brauns Archiv*, Volume 14, Book 5/6, Part 1, p
698.

[[249.]{.info}]{#n249} *Credo* -- the title of the manifesto which
expounded the main propositions of Russian opportunism -- Economism, an
opportunist trend in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement at the turn
of the century; adherents of Bernsteinism. Economists limited the tasks
of the working class to economic struggle for higher wages, better
working conditions, etc, asserting that political struggle is the
liberal bourgeoisie's affair -- Editor.

[[250.]{.info}]{#n250} See our *Vademecum* for the editorial board of
*Rabocheye Dyelo* \[*The Workers Cause*\] (Geneva, 1900). \[*Vademecum
for the Editorial Board of 'Rabocheye Dyelo*' -- a collection of
materials published by the Emancipation of Labour group with an
introduction by G Plekhanov (Geneva, 1900); it was directed against
opportunism in the RSDLP and especially against the Economists and their
journal *Rabocheye Dyelo* -- Editor.\]

[[251.]{.info}]{#n251} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1970), p 21 -- Editor.

[[252.]{.info}]{#n252} *Manifesto of the Communist Party* (Geneva,
1900), pp 16-17, 37. \[Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Selected Works,*
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 120 -- Editor.\]

[[253.]{.info}]{#n253} With the difference that while the far-sighted
see nearby objects worse than the near-sighted do, revolutionary
Social-Democrats usually understand even the immediate interests of the
workers better than those who do not recognise the 'ultimate aim'.

[[254.]{.info}]{#n254} A modification of a quotation from Ivan Krylov's
fable *The Inquisitive One* -- Editor.

[[255.]{.info}]{#n255} In reality, the historical process of the
understanding and change in people's views is not limited to an
understanding and change in *economic* views alone. We have simplified
the matter to make its depiction more graphic.

[[256.]{.info}]{#n256} Friedrich Wilhelm Schelling (1775-1854) -- German
philosopher, objective idealist -- Editor.

[[257.]{.info}]{#n257} 'The only thing that permits us to confirm the
data of science', Mr S Bulgakov assures us, 'is that current economic
development is leading to the gradual dying out of the most harsh and
gross forms of the exploitation of man by man.' (*Capitalism and
Agriculture*, Volume 2, p 456) \[Sergei Nikolayevich Bulgakov
(1871-1944) -- Russian bourgeois economist, idealist philosopher, in
1900s came out with revision of Marx's theory on agrarian question,
subsequently became a priest -- Editor.\]

[[258.]{.info}]{#n258} *Kozma Prutkov* -- the satirical literary
pseudonym used by a group of Russian poets in the 1860s -- Editor.

[[259.]{.info}]{#n259} This latter thought was expressed by him in an
article 'The Fundamental Antinomy of the Theory of Labour Value',
*Zhizn* (*Life*), February 1900.

[[260.]{.info}]{#n260} Eugen Böhm-Bawerk (1851-1914) -- bourgeois
economist of Austrian school of political economy -- Editor.\]

[[261.]{.info}]{#n261} See Preface to the second German edition of
Volume 1 of *Capital*, p xix. \[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow,
1974), p 29 -- Editor.\]

[[262.]{.info}]{#n262} The psychology of Marx's West European 'critics'
differs from that of his Russian 'critics' only in the measure of the
Western bourgeoisie's seniority to our bourgeoisie. However, there is no
essential difference here, neither can there be one. It is the same
tune, though somewhat in another key.

[[263.]{.info}]{#n263} *Sotsial-Demokrat* -- a literary and political
collection published abroad in 1890-92 by the Emancipation of Labour
group; it played an important part in disseminating Marxism in Russia --
Editor.

[[264.]{.info}]{#n264} See our review of the booklet *Sotsial-Demokrat*
(Geneva, 1890).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../../index.htm)

1
