---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1899

### The Philosophical and Social Views of Karl Marx

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 423-26. Scanned and
prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov delivered this speech at a meeting in
Switzerland in the late 1890s (most likely in 1897 or early in 1898).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

**Ladies and Gentlemen, Citizens**

In view of the limited time granted to speakers today, it is perhaps too
bold on my part to attempt to give an appraisal of Marx's contribution
to philosophy and social science. Yet I shall try to do that, and if I
do not measure up to that task, so much the worse for me.

Marx's philosophy springs logically and inevitably from Hegel's - that
is what we are so often told by those who have made a study of the
origins of present-day socialism. That is true, but it is not all; far
from it. Marx succeeded Hegel in the same way as Jupiter succeeded
Saturn, by toppling him from his throne. The appearance of Marx's
materialist philosophy was a genuine revolution, the greatest in the
history of human thought. For an appreciation of the significance of
that revolution, one has to cast a glance at the condition of
materialist philosophy in the eighteenth century.

The idea of evolution in Nature and in human society was almost
completely alien to the materialism of those times - that bold and
militant philosophy. True, Denis Diderot, one of its most outstanding
thinkers of the period, often voiced views that would do credit to our
present-day evolutionists. However, these profound and brilliant views
did not comprise the essence of the materialists' doctrine; they were
merely exceptions, and as such could only bear out the general rule. I
cannot go into details of the matter here, which is why I shall cite
only two examples.

Read through Holbach's celebrated book *Système de la Nature* and note
the chapter in which the author speaks of man's origin. You will see
that the greatest difficulties the author came up against were those
that refer to man's *zoological* evolution and our planet's *geological*
evolution.

The second example will be taken from the sphere of morals. The
eighteenth-century materialists have been accused by almost all
historians of philosophy of having preached selfishness. That as a bad
mistake. To Helvétius, Holbach and their friends, the *social* weal, not
the *personal*, was the foundation of all morality. *Salus populi -
suprema lex* (the public weal is supreme law), said Helvétius. In that
case, what is the explanation of a mistake so widespread in the world of
philosophy and literature? It derives from a source that has already
been mentioned: the materialist philosophers of the eighteenth century
could not consider morals from the evolutionary point of view. It is
only historical evolution that can explain to us why and how the social
weal becomes predominant in the morals that reign in a given society.
That evolution, however, most often takes place without the knowledge of
individuals, who obey the moral demands of their society or *their
class* as the behest of absolute morality as sanctioned by religion or
metaphysics. It is not the individual's subjective mind but the
objective logic of social relations that dictates one course of
behaviour or another to the individual. Lacking any knowledge of
evolution, the philosophers of the last century could have resort only
to what they called Reason.

They tried to *prove* that even from the standpoint of personal
interest, it is better to give preference to the social weal. It is not
surprising that the Reason they addressed themselves to often resembled
a man with a most excellent heart that prompts the most noble sentiments
in him, but with a mind which at the same time cannot escape from the
logical labyrinth of individualist utilitarianism.

The first half of our century saw the complete rehabilitation of
idealist philosophy. Nobody wished even to hear of materialism, which
was regarded with the utmost contempt. If you compare the idealist
philosophy of the nineteenth century with the philosophy that preceded
the efflorescence of materialism in the last century, you will see that
the strongest feature of idealism in our century is that very idea of
evolution, which was unknown to the materialists. That was the price
paid by materialism for its error.

For its part, the idealist philosophy of our century also proved
incapable of solving the problem of evolution. The logical laws of the
evolution of the idea - such was the weapon employed by that philosophy
whenever it had to ascertain the laws of the evolution of the Universe
and the human race. However, the logical laws of the evolution of the
idea explain nothing in Nature and society, so the idealists were
obliged to address themselves to ordinary facts and laws - the facts and
laws of Nature, and those of social history. Thus, Hegel, the greatest
idealist of all times and peoples, was obliged to seek in *economic*
evolution explanations of historical facts that were incomprehensible
from the idealist point of view. Hegel's philosophy of history was an
involuntary and unconscious tribute to materialism.

On the other hand, what the idealists called the philosophy of the
spirit - *Philosophie des Geistes* - was demolished by difficulties that
can be surmounted only by physiological psychology, a science that is
totally materialist, whatever may often be said by those who engage in
it.

It was thus that, in the second half of our century, philosophy has
again become materialist; however, the materialism of our times has been
enriched by all the achievements of the evolutionist theory.

You are no doubt aware of the role played by the idea of evolution in
various fields of the great science of Nature. Suffice it to recall the
names of Kant and Laplace, Lyell and Darwin. But what is the place held
by the idea of evolution in the area of social science?

At present very much is being said in sociological literature - and
often quite wrongly - about evolution. However, it is not enough to
state that social relations are constantly changing; what is necessary
is to ascertain the driving force in that change. Darwin did not limit
himself to stating that species undergo change; he showed that the
struggle for existence was the cause of that change. What, then, is it
that brings about changes in social relations? What is the origin of
various kinds of social structure?

Marx proved that the economic structure of human society is the
foundation whose evolution explains all other aspects of social
evolution. That stands to his everlasting credit, one that is even more
important than the blasting criticism of present-day society that he
gave in his *Capital*. The key to an understanding of human evolution
was first given us by historical theory. It was from Marx that we first
received the materialist philosophy of the history of mankind:

My dialectic method \[says Marx\] is not only different from the
Hegelian, but is its direct opposite. To Hegel, the life-process of the
human brain, that is, the process of thinking, which, under the name of
the 'Idea', he even transforms into an independent subject, is the
demiurgos of the real world, and the real world is only the external,
phenomenal form of the 'Idea'. With me, on the contrary, the ideal is
nothing else than the material world reflected by the human mind, and
translated into forms of thought\...

In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany, because
it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In
its rational form, it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and
its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension and
affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same
time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its
inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed
social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its
transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets
nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and
revolutionary. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Sociologists of the Darwin school say a lot about the struggle for
existence, which they would wish to perpetuate. Far from ignoring that
struggle, Marx's school explains its inception and all the phases of its
historical development. It has shown that, ever since mankind emerged
from its primitive condition, it has consisted of various classes, the
antagonism between which has been the main driving force of social
evolution. We are today witnessing a furious struggle - a life-and-death
struggle - between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, between those
who toil and those who appropriate the products of their labour. Marx
has described to us the phases of that struggle, and indicated its
inevitable outcome. He sided with the oppressed, calling upon them to
organise and to achieve international unity. That call was answered by
the masses of the proletariat. Less than fifty years have passed since
there resounded the great call: 'Working Men of All Countries, Unite!',
and the red banner of international socialism is proudly waving in all
countries involved in the capitalist system. With every day, the
movement is acquiring ever greater force; with every day, its speed is
growing, with every day, the struggle is becoming ever fiercer.

Let us all stand ready, for the day of the decisive battle is at hand!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by the Moscow editors of this edition of the work.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 29 -
Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
