---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1899

### Reply to an International Questionnaire from the Newspaper *La Petite République Socialiste*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 2 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 421-22. Scanned and
prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov's reply to an international
questionnaire of the newspaper *La petite République Socialiste* was
published together with a number of answers by socialists from other
countries in a fortnightly supplement to the newspaper on 22 September
1899.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

**Dear Citizens**

You have honoured me by wishing to learn my opinion on the following
questions:

Can a socialist party, without betraying the principle of the class
struggle, intervene in clashes between various bourgeois groupings,
whether with the purpose of saving political freedom or, as in the
Dreyfus case ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ in defence of humanity?

In what measure can the socialist proletariat take part in a bourgeois
government; does the principle of the class struggle contradict,
absolutely and in all cases, the partial gaining of governmental power
by a socialist party?

I shall reply with the greater willingness since these questions, as you
have so correctly pointed out, present international interest. They are
of such importance that the entire future of our Party hinges on the way
in which socialists deal with them in one sense or another.

Here is what I think of the matter.

As I see it, the socialist proletariat is not only entitled but is in
duty bound to intervene in clashes between various bourgeois groupings
whenever it finds that useful to the interests of the revolutionary
movement. However, that intervention can be of use to the revolutionary
movement and should take place only in cases when it is capable of
giving greater activity and determination to the struggle between the
bourgeoisie, that is, the possessors of the means of production, on the
one hand, and the proletariat, that is, the class exploited by the
possessors of those means, on the other.

For the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat to become
ever more active and resolute, it is necessary for the proletariat to
become more and more imbued with the consciousness of the opposedness of
its interests to those of its exploiters. The proletariat's
revolutionary consciousness is that awesome dynamite of the socialists
that will explode present-day society. Everything that promotes the
development of that consciousness should be considered a revolutionary
means, and therefore acceptable to socialists; everything that blunts
that consciousness is anti-revolutionary, and should therefore be
condemned and rejected by us. That is the main principle all our tactics
should be based on.

Adhering as I do to that point of view, I am inclined to think that
socialists' participation in a bourgeois government would bring us more
harm than good, since it would lead to a weakening of the proletariat's
revolutionary consciousness. I am aware, however, that there are
exceptions to any rule, and that, if understood in absolute terms, any
principle becomes metaphysical. I therefore allow the possibility of
individual and exceptional cases of a socialist party being obliged to
agree to one of its representatives joining a bourgeois ministry, but
the right of decision should, in such cases, always belong to the party,
not to any particular member.

It should also be added and emphasised that any decision to join a
bourgeois government can be made by socialists only with an immediate
and clearly expressed aim - that of speeding up the disintegration of
present-day society.

Accept, dear comrades, assurances of my friendly esteem.

**G Plekhanov**

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes are by the Moscow editors of this edition of the work.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} The Dreyfus Case - a provocative trial of Dreyfus, a
French General Staff officer of Jewish nationality, who was falsely
charged with espionage and high treason. It was staged in 1894 by
reactionary monarchists in the French army. Dreyfus was sentenced to
life imprisonment by a court martial. The Dreyfus case was used by the
French reactionary circles to foment anti-Semitism and attack the
republican regime and democratic liberties. When in 1898 socialists and
progressive bourgeois democrats (such as Emile Zola, Jean Jaurès and
Anatole France) started a campaign for re-examination of the Dreyfus
case, the latter assumed a markedly political character. The country was
split into two camps, with the republicans and democrats on one side,
and the bloc of monarchists, clericals, anti-Semites and nationalists on
the other. Under pressure of public opinion, Dreyfus was pardoned and
released in 1899, but it was only in 1906 that he was acquitted by the
Court of Cassation and reinstated in the army.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
