---
layout: default
title: 
---
# Lo, the Poor Inventor!

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Apr. 25, 1904\

Whenever the position of a defender of capitalism against the attacks of
socialism becomes desperate, he drags forth the inventor.

"What are you going to do with the inventor, the man whose genius has
created the great machines which make wealth and civilization possible?
Are you going to despoil him---to rob him?"

To this the socialist generally retorts by showing that it is capitalism
that robs the inventor, and he proves his case by indisputable evidence
culled from court records.

But times are changing, so much so that it may be said that the
individual inventor had become as much of a myth as the individual
captain of industry---the great overman, who, it is alleged, directs the
work of thousands of wage slaves. Today industry is so ramified, so
colossal, that it is an impossibility for one man to direct it. Corps of
trained subordinates, executive, engineering, and other boards meet in
frequent consultation to devise ways and means for the safe conduct of
the consolidated industries over which they preside; so much so that
when the great overman goes off to Monte Carlo on a carouse, industry
continues as though he had never breathed.

And so it is with the inventor. Invention has become social in scope and
methods. With the various branches of industry so closely related, the
mechanical changes in one branch of production must be considered in
their relation to other branches. The result is that today the inventor
is no longer an isolated being, developing himself and his ideas in some
dismal garret.

The inventor is today the product of a scientific school or a great
establishment, which, while specializing in his abilities, has given him
a well-rounded education. The inventor is today a part of a corps of
technical experts, men rarely heard of outside their own spheres, who,
with the finest mechanical equipments and extensive chemical
laboratories at their command, work in cooperative unison for the
production of new and interrelated inventions,a nd the improvement of
old ones.

The inventor today is one of a multitude of workingmen who are asked to
drop suggestions for improvement into boxes placed about the factories
in which they work; suggestions that have, in the aggregate, produced
new types of machines and so transformed the original inventions as to
make them entirely new creations; suggestions that have immensely
enriched the capitalists to whom they were given, while the reward of
the workingmen making them was a few paltry prizes, which are far from
being commensurate in value which the things they are supposed to
represent.

The poor lone inventor whom socialism would rob is a myth, and, like all
myths, is adorned with the poetry of bygone ages. Like modern industry,
modern invention is social. And, since the social characteristic of
industry demands the social ownership of the means of production and
distribution forming its basis, so does the social nature of invention
demand the social ownership of its creations.

Lo, the poor inventor! As a capitalist shield, he is played out!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
