---
layout: default
title: 
---
# THE BURNING QUESTION OF TRADES UNIONISM

## by Daniel DeLeon

An address delivered at\
the New Auditorium Hall, Newark, N.J.,\
April 21, 1904\

Workingmen and Workingwomen of Newark:

That the Trades Union Question is a burning one is obvious from the
space it fills in the public mind, the acrimony of the discussion and
the wide divergence of opinion on the subject.

Obvious also is the conclusion that a subject that can draw upon itself
so much attention, that can produce so much acrimony, and on which
opinion takes so many shades"running from extreme and unqualified
support through all manner of gradations across the gamut, to extreme
and unqualified opposition"cannot choose but be a vital one, and
certainly must have a latent something about it that will not down.

Finally, it is obvious that such a question deserves attention \--
close, serious and sober"and that the solution be grappled with and
found. Nor is the task impossible. Despite the widely conflicting views,
the solution is not only possible but easy"but possible and easy only by
either rising high enough above, or penetrating deep enough below the
squabble to enable the inquirer to detect the fact that, despite their
being seemingly irreconcilable, the conflicting views have important
points of contact. In other words, the solution of the problem depends
upon the perception of the fact that there is no real conflict; that
what there is is a failure to harmonize views that are supplemental to
one another; and that the failure proceeds from the blindness of each
side to perceive the element of soundness in the others"a perception
without which none can understand the bearings of his own position, and
consequently stands stock-fast, impotent \-- except for suicide.

Before entering upon the analysis of the subject, there is one thing I
must request of my audience. It is this: To drop, for the present, all
recollections of the corruption and dishonesty in the Trades Union
Movement that surely will obtrude themselves upon your minds. Need I say
that dishonesty plays an important role in the issue? It does. I shall
come to that. But for the present I shall eliminate that factor. It can
only confuse if taken up now. Leave it out for the present. The actual
and important lines of the question being first established, the
corruption element will then fall of itself into natural grooves and
help to elucidate the principles. Taken now it can only becloud them.

Never forget this"dishonesty in argument is like a creeping plant that
needs support; it would collapse and lie prone but for some solid truth
around which to wind its tendrils for support. Let's first ascertain the
truth.

Nothing so well illustrates the general situation on the fierce
discussion that is going on on Trades Unionism as a certain choice poem
of our genial New York poet, the late lamented John Godfrey Saxe. Many
of you may have heard it, perhaps even learned it by heart on the school
benches. All of you can hear it with profit once more.

*THE BLIND MEN AND THE ELEPHANT*

*It was six men of Indostan\
To learning much inclined,\
Who went to see the Elephant\
(Though all of them were blind),\
That each by observation\
Might satisfy his mind.*

*The First approached the Elephant,\
And happening to fall\
Against his broad and sturdy side,\
At once began to bawl:\
"God bless me! but the Elephant\
Is very like a wall!"*

*The Second feeling of the tusk,\
Cried, "Ho! what have we here\
So very round and smooth and sharp?\
To me \`tis mighty clear\
This wonder of an Elephant\
Is very like a spear!"*

*The Third approached the animal,\
And happening to take\
The squirming trunk within his hands,\
Thus boldly up and spake:\
"I see," quoth he, "the Elephant\
Is very like a snake!"*

*The Fourth reached out his eager hand,\
And felt about the knee.\
"What most this wondrous beast is like\
Is mighty plain," quoth he;\
"\`Tis clear enough the Elephant\
Is very like a tree!"*

*The Fifth who chanced to touch the ear,\
Said: "E'en the blindest man\
Can tell what this resembles most;\
Deny that fact who can,\
This marvel of an Elephant\
Is very like a fan!"*

*The Sixth no sooner had begun\
About the beast to grope,\
Than, seizing on the swinging tail\
That fell within his scope,\
"I see," quoth he, "the Elephant\
Is very like a rope!"*

*And so these men of Indostan\
Disputed loud and long,\
Each in his own opinion\
Exceeding stiff and strong,\
Though each was partly in the right,\
And all were in the wrong!*

Why? Why were they all in the wrong? Simply because none could see where
the others were right, and, consequently, was unable to understand even
himself.

Leaving general illustrations and stepping into the concrete, let us
take two or three instances on the question itself.

Take this instance"President Eliot of Harvard says: "The scab is a
hero!" President Gompers of the A. F. of L. says: "The scab is a scamp!"
It may need a superhuman effort, but, I pray you exercise it. Repress
the thoughts of dishonesty that the mention of these two names must
inevitably conjure up to your minds. Let us examine the two utterances,
regardless of who made them. They are made. That is enough for our
purpose. They seem wholly irreconcilable. Are they, in fact? Let us see:

Here is a shop. What with fines, the intensity of the work demanded, and
other impositions, the wages are inhumanly low. On top of that, a
further reduction is inflicted upon the men, and they rebel. A strike is
on. Presently men who are not starving, but who either occupy other
positions in the employer's service and wish to ingratiate themselves
with their masters, or who despise labor, step into the shop and help
him out. Such instances occurred in the telegraphers' strike and a
shoemakers' strike in New York, and recently when Yale students took the
places of striking car drivers in New Haven. Who will deny that the man
who does such a thing is a scab and a scamp?

But now, look at this other picture. A number of breweries in this
neighborhood and New York had a contract with their employees; the
contract expired and the breweries wanted a new contract less favorable
to the men. In order to accomplish that they needed the help of the
officers of the union. They obtained it. A contract, that tied the men's
hands and left them at the employers' mercy, is drawn up and jammed
through the union partly under false pretenses and partly by brute
force. Members of the rank and file rebel, and their spokesman,
Valentine Wagner, demands an explanation from the officers. He is fined
for "insubordination," and fine is laid upon fine until the amount has
risen to \$80; as he still remains "insubordinate," and as the officers
are in league with the brewery bosses, the man is expelled, thrown out
of work as "not being a member of the union," and left to starve. These
facts have all been made public and proved. Thereupon, to the threat
that if he dared work in any brewery lie would be called a "scab,\"
Valentine Wagner announced that not only would he dare, but that he
would deem it an honor to be called a "scab\"! Who would deny that
Valentine Wagner is a hero?

Are the two utterances, "The scab is a scamp," and "The scab is a hero,"
utterly irreconcilable? Evidently not. Evidently they harmonize
perfectly. And in perceiving the common ground for both, we are
enlightened on what the "scab" is. The "scab" is he who by his voluntary
conduct helps to lower the standard of the worker. He who for the
pleasure of it, or out of currishness to the master, will help to break
a strike for better conditions is a "scab" and "scamp," and a "scamp"
and "scab" is the union officer who conspires with the master against
the interests of the men. They are both scabs because, by helping to
down the worker, they sap the nation and introduce disease, death and
the pestilence of a degraded people. That is the test of the "scab." The
scab may wear the union label as well as not.

Take this other instance"one set of people says: "The union must be a
good thing because the capitalists hate it\"; another set says: "The
union is a bad thing because the capitalists love it." These two
utterances seem wholly irreconcilable. Are they, in fact? Let us see:

Look at what is going on in Colorado. The right of habeas corpus, the
dignity of the courts, the right of free assemblage and free speech \--
in short, all the great civic conquests of the past"are trampled on by
the capitalist class in power in that state, and all for the purpose of
smashing the Western Federation of Miners. If ever there was an instance
of hatred this is one. The capitalists hate that union to the point of
endangering even the privileges that their own class still stands in
need of.

But now look at this other picture. Charles Corregan, a member of the
Syracuse, N.Y., local of the International Typographical Union, speaking
on the public stump for the Socialist Labor Party, gave facts and
figures concerning an important factor in the labor movement, to wit,
the manner in which the pure and simple trades union is run by its
officers, and he illustrated the points with the officers of his own
union. He is thereupon tried by these officers, convicted and fined in
his absence without charges being presented to him; and as he refused to
pay a fine imposed under such conditions, a strike was ordered in the
shop against him and he was thrown out of work. The very fact that a
strike could be called against him, that the employer virtually lined up
with the officers, points to the point I am reaching. Corregan sued the
union for reinstatement and damages, the court threw the case out and,
mark you, the capitalist press, particularly that of New York, announced
the decision with flaming and jubilating headlines as a union victory.

Are the two utterances, "The capitalists hate the union" and "The
capitalists love the union," as irreconcilable as they looked at first?

What is it that discloses their reconcilability? Why, the facts, which,
taken together, point to the common ground of the utterances, and
thereby clarify both. That common ground tells us that capitalism justly
sees in Socialism, in the Socialist Labor Party, its unquestioned foe,
while with equal accuracy it perceives in the union an organism of
various possibilities"a possibility of injury to the capitalist class,
and also a possibility of safety and protection; where the possibility
of injury takes shape, as in Colorado, hatred is developed for the
union; where the possibility of safety and protection takes shape, as in
Corregan's case, love is developed for the union.

We are making progress out of the woods. But, before proceeding further
in our march, let us establish a collateral point hinted at by these
facts.

The country has in recent years been twice convulsed by two
economic-political issues that may be called great when we consider the
millions of votes that they shared among them. And both these issues may
yet spring up again. The one is the tariff, the other the silver issue.

When the tariff was the issue, the Democratic free trader declared that
protection was robbery; on the other hand, the Republican protectionist
pronounced free trade unpatriotic. The free trader argued that the
tariff was like an artificial mountain raised at the gates of the nation
and, thereby, increasing the cost of goods. "Tear down these mountains,"
said he, "and prices will decline." That is all true, but we Socialists
know that if the artificial mountains of the tariff are removed, prices
will go down true enough, but seeing labor is a merchandise under the
capitalist system of production, its own price, wages, must go down
along with that of all other merchandise. The advantage, accordingly, of
lower prices is lost to the working class.

The Republican protectionist argued that it was the duty of government
to promote by protecting and protect by promoting the interests of the
people. "A tariff," said the Republicans, "protects the country inasmuch
as it enables it to differentiate its industries, unchecked by foreign
competition." This also is all true, but we Socialists know that if
government is to be at all justified it is upon the ground of the
protection it affords to the people; and we also know that, under the
capitalist system, the "people" who count are not the workers, but the
capitalist shirkers, and, consequently, that the advantage to be derived
from the theory of protection does not extend to the workers, to the
majority of the people. They are left out in the cold. The tariffs
protect the capitalists against foreign competition, but not the
workers. The largest infloods of foreign labor have been instigated and
taken place under Republican "protection" administrations.

Accordingly, while both "free trade" and protection have an element of
truth in them, that element is in both cases lost to the people under
capitalist rule. It takes Socialism, the Socialist Republic, to
harmonize the two opposites. Under the dome of the Socialist Republic
the discord between the two principles vanishes, and only the truth
remains. Under Socialism the "mountains" of tariffs may be safely
removed: the decline in prices will not then drag down labor's earnings
because labor will have ceased to be merchandise and become a human
factor"what it now is only in the speeches of capitalist politicians at
election time, and in the sermons of the political parsons between
election and election. Likewise with regard to protection. The principle
of organized mutual protection through government becomes truthful and
effective only under Socialism where, there being only one class, the
working class, government is truly of, by, and for the people.

It is similarly with the silver question. The free coinagists denounced
the gold standard men as robbers; the gold standard men denounced the
free coinagists as bandits"and each was right and both were wrong. As to
the free coinagists: their theory was that money is a good thing and
that the more there is of a good thing the larger is the per capita
thereof for the people. We know that right as the premises are, under
capitalism the conclusions become wrong.

There are infinitely more hats, shoes, coats and other good things today
than thirty years ago in the land; but everybody knows that the
workingman's per capita of these good things has not increased. He has
remained where he was, if not even below, while the increase has gone to
the Anna Goulds, the Consuelo Vanderbilts, the international capitalists
in short. And we understand the reason why.

Under capitalism, the workingman being a merchandise, his price (wages)
does not depend upon the quantity of good things in existence, but upon
the quantity of him in the labor market. The same as, regardless of the
quantity of money there may be in the money market, pork chops will
fetch a smaller price if the pork chop market is overstocked, so will
the merchandise labor fetch a smaller price, however much money there
may be, if the labor market is overstocked. And capitalism does that
very thing. Privately-owned improved machinery, and concentration of
plants, ruthlessly displace labor and overstock the labor market.

Thus, capitalism renders absurd the premises above mentioned of free
coinagism. On the other hand, the gold standard men proceeded from the
principle that money is a merchandise and must have value, from which
they concluded that the workingman would be robbed unless he was paid
with what they call a 100-cent dollar. Here again, right as the premises
are, capitalism renders the conclusion false. As shown above, labor
being a merchandise, it matters nothing what the counter is in which it
is paid. Its price depends upon its market value; and it is all one to
it whether it gets paid with one 100-cent gold dollar for its day's
toil, or with two fifty-cent silver dollars.

Accordingly, while both the free coinage and the gold standard principle
have an element of truth in them, under capitalism the truth is lost to
the workers. It takes Socialism to harmonize the two. Under Socialism,
labor no longer being a merchandise, the more good things it produces,
the more it has, and the 100-cent dollar ceases to be its merchandise
badge and, thereby, a fraud upon it.

These two sets of illustrations will suffice. They throw light upon what
otherwise is puzzling in modern society, to wit, that correct principles
work evil. Free trade and protection are both accompanied with
increasing masses of pauperism; gold standard and silver standard leave
nothing to choose between them for the masses. The sense in each is
turned into nonsense by capitalist rule; it is Socialism that alone can
redeem them.

And as the Socialist key alone can unlock the secret of this conflict of
thought, it is the Socialist key alone that can unlock the secret of the
conflict of thought with regard to the burning question of trades
unionism. Equipped with this key, we shall be able to acquire a full
grasp of the question at hand, and see the elephant in full with all his
members coordinate, and not as a jumble of "rope," "spear,\" "snake,"
"wall," "tree" and what other things the blind men of the story took the
animal to be.

### PRO- AND ANTI-UNIONIST ARGUMENTS {#pro--and-anti-unionist-arguments align="CENTER"}

Let us take two types on the question"both honest"but one holding that
the trades union pure and simple is all-sufficient and useful, while the
other holds that the trades union is worthless; in other words, one
holding the trunk of the elephant and claiming he is a snake, the other
holding his tail and claiming he is a rope; bring the two together, and,
both being honest, this dialogue will take place between them:

*Anti-unionist*""Drop your union, it is no good. Smash it!"

*Pro-unionist*""What! my union no good? I am a member of the
Housesmiths' and Bridgemen's Union. I know what I am talking about.
Before we had a union we could barely make two dollars a day. Now that
we have a union I make four and sometimes five dollars. Don't tell me
the union is no good."

*Anti-unionist*""You are hasty in your judgment. You are judging all the
unions by one, and your own union by only one epoch of its existence. I
grant that through your union you are now getting two dollars more. But
that is only a temporary affair. Exceptional circumstances aided Sam
Parks in bringing up your wages. But how long will that last? Look at
the other unions, take the census of the men. Without exception,
earnings are lower. The census itself admits that wages are now lower
than they were ten years ago. What happened to the older unions will
happen to yours. They were not able to raise earnings of the working
class. Already the day is at hand when your union will be in the same
fix. No, it is not true that the union can raise wages, speaking of the
union in general."

*Pro-unionist*""Well, that's so. Speaking with union men of other
trades, they all say how hard it is for them to get along. Yes, the
union cannot raise earnings. But it is a good thing all the same; it can
keep wages from declining."

*Anti-unionist*""You are mistaken again. Look over the field. Look below
the surface. You will find that, despite the union, earnings go down as
a whole. Look at the savage reductions inflicted upon the steel and iron
workers. A numerically strong union. Despite the union, a savage
reduction was made."

*Pro-unionist*""Well, I can't deny that (after a pause), but you must
admit that if we had no union the decline would be swifter. Will you
deny that the union acts as a brake upon the decline? Would we not be
down to the coolie stage today if it were not for the union?"

*Anti-unionist*""You have admitted that the union cannot raise wages;
you have admitted that it cannot keep wages where they are; and you have
admitted that it cannot prevent their reduction. Your last ditch is that
it keeps wages from going down as fast as they would otherwise go. I'll
now drive you out of that ditch. If your theory means anything it means
that the union will last, at least, as a brake. Now you know that
periodically men are laid off by the thousands, and hundreds of
thousands. These laid-off men want to live; they will offer themselves
for a lower price. If your union strikes it goes to smash, if it does
not strike it melts to smash, so that, even as a brake, the day is at
hand when your unions will exist no more.

*Pro-unionist*""You have hit me hard. Perhaps you think you have knocked
me out. But you have not. As sure as a man will raise his hand by mere
instinct, to shield himself against a blow, so surely will workingmen,
instinctively, periodically gather into unions. The union is the arm
that labor instinctively throws up to screen its head."

Unquestionably both the pure and simple pro-unionist and the
anti-unionist are knocked out. They have knocked out each other.

The pro-unionist's last statement is a knockout blow to the man who
imagines that the union is a smashable thing.

On the other hand, the anti-unionist's argumentation, whereby he brings
out the fact that the union's claims of potential triumph are false, and
that, driven from defeat to defeat, the union can gather for the next
defeat only, knocks out the pro-unionist. That is to say, the pure and
simple pro-unionist.

In their mutual trituration the materials are gathered with which
Socialism can build the four-jointed truth. Let us now take the "tail\"
and "trunk" and "legs" and "ears" and "body" of the elephant as
furnished us by these two typical disputants, and construct the animal.
The disputants' positions will be found to be, not inherently
irreconcilable, but fully reconcilable.

Starting from the principle, an undeniable one, that the spirit of union
formation is an instinctive one, the question immediately presents
itself: Is there no way by which the instinctive motion of self-defense
can be rendered effective? Does it follow that because the man who
raises his hand to protect his head from the threatened blow with a
crowbar, has both his arm and his skull crushed, that therefore the
instinctive motion of self-defense might as well be given up? The
question suggests the immediate answer. The answer is no, it does not
follow. And the question, furthermore, indicates what does follow. It
follows that the arm which periodically is thrown up in self-defense,
must arm itself with a weapon strong enough to resist"at least to break
the blow.

Naval warfare did not end when guns of stronger power were contrived.
What followed was that stronger armor plate was contrived for the
battleships; nor did naval warfare end there; when battleships became so
impregnable, contact mines were invented which sink these as if by
magic. And so it can be done here.

Pro-unionists always talk about the union being a "natural condition.\"
But they forget that so are hair and nails. No sensible man will pull
hairs and nails out by the root; but neither would any sensible man say
that because hair and nails are natural they must be allowed to grow
untrimmed and untended. Pro-unionists always talk about the condition
under which the union was born. So are babes born under puny condition.
No sensible man would kill the babe because so born; but neither will
any sensible man propose to keep the babe forever in the condition under
which it was born. That it is a natural growth is an important fact to
recognize, but how to improve it is equally important, and that can be
done by bringing the above pro- and anti-unionist arguments together.

The last anti-unionist argument condenses in itself all the previous
ones. It correctly points out that the large displacements of labor
render the union futile. It implies unionism in general, but that is a
mistake. It is true if applied to unionism as it is today, that is to
say, in the babe form under which it was born.

My point will be made clear if we suggest to both the pro-unionist and
the anti-unionist that all the members of a trade be enlisted in the
union"those at work, those temporarily displaced, and those that may be
considered permanently displaced. At the bare thought of such a
proposition both the pro-unionist and the anti-unionist will throw up
their hands; and both their gestures of hand and face indicate that
neither of the two has of the union any but a babe condition notion.

Why will the pro-unionist look dismayed at the proposition? He will
because he knows that his union is there to give jobs to its members;
that none join it but for jobs; and, consequently, that if the
applicants exceed the jobs the union would immediately go to pieces, if
they are all inside. The notion of the anti-unionist is the exact
reverse of the pro-unionist's notion. And both are right from their
standpoint, but their standpoint is wrong; it is as wrong as that of the
blind men at the several limbs of the elephant. The thought suggested by
the pro-unionist's last argument, that the union is like the instinctive
motion of the man who raises his arm to protect his head when assailed,
gives us in hand the method to proceed by.

Instructed upon the nature of the weapon of assault, man will strengthen
the arm that he throws up in defense of his head. But the effectiveness
of that strengthening depends entirely upon the correctness of his idea
on the nature of the instrument of assault.

In the babe condition under which the union is born naturally, it has no
conception of the nature of the weapon that it instinctively raises up
its arm in self-defense against.

In that natural and original babe condition the union does not realize
that its members are merchandise in the present state of society; it
does not realize the law that governs the value and price of
merchandise; consequently, it does not realize the law that underlies
its own value and price, that is, its wages; it does not realize the
cause of its degraded merchandise status; it does not realize that its
lack of the natural (land) and social (capital) opportunities keep it
down; accordingly, it does not realize there is no improvement, let
alone salvation, for it so long as it labors under the status of
merchandise; finally, and most important of all, and as a result of all,
it does not understand that it cannot improve faster than the rest of
the working class.

In other words, it does not understand the import of the "solidarity of
labor."

It matters not what phrases the pure and simple trades union may use,
the fact that none of them would like today to see all the members of
the trade in the union, the fact that the trades not directly concerned,
aye, even those directly concerned, do not rise in indignation when such
other trades as the railroaders are found willing to transport militias
from one end of the country to the other in order to break a
strike"these facts demonstrate that the meaning of the word solidarity
is a closed book to the pro-unionist.

On the other hand, the anti-unionist is utterly mistaken when he
proceeds from the theory that this closed book is to remain closed; in
other words that the union can never rise above its babe state of
natural birth; in other words, that the union is useless.

Leaving for later on the feature of the remoter utility of the union, in
fact, its real revolutionary and historic mission, let us be first clear
upon the fundamental error that, odd enough to say, both the pure and
simple pro-unionist and the anti-unionist stand.

The honest pro-unionist frankly admits that the best he can expect of
his union is to act as a brake on the decline. In other words, he admits
that the union only serves as a rear guard to a retreating army.
Obviously, from that standpoint the anti-unionist's position is
impregnable when he holds that the rear guard of a retreating army,
which can do nothing but retreat, is a futile thing. But equally obvious
is the fact that the whole strength of the anti-unionist position lies
in the babe original condition that the union has remained in.

The point need but be made and it will be accepted by every thinking man
that all the reasons which the anti-unionist advances why the union is
bound to go to smash through the displacement of labor will fall flat
the moment the union gets out of its natural, original babe condition,
realizes that it not only endangers the future but that it also loses
the present by turning itself into a jobs-providing machine. Even if the
union cannot grasp its great historic and revolutionary mission, it
certainly must, for the sake of the immediate present, be supposed to be
willing to adapt its methods, not to the babe, but the adult conditions
of capitalism.

Capitalism displaces labor; capitalism needs a large army of idle and
reserve labor for the periods of industrial expansion.

By constituting itself a jobs-furnishing institution, the union turns
itself into a pint measure into which it is impossible for the gallon
measure of labor to be received. And thus it is not only the capitalist,
from in front, but labor, from behind, that triturates the union. In
order to be able to contain the gallon measure of labor the union must
expand to gallon size; in order to expand to gallon size it must drop
its idle aspirations as a jobs"furnishing monopoly. And this can be done
only if it rises to the elevation of its political mission. Then will it
understand the solidarity of its class generally and of the members of
its trade in particular.

Even if as many 50,000 out of a trade of 100,000 members cannot be
provided for with jobs, the union could do better by taking them all in.
But this sounds like a purely chimerical idea under the general babe
condition notions that exist. The chimera, however, becomes possible if
the members are all tutored to understand that the best the union can do
for them today is to check the decline and prevent it from going as fast
as it otherwise would.

Not only in the long run, but all along, would such a union fare at
least as well as it fares today, besides being in a condition to
actually fulfill its great revolutionary historic mission that I have
all along been alluding to.

What is that great historic revolutionary mission?

It must be admitted that however philosophic, possibly even Socialist,
the anti-unionist may pronounce himself, he is on this subject not a bit
more enlightened than the pro-unionist.

It is to me surprising to find men who call themselves Socialists, and
who reason socialistically up to a certain point, suddenly go to pieces
when they touch the union question. They take certain facts into
consideration, these facts correctly point to the eventual destruction
of the union, and from these they conclude that the union might as well
be smashed now as later. They fail to consider all the facts in the
case. They are the real utopians of today who imagine the Socialist
Commonwealth can be established like spring establishes itself through
its balmy atmosphere, and without effort melts away the winter snows.
These anti-union utopians only see the political feature of the labor
movement. According to them, all that a lance would need is its iron
head.

On the other hand, the pro-unionists have their noses so close to---the
ground that they fail to see the political aspect of the trades union
movement, and can only see what they call its industrial aspect. In
other words, they virtually hold that all that a lance would need is its
shaft. It goes without saying that neither he who thinks a lance is all
iron head, nor he who thinks that it is all shaft has a correct idea of
what a lance is, or what its uses are.

Each may have a technical, theoretic, more or less practical knowledge
of each particular part of a lance, but a lance neither of them will
have, nor can wield.

I shall show you that unless the political aspect of the labor movement
is grasped, Socialism will never triumph; and that unless its trades
union aspect is grasped the day of its triumph will be the day of its
defeat.

Who of you has not heard some workingman when told that some fellow
workingman of his was nominated for Mayor, or for Governor, or for
Congress, sneeringly say: "What's he? What could he do in Congress? What
does he know about law? Why, he wouldn't know how to move!" The matter
is serious; it is no laughing matter. The workingman who utters himself
in that way is right and he is wrong. He is absolutely right when he
considers that the workingman is not a fit man to handle the laws of the
land; but he is wrong when he considers that that is a disqualification.
In other words, he is wrong in supposing that the political mission of
labor is to dabble with or tinker upon capitalist laws.

And mark you, his blunder proceeds direct, both from the pro-unionist
industrial mental attitude and from the anti-unionist's political mental
attitude. In this respect is realized into what errors the political
anti-unionist drops in his own domain of politics, and into what error
the industrial pro-unionist drops in his own industrial domain"due to
the circumstance that both fail to realize that their various domains
dovetail into each other.

Open any law book, whatever the subject be"contract, real estate, aye,
even marital relations, husband and wife, father and son, guardian and
ward"you will find that the picture they throw upon the mind's canvas is
that of everyone's hands at everyone's throat. Capitalist law reflects
the material substructure of capitalism. The theory of that substructure
is war, conflict, struggle. It can be no otherwise. Given the private
ownership of natural and social opportunities, society is turned into a
jungle of wild beasts, in which the "fittest" wild beast terrorizes the
less "fit," and these in turn imitate among themselves the "fit"
qualities of the biggest brute. No nuptial veils of lace or silk can
conceal this state of things on the matrimonial field; no rhetoric can
hide it on any other field. The rawboned struggle is there. It is
inevitable. It is a shadow cast by the angles of fact of the capitalist
system.

Now, then, is it the mission of the labor or Socialist movement to
continue or to uproot the material conditions that cast the shadow? Its
mission is to uproot it. Consequently its mission cannot be to tinker at
the laws that capitalism finds it necessary to enact. As well say that a
housekeeper is unfit to clean a neglected house because she has no
technical knowledge of the construction of the vermin that has been
rioting in it, as to say that, because labor has no knowledge of the
technique of the vermin of capitalist laws, it is unfit to take the
broom handle and sweep the vermin into the ash barrel of oblivion.

Accordingly, the political aspect of the labor movement spells
revolution. It points out exactly the duty of the Socialist or
classconscious workingmen elected to office"no tinkering, no compromise,
unqualified overthrow of existing laws. That means the dethronement of
the capitalist class.

And what does that, in turn, mean with regard to the subject in hand?

Did you notice, and did you realize, all that there was in the
capitalist threat of closing down the shops and stopping production if
Bryan was elected in 1896? We know that Bryan was a reactionary
capitalist; nevertheless, the fact was brought out in his campaign by
that upper-capitalist threat that the ruling capitalists have it in
their power to create a panic any time the government slips from their
hands. What places that power in their hands? Now watch close, think
close"What places that power in their hands is the pure and simple
trades union: it is the fact that the working class is not organized.
And I have shown you that the pure and simple trades union is unable to
organize the working class; that it keeps the working class hopelessly
divided.

The majority of the voters are workingmen. But even if this majority
were to sweep the political field on a classconscious, that is, a bona
fide labor or Socialist ticket, they would find the capitalist able to
throw the country into the chaos of a panic and to famine unless they,
the workingmen, were so well organized in the shops that they could
laugh at all shut-down orders, and carry on production.

Such a complete organization is impossible under pure and simple trades
union methods; being impossible on the industrial field, the seeming
unity that swept the political field would be a flash in the pan.

Political organization must necessarily partake today of capitalist
conditions; accordingly, the votes cast for a Congressman, for instance,
are not the votes of any one trade, but of a mixture of scores of
trades.

Civilized society will know no such ridiculous thing as geographic
constituencies. It will only know industrial constituencies. The
parliament of civilization in America will consist, not of Congressmen
from geographic districts, but of representatives of trades throughout
the land, and their legislative work will not be the complicated one
which a society of conflicting interests, such as capitalism, requires
but the easy one which can be summed up in the statistics of the wealth
needed, the wealth producible, and the work required"and that any
average set of workingmen's representatives are fully able to ascertain,
infinitely better than our modern rhetoricians in Congress.

But we are not there yet, nor will we be there the day we shall have
swept the political field. We shall not be there for the simple reason
that in order to get there through that first political victory we shall
have been compelled to travel along the lines of capitalist political
demarcations; and these I have shown you are essentially non-unionist;
that is to say, they ignore industrial bonds and recognize only
geographic ones.

It follows that, today, the very best of political organization is
wholly exclusive of industrial organization, and will have to continue
so until the political victory has been won, and the trades
organizations have been able to continue production in the teeth of
capitalist revolt; until the nation shall have had time to reconstruct
itself upon the labor"that is, the Socialist basis.

Thus we see that the head of the lance of the Socialist movement is
worthless without the shaft. We see that they are not even parallel, but
closely connected affairs; we see that the one needs the other, that
while the head, the political movement, is essential in its way, the
shaft of the lance, the industrial movement, is requisite to give it
steadiness. The labor movement that has not a well-pointed political
lance-head can never rise above the babe condition in which the union is
originally born; on the other hand, unhappy the political movement of
labor that has not the shaft of the trades union organization to steady
it. It will inevitably become a freak affair. The head of the lance may
"get there," but unless it drags in its wake the strong shaft of the
trades union it will have "got there" to no purpose.

Accordingly, the trades union question is indeed a burning one. On it is
pivoted the success of the Socialist movement. And for the reason I have
indicated, the confusion on the subject is inevitable.

Seeing that a thing called a union may act as a drag upon the Socialist
movement, the temptation is strong upon the part of anti-unionists to
drop it. I have shown you how fatal such dropping would be. The
political and the industrial movement are one; he who separates them
dislocates the Socialist movement.

I should not close without some concreter advice. Should we join unions?
Should we not join them? It seems to me these concrete questions stand
answered by what I have said before. Nevertheless, he in whose mind such
a question still arises is led thereto by the thought of the corrupt
practices that exist in unions. I shall take up that point summarily. It
now can be handled without giving it undue proportions. It now may even
be handled to advantage and help to clinch previous points.

There is no difference between what is called the corruption in the
unions and what is noticed in shipwrecks when men become cannibals. I
cannot now think of any of the numerous corrupt labor leaders, whom we
all know of, who did not start honest enough. But coupled to his honesty
was ignorance. He knew not the kind of a weapon that labor instinctively
raises its arm to ward off when it shapes itself into unions. He failed,
of course. He then imputed the failure to inevitableness. The capitalist
helped him along. He lost all hope in the working class. He then decided
to feather his own nest. Friendly relations between him and capitalist
thought followed inevitably, and he became what Mark Hanna so well
called him"the labor lieutenant of the capitalist class.

In that capacity we have seen him engineer strikes in favor of one
competing capitalist' against another. In that capacity we have seen him
act as an agent of the stock exchange, starting strikes to lower stock,
or keeping up strikes to favor competing concerns.

Of course, he could not do this if the rank and file of the union were
enlightened. For this reason it was in his interest, and in the interest
of the class whose lieutenant he is, to keep enlightenment from the
masses.

Frequently, also, his position enables him to compel the workingmen of
his trade to accept his yoke before they can get work.

He who says remedy this evil by any one means holds silly language. The
evil must be attacked by as many means as seem available.

Shall we then "join unions\"? The Socialist Labor Party has answered the
question by endorsing the Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance, and by
waging unflagging war against the Gompers pack; and the answer that the
party gave is justified by the light of the analysis that I have
submitted to you.

That analysis shows you that trades organizations are essential; they
are essential to break the force of the onslaught of the capitalist, but
this advantage is fruitful of good only in the measure that the
organization prepares itself for the day of final victory.

Accordingly, it must be every Socialist's endeavor to organize his
trade. If there is an organization of his trade in existence that is not
in the hand of a labor lieutenant of capital, he should join it and
wheel it into line with the Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance.

If, however, the organization is entirely in the hands of such a labor
lieutenant of capital; if its membership is grown so fast to him and he
to them, that the one cannot be shaken from the other; if, accordingly,
the organization, obedient to the spirit of capitalism, insists upon
dividing the working class by barriers more or less high and chicanery
against the admission of all the members of the trade who apply for
admission; if his grip of mental corruption upon it is such as to cause
a majority of its members to applaud and second his endeavors to keep
that majority at work at the sacrifice of the minority within and of the
large majority of the trade without"in that and in all such cases, such
an organization is not a limb of the labor movement, it is a limb of
capitalism; it is a guild; it is a degeneration back to the old starting
point of the bourgeois or capitalist class; and though it decks itself
with the name of "labor" it is but a caricature, because a belated
reproduction, of the old guild system.

Such a bizarre resuscitation of pristine bourgeois organizations may
mask itself all it likes with the mask of "labor," but it does so only
to the injury of the working class, of the proletariat, and it deserves
no quarter at the Socialist's hands.

Such an organization is no more a labor organization than is the army of
the czar of Russia, which, though composed wholly of workingmen, is
officered by the exploiting class. In such a case the Socialist must
endeavor to set up a bona fide labor trades union and to do what he can
to smash the fraud. The labor cannon that one day will surely decimate
the czar's army, and defeat it, will bring redemption even to the
workingmen in that army, although many of them may be killed by it.

Let me sum up, starting with where I closed.

In the first place, the trades union has a supreme mission. That mission
is nothing short of organizing by uniting, and uniting by organizing,
the whole working class industrially"not merely those for whom there are
jobs, accordingly, not only those who can pay dues. This unification or
organization is essential in order to save the eventual and possible
victory from bankruptcy, by enabling the working class to assume and
conduct production the moment the guns of the public powers fall into
its hands"or before, if need be, if capitalist political chicanery
pollutes the ballot box. The mission is important also in that the
industrial organization forecasts the future constituencies of the
parliaments of the Socialist Republic.

In the second place, the trades union has an immediate mission. The
supreme mission of trades unionism is ultimate. That day is not yet. The
road thither may be long or short, but it is arduous. At any rate, we
are not yet there.

Steps in the right direction, so-called "immediate demands," are among
the most precarious. They are precarious because they are subject and
prone to the lure of the "sop" or the "palliative" that the foes of
labor's redemption are ever ready to dangle before the eyes of the
working class, and at which, aided by the labor lieutenants of the
capitalist class, the unwary are apt to snap"and be hooked.

But there is a test by which the bait can be distinguished from the
sound step, by which the trap can be detected and avoided, and yet the
right step forward taken. That test is this: Does the contemplated step
square with the ultimate aim? If it does, then the step is sound and
safe; if it does not, then the step is a trap and disastrous.

The "immediate step" that acts like a brake on the decline of wages
belongs to the former category, provided only the nature of the brake is
not such that it inevitably invites a future decline, that requires a
further brake and which brake only invites some later decline, and so
on, towards a catastrophe or towards final cooliedom.

We have seen that the pure and simple trades union belongs to the latter
category, the category of "traps," and we have seen the reason why"it is
merely a jobs-securing machine; consequently, it inevitably rends the
working class in twain and, on the whole, has the love and affection of
the capitalist exploiter.

In the third place, and finally, the union formation, with its
possibility for good, being a natural, an instinctive move, is bound to
appear, and reappear, and keep on reappearing, forever offering to the
intelligent, serious and honest men in the labor or Socialist movement
the opportunity to utilize that instinctive move by equipping it with
the proper knowledge, the proper weapon, that shall save it from
switching off into the pure and simple quagmire so beloved, and develop
into the new trades union so hated of capitalism.

This is the theoretical part of the burning question of trades unionism.
Its practical part implies struggle, dauntless struggle against, and war
to the knife with that combination of ignoramuses, ripened into
reprobates"the labor faker who seeks to coin the helplessness of the
proletariat into cash for himself, and the "intellectual" (God save the
mark!) who has so superficial a knowledge of things that the mission of
unionism is a closed book to him; who believes the union will "fritter
out of existence\"; who, consequently, is actually against the union,
all his pretenses of love for it notwithstanding; and who meantime
imagines he can promote Socialism by howling with pure and simple wolves
that keep the working class divided and, consequently, bar the path for
the triumph of Socialism, or, as the capitalist *Wall Street Journal*
well expressed it, "constitute the bulwark of modern society against
Socialism."

The trades union question is, accordingly, not only a burning one, it
presents the most trying aspect of the Socialist movement. It brings
home to us the fact that not theory only is needed but manly fortitude
\-- that fortitude which the Socialist Labor Party gathers, builds and
tests, and without which the Socialist or labor movement becomes
ridiculous or infamous.

### QUESTIONS {#questions align="CENTER"}

**WILLIAM WALKER:** I desire to ask the speaker whether he considers it
wise for a political party to identify itself with a trades union
organization if such identification causes the political party to be
kept back?

**ANSWER:** This question is a begging of the question. It proceeds from
assuming as settled the very premises that are under discussion. It
proceeds from the assumption which I denied, that a party of Socialism
can ignore the trades union. I shall nevertheless answer it. It enables
me to take up the question by entering through another gate.

Some eight months ago, when I last delivered an address here in Newark,
a gentleman who is now associated with the questioner in setting up here
in Newark a so-called Essex County Independent Socialist Club, Mr. Harry
Carless, spoke after me and said in substance"the gentleman who just
asked the question was present, he will admit that I quote my critic of
that day correctly. My critic said: "The Socialist Labor Party should
have nothing to do with the trades unions. Affiliation with trades
unions keeps the party back. A political party wants to take in as many
people as possible. It wants to be as large as possible. A union does
not. I am a member of a union, the Silver Polishers', and I am also a
Socialist. My union had a meeting this afternoon; all that they want is
to get higher wages and to keep all others of the trade out. They
adopted a resolution along this line, and I voted with them in the
interest of the organization. Now, their position, like that of all
unions, is purely selfish. What has the Socialist Labor Party to do with
such things? It should keep its hands off. If it does not it will
suffer."

My answer was this: "The gentleman furnishes me with the very facts that
overthrow him. He is a member of a trades union that wishes to keep out
applicants. What would be his fix in a Socialist party? Say his
Socialist organization is in session in the evening, and the men whom
he, along with the other members of his trades union, refused admission
in the afternoon, knock at the door applying for membership. What will
he do? He correctly stated that a political party needs numbers. He will
have to admit them into his Socialist party organization. And what will
happen when those men come in and hear him making a grandiloquent speech
on the \`solidarity of labor,' on the \`necessity of workingmen to
unite,' on the \`brotherhood of the wage slave,' and on all those things
that a Socialist, a good Socialist, as the gentleman says he is, is
bound to emphasize? What do you think will happen, when the men whom he
has just voted to keep out of his union hear him thus glibly declaiming?
Why, they'll say he is a hypocrite; they'll denounce him roundly for
preaching one thing and practicing another. They will even bring charges
against him. And, if his organization is really a Socialist
organization, he will be expelled and justly so. But even if it does not
come so far, he will have discovered that a Socialist party cannot play
ostrich on the economic or trades union question. If it is a party of
Socialism, it is a party of labor. In a party of Socialism the trades
union is latent. It cannot be ignored. It will not ignore you."

"But suppose," I went on to say, "that, feeling a presentiment of what
is in store for him if he votes to admit them into his party
organization, he votes to keep them out. What will he have done then? He
will have impressed upon his political organization, which wants large
numbers, the characteristics of the backward pure and simple union with
which he blandly floats along"another evidence that the trades union
question is bound to assert itself."

Was not that the answer I gave your friend? With what face can you,
then, come here tonight and ask the question that you did?

There is no such thing as a political party of labor "having nothing to
do with the unions." It must have. It must either inspire the union with
the broad, political purpose, and thus dominate it by warring on the
labor faker and on the old guild notions that hamstring the labor
movement, or it is itself dragged down to the selfish trade interests of
the economic movement, and finally drawn down into the latter's
subservience to the capitalist interests that ever fasten themselves to
the selfish trade interests on which the labor faker, or labor
lieutenant of the capitalist class, thrives.

The notion implied in the words of our friend who asked the question,
the notion that numbers is the important thing and not soundness, often
leads to bizarre results. A recent instance is striking.

At the late annual convention of Gompers' A. F. of L., Max Hayes, of the
said so-called Socialist party, introduced a Socialist resolution. The
resolution was snowed under by a veritable avalanche of something like
11,000 votes. About a month later, the Socialist Trade and Labor
Alliance held its annual convention. The S.T. and L.A. is a trades union
built strictly upon the Socialist lines of the resolution which Max
Hayes introduced in Boston. But the S.T. and L.A. is a very much smaller
body. At its annual convention it numbered barely twenty delegates. Now,
then, what do we find Mr. Max Hayes saying about the S.T. and L.A.
convention? He ridiculed it on account of its numbers. He, who had just
been flattened out like a pancake by a huge anti-Socialist convention,
seemed proud of having been in a big crowd, and peeping from under the
numerous heels that trampled upon him, had jeers only for the smallness
of the body that nevertheless upheld the principles which, in his hand,
lay flattened out beside him, flattened out by a numerous body.

Such are the fruits, the mental somersaults, of a chase after numbers.
It is nothing short of idiocy. The head of the lance that rushes forward
shaftless, rushes forward uselessly. It should move no faster than its
shaft.

The "Socialist" party that dances to the fiddle of labor-dividing pure
and simpledom, may for a while get more votes than the Socialist Labor
Party; but it never will "get there\"; a miss is as good as a mile on
the "get there" run.

Moreover, the slowlier going S.L.P., that is not a flypaper concern, and
never sacrifices sense for votes, is a real educator. When the time for
votes shall have ripened, that party will have them"will have the votes,
plus the requisite knowledge"while the S. P. will have melted away,
seeing it only had votes, and could not possibly, in view of its
contradictory and flypaper conduct, have men back of its vote.

**JOHN J. KINNEALLY:** We see what is going on in Colorado today. Pure
and simple unionism is said to have over 2,000,000 members. I wish to
ask the speaker if he thinks such outrages would be possible if those
2,000,000 were in the S.T. and L.A.?

**ANSWER:** Two millions of S.T. and L. A. men would mean 2,000,000 men
swayed by S.L.P. sense, vigor, manliness and determination. It would
mean 2,000,000 men moving, because they felt as one man, and,
consequently, feeling and moving right. Large masses cannot feel and
move as one if they are in error. Error is manifold; it scatters. Truth
only is onefold, it alone unites. Such a number as 2,000,000 S.L.P. men
in the land would produce such a sentiment and resulting actions that
capitalism would melt like wax. The thing, then, is to build up S.L.P.
men. Let that be all serious men's endeavor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
