MIA: M.I.A. Library: Marx & Engels: Selected Works

> ::: border
>  
>
> ### "Fullest possible list of the Published writings by Marx" [According to Engels, 1892]{.book}
>
> > [*Rheinische
> > Zeitung*](../../subject/newspapers/rheinische-zeitung.htm), Cologne,
> > 1842: articles on the Rhine Province Assembly, on the situation of
> > the peasant vintners on the Mosel, on wood theft; leading articles
> > October to December 1842.
> >
> > [*Deutsch-Französische
> > Jahrbücher*](../../1844/df-jahrbucher/index.htm) by A. Ruge and K.
> > Marx, Paris, 1844: [Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's
> > Philosophy of Law. Introduction](../../1843/critique-hpr/intro.htm);
> > [On the Jewish Question](../../1844/jewish-question/index.htm).
> :::

K. Marx and F. Engels, [The Holy Family, Against Bruno Bauer and
Company](../../1845/holy-family/index.htm), Frankfurt a.M., 1845.

Shorter articles (anonymous) in Paris
[*Vorwärts!*](../../subject/newspapers/vorwarts.htm), 1844.

Various articles, anonymous and signed, in the
[*Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung*](../../subject/newspapers/deutsche-brusseler.htm),
Brussels, 1847-1848.

[The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M.
Proudhon](../../1847/poverty-philosophy/index.htm), Brussels and Paris,
1847. German: Stuttgart, 2nd edition, 1892. Spanish: Madrid, 1891.

[Speech on the Question of Free Trade](../../1848/free-trade/index.htm),
Brussels, 1848. English: Boston, 1888. German in the German edition of
The Poverty of Philosophy.

With F. Engels: [Manifesto of the Communist
Party](../../1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm), London, 1848. Latest
German: London, 1890; translated into almost all European languages.

Articles in the [*Neue Rheinische
Zeitung*](../../subject/newspapers/neue-rheinische-zeitung.htm),
editorials, etc., Cologne, 1848-1849. Of these repeatedly reprinted
separately: [Wage Labour and Capital](../../1847/wage-labour/index.htm),
latest Berlin, 1891; appeared in Russian, Polish, Italian, French.

[Two Political Trials](../../1849/two-political-trials/index.htm),
Cologne, 1849 (two defence speeches by Marx).

[*Neue Rheinische Zeitung*. Revue](../../1850/nrz-revue/index.htm),
Hamburg, 1850. 6 issues. Including by Marx: [1848 to
1849](../../1850/class-struggles-france/index.htm). Written with Engels:
reviews and monthly synopses.

[The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte](../../1852/18th-brumaire/index.htm), New York, 1852. Third
edition: Hamburg, 1885. Also published in French.

[Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in
Cologne](../../1853/revelations/index.htm), Basle, 1853 (edition
confiscated); Boston, 1853. Latest Zurich, 1885.

Articles in the [*New-York Tribune*,
1852-1861](../../subject/newspapers/new-york-tribune.htm). Of these some
about [Palmerston](../../1853/palmerston/index.htm) --- enlarged ---
published as pamphlet in London, 1856.

[*Free Press*](../../subject/newspapers/free-press.htm), Sheffield, June
1856, and London, until April 1857; [Revelations of the Diplomatic
History of the 18th Century](../../1857/russia/index.htm) (on the
continued interested dependence of English Whig ministers upon Russia).

[*Das Volk*](../../subject/newspapers/das-volk.htm), London, 1859:
Articles on the diplomatic history of the Italian War of 1859.

[A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part
One](../../1859/critique-pol-economy/index.htm), Berlin, 1859. Polish,
1890.

Herr Vogt, London, 1860.

[The Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International
Association](../../1864/10/27.htm), London, 1864; further all
[publications of the General Council](../../1864/iwma/index.htm), up to
and including [The Civil War in
France](../../1871/civil-war-france/index.htm), London, 1871. (Latest
German Berlin, 1891, also published in French, Italian, Spanish.)

[Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, first
volume](../../1867-c1/index.htm), Hamburg, 1867, latest edition, 4th,
1890. Published in Russian, French, English, Polish, Danish.

[The same, second volume](../../1885-c2/index.htm), Hamburg, 1885,
second edition in the press. Published in Russian. The third volume will
be published in 1893.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Selected Works Index](../../sw/index.htm) \| [Full Text of
Biography](../../1892/11/marx.htm) \| [Marx/Engels
Archive](../../../index.htm)

 
