---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1913

### French Utopian Socialism of the Nineteenth Century

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: From Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 492-533. Prepared for
the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Soviet Editor's Note: 'At the end of June 1911 Plekhanov was asked by
Mir Publishers to write an essay on "development of social utopian
theories in France and Hegelianism with its variants in Germany." The
essay was to be included in one of the volumes of *The History of
Western Literature in the Nineteenth Century* which was being issued by
these publishers. Early in 1912 the essay was ready and sent to the
publishers, but they returned it back with a request to shorten it.
Plekhanov published his article in *Sovremenny Mir*, nos 6-7, 1913. For
*The History of Western Literature in the Nineteenth Century* he wrote
two new articles: "Utopian Socialism of the Nineteenth Century" and
"From Idealism to Materialism."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

The various systems and doctrines of nineteenth-century French *utopian*
socialism differ very much from one another on many important questions.
^[\[1\]](#n1)^ Nevertheless, all of them have several basic features in
common that distinguish them from international *scientific* socialism
as we know it today. Had they not had these features in common it would
have been impossible for me to present here a characterisation of French
utopian socialism as a whole; a detailed exposition of its various
teachings and systems could not have been undertaken in this article,
and in any case, would have been irrelevant.

Before one can ascertain the features common to all shades of French
utopian socialism in the period mentioned, it is necessary to recall its
historical origin.

### I

In his polemic with Bruno Bauer and his associates, Marx wrote:

There is no need for any great penetration to see from the teaching of
materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual endowment of
men, the omnipotence of experience, habit and education, and the
influence of environment on man, the great significance of industry, the
justification of enjoyment, etc., how necessarily materialism is
connected with communism and socialism. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^

Incidentally, Marx proceeds to confirm this remark with the
consideration that if man draws all his knowledge, sensations, etc.,
from the world of the senses and the experience gained from it, as was
taught by the eighteenth-century materialists, then the empirical world
must be arranged so that in it man experiences and gets used to what is
really human and that he becomes aware of himself as man. That is quite
correct. Marx was also quite right in asserting that Fourier, for
example, 'proceeds directly from the teaching of the French
materialists'.^[\[3\]](#n3)^ If any one doubts this, he would be well
advised to compare Fourier's teaching on the passions with what is said
about them in the first chapter of the first part of Holbach's *Système
social.* It would be no less interesting in this respect to compare
Fourier with Helvétius. But it is important to remember the following.

Although Fourier^[\[4\]](#n4)^ proceeds immediately from the teaching of
French materialism, at the same time he has a completely negative
attitude to the whole of the eighteenth-century French philosophy of
Enlightenment. This attitude made itself felt already in his first work,
*Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées sociales*, published in
Lyons in 1888. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ We read there:

From the time when the philosophers revealed their impotence in their
very first experiment, the French Revolution, all agreed among
themselves that their philosophy should be regarded as an error of the
human intellect. And the streams of political and moral enlightenment
were found to be streams of illusion. And could anything else be found
in the works of scholars who, after spending 2500 years in perfecting
their theories and uniting all ancient and modern enlightenment, at
their first attempt gave birth to no fewer calamities than they had
promised blessings, and caused the civilised world to decline to a state
of barbarism? Such were the consequences of the first five years during
which philosophical theories were put to the test in France. After the
catastrophe of 1793, the illusions were dispelled\... ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

In another part of the same work, Fourier recalls with indignation the
scholastic quarrels over equality (*querelles scolastiques sur
l\'égalité*) which wrecked thrones, altars and the laws of property, and
thanks to which, he says, Europe was moving towards barbarism.

Fourier was never at any time a supporter of the old order. On the
contrary, it is most probable that, in common with the entire third
estate of the time, he did not approve of that order and wished to see
an end of it. But the revolutionary struggle of the various classes of
French society at that time assumed such a violent character ---
especially in 1793 --- that Fourier along with the majority of his
contemporaries took fright. Since he considered that the
eighteenth-century philosophy of Enlightenment was responsible for the
'catastrophe of 1793', ^[\[7\]](#n7)^ he declared that philosophy to be
totally bankrupt. In his opposition to it, he went to the length of
working out two rules of procedure for himself: 1) 'absolute doubt' (*le
doute absolu*) and 2) 'absolute digression' (*l*\'*écart absolu*).
'Absolute doubt' consisted in regarding with scepticism even the most
widespread opinions of his time. For example --- and this is his own
example --- all the various philosophical trends were agreed in their
attitude of respect for civilisation. But Fourier, in applying here his
rule of 'absolute doubt', questioned the 'perfection' of civilisation.
He asked himself:

Can there be anything more imperfect than this civilisation which is
attended by so many calamities? Can there be anything more doubtful than
its necessity and the inevitability of its future existence? Is it not
probable that it represents but a stage in social development?
^[\[8\]](#n8)^

Having set himself these questions, he soon became convinced that
'civilisation', that is to say, those social relations which prevail in
the civilised nations, must give way to other forms of community; and he
began to ponder over the nature of those future forms.

As far as Fourier's 'absolute digression' is concerned, it consisted of
his deciding 'never to walk the paths laid down by the uncertain
sciences', that is, by the self-same eighteenth-century philosophy. It
is interesting to note that, in justification of this rule of procedure,
Fourier adduced the circumstance that the 'uncertain sciences', in spite
of the enormous successes of industry, were unable even to 'prevent
poverty'.

However, the very application of these two rules demonstrated that, in
rebelling against eighteenth-century philosophy, Fourier none the less
remained very strongly influenced by it. As we know, that philosophy was
essentially *progressive*. One of its most important distinguishing
traits was a deep belief in progress, in the perfectibility
(*perfectibilité*) of man and of human society. Fourier habitually
sneered at this belief. But it should be noted that in applying the rule
of 'absolute doubt' to civilisation, strictly speaking, he was casting
doubt not on civilisation itself, but only on the inevitability of the
existence of certain serious defects in the social structure of the
civilised nations. When he finally reached the conclusion that these
serious defects could be eliminated, when he had elaborated a plan of
the new social system, he himself became an active worker in the cause
of perfection, although he did not cease to sneer at the doctrine of the
'uncertain sciences' concerning the capacity of man and human society to
perfect themselves. No less remarkable is the fact that this '*absolute
digressionist*' from the paths laid down by the 'uncertain sciences'
immediately encountered the *problem of poverty.* The man who reproaches
eighteenth-century French philosophy for not preventing poverty, himself
remains loyal to its spirit, since that philosophy constantly
reiterated: *salus populi --- suprema lex* (the welfare of the people is
the supreme law).

But if this is true, and if Fourier, while sharply opposing and
malevolently sneering at eighteenth-century philosophy, did remain
essentially its loyal follower and made its teaching the basis of his
own theoretical constructions, it may well be asked: where did his
'absolute doubt' and his 'absolute digression' lead him to?

First, they led him into many theoretical *eccentricities*, which for a
long time provided a target for the witticisms of socialism's
adversaries. 'Absolute doubt' led Fourier to disregard rules of
theoretical reflection which no one can disregard with impunity. When he
dilates upon 'disyllabic immortality' and erects a 'general ladder of
metempsychoses' (*échelle générale des métempsycoses*); ^[\[9\]](#n9)^
when he assures us that 'he who gave us lions will give us anti-lions
upon which we may ride at great speed\'; ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ when he
describes the good qualities of the future anti-whales, anti-sharks,
anti-hippopotami, and anti-seals, ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ he is obviously
abusing the 'digression' which resulted from his revolt against all
former philosophers. If he had not rebelled in this way, he would
probably not have revealed so much of the self-assurance of the
self-taught and would have tried to curb his flights of fantasy.

Secondly, in obeying the rule of 'absolute digression', Fourier, in his
own words, tried to take up only those problems that eighteenth-century
philosophy had not touched upon. Since this philosophy had been greatly
occupied with *politics* and *religion*, Fourier felt bound in contrast
'to seek social well-being only in measures that had nothing to do with
the administration and the priesthood and extended only to industry and
domestic life, and would be compatible with any government, without any
need for its interference'. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ *This largely defines the
nature of his social system; it is, in fact, devoid of any political
aspirations.*

But there is still more to it than that. Since Fourier's revolt against
French eighteenth-century philosophy was caused by his conviction that
it was responsible for the 'catastrophe of 1793', not only did he stress
at every convenient opportunity (and, perhaps, at some not so
convenient) that his system *had no revolutionary aspirations*, but he
recommended it as the sole reliable means of struggle against such
aspirations. In the first volume of his book *La fausse industrie*, etc,
there is an interesting chapter entitled 'Notice sur les intèrêts du Roi
--- Moyens d\'en finir des conspirations' (\'Notes on the King's
Interests --- Means to put an End to Conspiracies'). In it, Fourier
points out that since the infernal machine is the conspirators' new
weapon, it is essential 'to test an invention that will avert
conspiracies by creating general well-being and good morals'.
^[\[13\]](#n13)^ Then follows a fairly detailed exposition of his new
social system. In the second volume of the same work, published a year
later, this thought is repeated in a note: 'Thème général, appliqué aux
attentats régicides' (\'General theme, in its application to attempted
regicide'). In it Fourier blames the philosophy of the Enlightenment for
these attempts:

In the course of the last forty-eight years \[he says\], kings have been
at war with philosophy, but they only use against it half-measures which
strengthen it; they are incapable of creating an effective opposition to
it, of exposing its false knowledge by opposing to it an exact science
of the industrial mechanism and the destiny of society. ^[\[14\]](#n14)^

It goes without saying that this exact science is Fourier's system,
recommended to Louis Philippe as the best means against conspiracies.

We shall see shortly that in this respect Fourier was not an exception
among socialists of those days. On the contrary, such appeals were very
typical of nineteenth-century French utopian socialism. Therefore, it
would be useful if we ascertained their general psychological
background.

### II

See how Fourier portrays (in the book already mentioned --- *Théorie des
quatre mouvements*) --- the revolutionary condition of society which, he
says, may be got rid of only by putting into effect his plan for social
reform:

Yes \[he exclaims\], the civilised order ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ is becoming
more and more shaky; the volcano created by philosophy in 1789 is only
in its first eruption; others will follow as soon as a weak rule favours
the agitators; the war of the poor against the rich was so successful
that the intriguers of all countries dream only of resuming it. It is
useless to try to avert it; nature ridicules our enlightenment and our
foresight; it will be able to bring forth revolution out of the same
measures which we adopt to ensure social tranquillity. ^[\[16\]](#n16)^

All this is worthy of the greatest attention. Already in 1808, Fourier
sees in the Great Revolution an episode of the class struggle: *the war
of the poor against the rich.* As though in regret, he announces that
this war was successful. It might be thought from this that he
sympathised with the old order; but, as has been said above, that is not
the case. He had no sympathy with the old order; he simply *rejected the
class struggle in general and the revolutionary class struggle in
particular.* He maintained that France could have escaped the Great
Revolution if the discoveries which he made *after* the 'catastrophe of
1793' had been made by some other genius under the old order, and made
timely use of as the basis of social reform. But now the discoveries had
been made; social upheavals could be forestalled and the war 'of the
poor against the rich' avoided, if only those interested in the
preservation of social tranquillity would understand the advantages of
the social system that Fourier had thought out. Therefore, in his appeal
to them, he spared no colours in depicting the upheavals that would be
the price civilised society would pay for failing to heed his voice.

Such were his 'tactics'. They were characterised, first, by
*indifference to politics*; second, by a completely negative attitude to
the class struggle. There was a very obvious and close connection
between these two most important features of his system. The connection
consisted in the second begetting the first.

Fourier's negative attitude to the class struggle was the outcome of the
'catastrophe of 1793'. And since politics is a weapon of the class
struggle, it is natural that with Fourier negation of this struggle was
followed by negation of politics.

Do not think that this is simply a special case in the history of
utopian socialism. No! There are so many similar cases that we are fully
entitled to speak of a general rule. Here is another example, perhaps
less vivid, but no less important.

Saint-Simon ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ also regarded the French Revolution as a
class struggle: to be exact, the struggle of the non-possessing class
against the propertied class, and, like Fourier, he was very
unfavourably disposed towards this struggle. In his brochure *Lettres
d*\'*un habitant de Genève à ses contemporains*, published in 1802, that
is to say, six years before the appearance of Fourier's first book, he
calls the French Revolution the most terrifying explosion and the
greatest of all scourges. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ He writes at length of
'frightful atrocities caused by this application of the principle of
equality', ^[\[19\]](#n19)^ and in an appeal to the non-possessing
class, says: 'See what happened in France when your comrades held sway
there; they brought forth famine.' ^[\[20\]](#n20)^ It is plain that the
'catastrophe of 1793' made the strongest impression on Saint-Simon too.
If Fourier laid the blame for this 'catastrophe' at the door of
eighteenth-century philosophers, Saint-Simon explained it by the
ignorance of the non-possessing class. But this is only an apparent
difference, since 'the application of the principle of equality' was, in
Saint-Simon's opinion, nothing more than the practical application of
the extreme conclusions reached by the philosophers of the
Enlightenment. Thus, Saint-Simon's teaching reveals the same
indifference to politics that we have seen in Fourier's.
^[\[21\]](#n21)^ In a practical sense, Saint-Simonism (of the first
style) is no more than a study of the measures required to put an end to
revolution (*sur les mesures à prendre pour terminer la révolution*).
The degree to which Saint-Simon was averse to all thought of revolution
may be gauged from the following passage taken from his book *Du système
industriel.* To the question, which force will produce the changes he is
contemplating in social relationships and who will guide this force, he
replies:

*These changes will be accomplished by the force of moral feeling, and
this force will have as its prime mover the belief that all political
principles must be deduced from the general principle given to humanity
by God.* \[\'Love one another.' --- GP\] *This force will be directed by
philanthropists who, as they were at the time when Christianity was
being formed, will be the immediate agents of the Eternal.*

A little further on Saint-Simon writes: '*The sole means to which the
philanthropists will have recourse will be oral and printed preaching.*'
^[\[22\]](#n22)^

Like Fourier, Saint-Simon was horrified at the very thought of the class
struggle and sometimes liked to intimidate his readers with 'the
propertyless class', the 'people'. In his Fourth Letter to Messrs the
Industrialists, in demonstrating the undesirable turn which their
struggle with 'Bonaparte's feudalism' might take, he writes:

Besides, gentlemen, one cannot contemplate without trepidation that in
case of open battle it \[that is, Bonaparte's feudalism --- GP\] could
momentarily attract the people to its side. Although you are the natural
and invariable leaders \[*chefs*\] of the people and although it
acknowledges you as such, experience has shown you that it could be
rallied for a time to the banner of the military and the legists. You
think rightly that the influence which the agitators could have on the
people has now \[in comparison with the period of the Great Revolution
--- GP\] diminished considerably\... But it has not been altogether
destroyed. The dogma of Turkish equality\... ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ may still,
unless you take precautions, make great ravages\... What means have you
to fight against the seductions of this dogma, unless you previously
offer the people clear and precise notions of their true interests?
^[\[24\]](#n24)^

This passage shows most convincingly that the propertyless class was not
at all the class which Saint-Simon counted upon to realise his practical
plans. Saint-Simon's views, like Fourier's, were by no means the views
of the proletariat.

The followers of these two great founders of French utopian socialism
were completely loyal to them in the extremely important respects I have
indicated. They repudiated indignantly any idea of making the class
struggle going on in society the basis of their social-reforming
aspirations. As an example, I shall mention one of Fourier's most
talented followers --- Victor Considérant. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^

### III

In his brochure *Débâcle de la politique en France*, issued in 1836,
that is to say, while Fourier was still alive, Considérant defines
politics as '*the totality of contending opinions and theories relating
to the fundamental principles of government or to the various
administrative systems that wrangle over portfolios for the sake of the
greatest good of the nation*'. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ The last words in this
definition have a very noticeable touch of irony about them, and show
that, in Considérant's eyes, politics was of no great value; far from
hiding this opinion, he notes with satisfaction that, in comparison with
recent times, interest in and respect for politics in general had fallen
considerably in France. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ Why? In consequence of some
theoretical errors of politics (*erreurs théoriques de la politique*).
What were these errors? Reply:

Instead of bothering about the means necessary for realising the *unity
of interests* \[*alliance des intérêts*\], which would be profitable to
all interests, people \[of the various political parties --- GP\] are
taken up exclusively with *supporting and strengthening their struggle*,
which is profitable only to those who traffic in that struggle \[*qui
trafiquent de cette lutte*\]. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

Politics is a weapon of the class struggle; like his teacher Fourier,
Considérant does not want the class struggle. Consequently --- again
like Fourier --- he turns his back on politics. This could not be more
logical. In another part of the same brochure, Considérant puts forward
as a truth that admits of no denial the following proposition:

*All of us are interested in everyone without exception being happy; and
for each class the best means of ensuring its material interests is to
link with its own interests the interests of the other classes.*
^[\[29\]](#n29)^

Considérant is as completely disapproving as Fourier in regard to
eighteenth-century French philosophy. He calls it *subversive*, and says
that when the fundamental idea of this philosophy, that is to say, the
idea of overthrowing feudalism and the Catholic religion, began to be
realised, great social upheavals occurred. He gives us to understand
that at the end of the eighteenth century, in his opinion, the means
were available to improve the social order without resorting to
revolutionary struggle. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ As far as his own epoch is
concerned, he has not the slightest doubt about the possibility of a
peaceful transformation of society. This possibility is fully assured by
Fourier's discoveries, which offer the most reliable means of
reconciling the interests of all social classes. The revolutionaries who
take so readily to acts of violence do not wish to understand this.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^ Hence his very severe condemnation of the
revolutionaries. True, he gives no quarter either to the authorities,
who, he says, compromise their own cause by their clumsiness.
^[\[32\]](#n32)^ But for all that, he is convinced that 'at the present
time, the party that is interested in the preservation of order, is less
anti-social \[*moins anti-social*\] than the party that is striving to
overthrow it'. Why?

Since it is evident from the contemporary condition of society \[he
replies\] that now it is necessary not to fight, but to improve and
organise, *the party whose very position provides it with a love for
order is less unfavourable* \[*moins défavorable*\] *to the action which
must be taken now than the party that still wants to expel, smash,
overthrow*. ^[\[33\]](#n33)^

Here in Russia, the late Leo Tolstoy reasoned in exactly the same way:
he too, out of the selfsame considerations, was more sympathetic to the
authorities than to the revolutionaries.

All this is, I trust, sufficiently characteristic. But Considérant's
views are even more vividly expressed in this passage: 'Any uprising of
one element against another is unlawful; only concord, harmony, free and
full development, Order, are lawful.' ^[\[34\]](#n34)^

These words illustrate the whole tactics of utopian socialism.
^[\[35\]](#n35)^ I am not saying that the tactics never changed. That
would have been completely unnatural in the feverish public life of
France in those days. But in spite of modifications, the tactics of
utopian socialism in general retained this character to the very end. No
matter how numerous were the individual features distinguishing one
school of utopian socialism from another, all of these schools --- again
with some few exceptions which I shall deal with later --- were
indifferent to politics, and all of them, again apart from a few
exceptions, were against the class struggle.

Take the Saint-Simonists. In expounding their doctrine, they refer to
the class struggle which has been taking place in history and to the
exploitation of 'man by man'. They say that in modern society the
workers (*les travailleurs*) are exploited by the idle (*les oisifs*).
Already in their first publication, *Le Producteur*, appearing in
1825-26, they state that it is already now '*impossible to imagine that
the interests of the idle are the same as those of the workers*'.
^[\[36\]](#n36)^ The aim of social development, they say, is the
elimination of class antagonisms and the triumph of 'association'. But
when the question is raised of how to bring about the triumph of
'association', they point to the *reconciliation of classes.* This can
all be read in the interesting collection of their lectures: *Doctrine
saint-simonienne. Exposition* (see the first volume especially).
^[\[37\]](#n37)^ But these views are presented with particular clarity
in the *Report on the Work of the Saint-Simonist Family*, submitted by
Stéphane Flachat to the 'fathers' ^[\[38\]](#n38)^ Bazard and Enfantin.

Stéphane Flachat not only recognises the division of contemporary
society into two classes, but expresses himself much more precisely than
most of those who shared his views. Whereas to the enormous majority of
Saint-Simonists contemporary society is divided into a class of 'idle'
and a class of 'workers', Flachat speaks of the opposition between the
*bourgeoisie* and the *proletariat*, naively supposing at the same time,
however, that behind the difference in terms there is no difference in
social relationships. He notes that after the 1830 revolution the
bourgeoisie did not see any necessity of giving serious thought to the
interests of the proletariat. And for all his readiness to excuse this
error of the bourgeoisie, he does, nevertheless, think it is high time
the error was corrected, since otherwise society is threatened with
'upheavals more prolonged and more profound than those that marked the
struggle of the bourgeoisie and feudalism'. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ It is
obvious from this that recollections of the class struggle in the period
of the Great Revolution are very fresh in the memory of the socialist
rapporteur. They compel him to strive for the reconciliation of classes.
He quotes Saint-Simon as saying that the English proletarians are ready
at the first favourable opportunity to launch a war *of the poor against
the rich*, ^[\[40\]](#n40)^ and then goes on to say:

It is in these grave circumstances that we appear on the scene. We say
to the bourgeoisie: *we are the voice of the people* demanding for them
their just share in the association, an *energetic voice* because the
demand is just, but *peaceful* because, being heralds of the future, we
know from our teacher that violence is retrograde and that its reign is
over. To the people we have said, we repeat every day: *we are the voice
of the bourgeoisie.* All you who suffer, demand universal association
and you will receive it, because it is God's will. But it will be
granted to you only if you demand it *peacefully* and *gradually*. For
if you try to snatch by force the instruments of labour from the hands
of those who now possess them, remember that the strong men who will be
directing your fury would not find the mansions and palaces, whose
owners they had evicted, too big or too sumptuous for themselves, and
you would only have changed masters. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^

This warning about the 'strong men' may astonish the present-day reader.
But, there was nothing strange in it for the rapporteur. Flachat
believed that the proletariat was incapable 'in consequence of its
ignorance of clearly formulating its needs and its hopes'.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^ *Such* a social class was really very easy to lead by
the nose. The whole question was whether abstinence from politics would
promote the intellectual development of such a class.

The extent to which this mood of conciliation was rooted in the spirit
of that time, or, more correctly, in the minds of those people of that
time who were interested in social questions, is shown, incidentally, by
the following fact.

When Pierre Leroux ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ --- who is known to have excited
great interest in Russia, in the circle of Belinsky and Herzen, and, out
of caution, was referred to by them as *Pyotr Ryzhy* --- joined the
Saint-Simonists, he mentioned the peaceful character of their 'doctrine'
as the aspect which had had the greatest influence in converting him.
^[\[44\]](#n44)^

Louis Blanc ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ was another who was utterly opposed to the
class struggle. His famous work, *Organisation du travail*, begins in
this way: 'It is to you, the rich, that this book is addressed, since it
is a question of the poor. For their cause is your cause.' Further on,
there is another, somewhat modified, version of this appeal:

This appeal is, I repeat, dedicated to you, the rich\... Yes, it is your
cause, this sacred cause of the poor. Their emancipation alone will be
appropriate to reveal to you the treasures you have not yet known of
serene joys. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^

Even Proudhon, ^[\[47\]](#n47)^ whom many even yet, for some reason,
regard as a great revolutionary, in reality rejected the posing of the
social question in a revolutionary way. In a letter to Marx dated 17
March 1846, he says:

We must not lay down revolutionary action as a means of social reform,
because this pretended means would be simply an appeal to force, to
arbitrary rule, in short, a contradiction. Therefore I set the problem
to myself as follows: by means of an economic combination to return to
society the wealth taken from it by another economic combination
(interest on capital, land rent, house rent, usury). In other words, to
turn in political economy the theory of property against property, in
order to ensure freedom and equality. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^

This desire to solve the social problem by means of an *economic
combination* spells the negation of *politics* we now know so well. This
negation has always played the decisive part in Proudhon's views. It led
him into anarchism, and passed from him to MA Bakunin, Elisée Reclus, PA
Kropotkin, J Grave and other theoreticians of anarchism, as well as to
the present-day French and Italian 'revolutionary syndicalists'.

In 1848 Proudhon, with the magnificent turn of phrase characteristic of
him, proclaimed that the Provisional Government preferred the tricolour
to the red flag. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ 'Poor red flag, everyone is abandoning
you! But I kiss you, I press you to my breast\... The red flag is the
federal banner of the human race.' ^[\[50\]](#n50)^ But this ardent
devotion to the red flag did not in the least prevent him from preaching
the union of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Thus, when his
candidature was proposed at Besançon, he wrote in his election address:
'Workers, offer your hand to your employers, and you, employers, do not
reject the advances of those who were your workers.' ^[\[51\]](#n51)^ In
his paper *La Voix du Peuple* ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ (issue of 20 March 1850)
he wrote:

The union of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat means, today as of old,
the emancipation of the serf, a defensive and offensive alliance of the
industrialists and the workers against the capitalist and the nobleman,
the solidarity of interests of the proletarian and the master.
^[\[53\]](#n53)^

The contrasting of the *master* to the *capitalist* shows that by
bourgeoisie Proudhon understood, strictly speaking, the petty
bourgeoisie: he invited the *master* to unite with the *journeyman* (*le
compagnon*). This is worth noting as material for characterising the
views of the utopian socialists on economic relations in the society of
their day. I shall have to analyse these views in more detail later.
Meantime, I shall add just one point: Proudhon's book *Idée générale de
la révolution au dix-neuvième siècle*, which was published in 1851 and
left deep traces in the views of the socialists in the Latin countries
and Russia for a very long time, was dedicated to the bourgeoisie. The
dedication comprised a whole song of praise to that class:

To you, the bourgeois, the homage of these new essays \[said Proudhon\],
you have in all ages been the most intrepid, the most skilful
revolutionaries\... You and you alone --- yes, you elaborated the
principles, laid the foundation of Revolution in the nineteenth century.
Nothing undertaken without you or against you could survive. Nothing
undertaken by you was in vain. Nothing prepared by you will fail\... Is
it possible that, having accomplished so many revolutions, you have in
the end become irrecoverably, in spite of interest, in spite of reason,
in spite of honour, counter- revolutionaries? \[And so forth\]

Later, Proudhon speaks of the 1793 revolution, during which the
garrulous tribunes of the people could, as he put it, do absolutely
nothing, and of the 1848 revolution, which was unable to solve the
social question; and winds up by once more calling on the bourgeoisie to
be reconciled with the proletariat: 'I say to you: reconciliation is
revolution.' It might be thought from this that in 1851 Proudhon had
become a revolutionary; but the content of his book refutes that idea.
In the most detailed fashion, he sets out a plan for a quite peaceful
'social liquidation' which he presents as social revolution only
because, in general, he badly misuses terminology.

The utopian socialists' characteristic aversion to revolutionary action
was classically expressed by Etienne Cabet: '*If I had the revolution in
my grasp, I would not open my hand even if I had to die in exile for
it.*' ^[\[54\]](#n54)^

### IV

Thus, the utopian socialists admit the existence of the class struggle
in contemporary society. But they do not adapt their plans of reform to
this struggle, and resolutely refuse to take advantage of it to further
their aims. They hope to put their plans into effect through reconciling
the classes. Accordingly, they reject revolutionary action and turn
their back on politics. ^[\[55\]](#n55)^

When the July revolution broke out, the Saint-Simonists decided to take
no part in it. Their 'fathers', Bazard and Enfantin, wrote in a special
message to the Saint-Simonists in the provinces:

Those who are triumphant today will doubtless be indignant at what they
will call our coldness and indifference; we are prepared to put up with
their insults and their violence --- Dear children, a happier fate is in
store for us.

This happier fate consisted in working for 'the realisation of the
kingdom of God on earth' (\'*la réalisation du Régne de Dieu sur la
terre*'), as the authors of the message expressed it.

But to turn one's back on politics does not mean to remove from the
historical arena the political forces acting in it. Even while eschewing
politics, the utopian socialists had to admit the presence of those
political forces. Thus they conceived the wish somehow to utilise them
for their own ends. But how? There was only one way open to them: to
convince some influential representative of a particular political force
that the interests of his own cause, properly understood, demanded the
speediest realisation of the particular plan for social reform. But how
to do the convincing? This depended on whom precisely the reformer
appealed to and in which particular circumstances the appeal was made.
When Saint-Simon wished to draw the attention of Napoleon I to his
writings, he gave one of them a title which held the promise of showing
how victory over England might be achieved --- '*Moyens de faire
reconnaître aux anglais l\'indépendance des pavillons*' --- although the
actual work itself was devoted to a quite different subject. When
Fourier took it into his head to draw Louis Philippe, who was being
harassed by conspirators, over to his side, he began repeating that the
establishment of phalansteries was the best way of combating the
revolutionaries. When the police of the July monarchy arrested the
Duchess of Berry for attempting a restoration in favour of her son, the
Duke of Bordeaux, and when the rumour spread throughout society that she
was to be executed, 'Father' Enfantin immediately wrote an open 'Letter
to The Queen', in which, protesting against the death penalty, he
proclaimed (*in bold type*) the future emancipation of women --- '*la
femme s*\'*affranchira!*'. Informing his 'children' of this letter, he
expressed the hope that it would promote 'the introduction of women into
politics'. ^[\[56\]](#n56)^ Having departed subsequently for Algiers,
Enfantin tried through one of his correspondents to establish contact
with the Duke of Orleans. This attempt led to the tragi-comic
consequence that the Duke graciously offered the 'Supreme Father' of the
Saint-Simonists the post of sub-prefect. Unfortunately, this did not
sober Enfantin. He did not cease to build far-reaching schemes for
preaching to crowned heads (\'*apostolat princier*'). These plans led
him to commit some very crude errors, true, much more of a theoretical
than a practical nature. Heine is known to have been interested in and
sympathetic to the Saint-Simonists. The first edition of his book *De
l\'Allemagne* was dedicated to 'Father' Enfantin, who in reply printed a
letter under the heading 'To Heinrich Heine' (\'A Henri Heine') in which
he developed some, to say the least, astonishing political views.

In speaking of Germany, Enfantin revealed a tremendous sympathy for
Austria (the Austria of Metternich!). In his opinion, Austria
represented order, hierarchy, sense of duty and especially of peace:

Recognising that the dogma of freedom and equality is neither full
enough nor perfect enough to guide the peoples, let us bless Austria for
resisting the invasion of these purely revolutionary ideas and repelling
them even in the person of a Joseph II; let us bless the sublime
patience of that nation, incessantly subjected to the sabre thrusts of
the revolution as personified by Napoleon\... Let us bless Austria for
providing a noble refuge to the last representatives of feudal law, our
old Bourbons, since God has not yet said his last word on the form of
the transition by means of which mankind abolishes the old law and
ushers in the new. Finally, let us bless her for extending across the
Alps a heavy hand which holds down the Italian peoples and prevents them
from stabbing one another. Surrounded by nations in which there is a
ferment of freedom, Austria constantly reiterates in her calm and
authoritative voice: Children, you have no love for order, you have not
matured for freedom.

Further on, Enfantin confesses that war against the Holy Alliance
^[\[57\]](#n57)^ and against the 'obscurantism of the Cabinets' seems to
him to be a pretty shabby affair, 'at least for men of a strong
character'. ^[\[58\]](#n58)^

Heine silently reacted to this letter by removing the dedication to
Enfantin from the later editions of his book *On Germany.* This, of
course, was in itself his most expressive criticism. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^

It is unlikely that Enfantin had any predilection for legitimism. He
simply wanted with diplomatic finesse to conduct his apostolic mission
among persons in high places who, by their very position, were disposed
to defend 'order'.

When Louis Bonaparte, who could never have been accused of legitimism,
carried out his *coup d\'état* in France, Enfantin started to flirt with
this lucky adventurer, and even worked out a whole programme of action
for him. True, it was not a particularly definite programme. Enfantin
wanted Louis Bonaparte to serve the cause of good socialism (*bon
socialisme*). This service was to consist in renouncing militarism and
energetically promoting France's industrial development.
^[\[60\]](#n60)^

The reader will perhaps have detected an ironical note running through
my exposition. Needless to say, we can scarcely look back now on
Enfantin's apostolic mission among persons in high places without a
smile. But it would be wrong to see this error as Enfantin's alone. This
sort of mistake was the persistent and logical outcome of the negative
attitude taken by the utopian socialists to politics which I pointed out
above. *The rejection of politics led* logically to *political
intrigues* (just as it invariably *does* with those who commit the same
error today). Of course, some representatives of utopian socialism
committed in their intrigues more crude errors than others. But this is
a detail. The essential thing is that, once having renounced politics
and taken to intriguing, even the most outstanding people could not
avoid blundering in a manner that seems to us nowadays to be quite
improbable.

Here is convincing evidence of this. The 'man-terror'
(*l\'homme-terreur*) Proudhon, generally speaking, was very unlike the
'Supreme Father' Enfantin. In many respects, he was Enfantin's exact
opposite. But even he did not avoid making blunders exactly like those
astonishing ones committed by Enfantin.

Proudhon is known to have been the father of French *anarchism*.
^[\[61\]](#n61)^ As an anarchist, he regarded politics with the greatest
contempt. And yet his contempt for politics did not keep him out of
political intrigues. On the contrary, it drove him into them. In one of
his letters he remarks that he who engages in politics must 'wash his
hands in dung'. ^[\[62\]](#n62)^ This washing of hands in dung is
precisely political intrigue. How fervently he indulged in it at times
may be seen from his book *La révolution sociale, démontrée par le coup
d*\'*état du 2 décembre*, in which he does his utmost to convince the
reader and above all, of course, Louis Bonaparte himself that the
historical meaning of 2 December was 'democratic and social revolution'.
^[\[63\]](#n63)^

When *political intriguing* reaches such a pitch of intensity it is more
than the logical outcome of a denial of *politics*. It is also perhaps
the best indication of the inconsistency and confusion of the *social*
views of the utopian socialists who engage in it.

### V

I make haste to remind the reader that in nineteenth-century French
utopian socialism there was a trend --- one of the varieties of
*communism* --- which did not spurn the class struggle and did not at
all reject politics, though regarding it in a very narrow sense. As I
said above, this trend was the exception to the general rule. But to
grasp well the meaning of this *exception*, we must first of all
scrutinise the *rule* itself from all aspects.

Although they rejected the class struggle, the utopian socialists at the
same time understood its historical significance. This may seem
paradoxical, but it is true none the less. The reader already knows that
in the eyes of Saint-Simon, Fourier and their followers, the Great
French Revolution was 'a war of the poor against the rich'. Indeed,
Saint-Simon expressed this noteworthy view of the French Revolution as
early as 1802, subsequently developing it in some detail. He said that
the basic law in every country is that which governs property (*gouverne
la propriété*) and the institutions protecting it. The aim of the social
alliance is production. Consequently, people who are leaders of
production have always headed this alliance and always will. Until the
fifteenth century the most important branch of social production was
agriculture. The leaders of agriculture were the nobility. The civil
power was therefore concentrated in their hands. ^[\[64\]](#n64)^ Little
by little, however, a new social force emerged --- *the third estate.*
In need of support, this estate concluded an alliance with the monarchy
and through this alliance determined all the subsequent development of
society. In saying this, Saint-Simon had in mind France in particular,
and greatly deplored the fact that in the person of Louis XIV the
monarchy betrayed the third estate and went over to the side of the
aristocracy. The Bourbons paid very dearly for this mistake, which
however did not halt the progress of the third estate. The struggle of
the new industrial order against the obsolete feudal system gave rise to
the French Revolution and determines the most important social events in
our days.

Saint-Simon's views on philosophy and history passed from him to
Augustin Thierry. Saint-Simon even thought that Guizot, too, made them
the basis of his historical researches. It is possible that the great
French historian arrived at these views independently of Saint-Simon;
such historical views were then fairly widespread. There is no doubt
about one thing: Guizot, Thierry, Mignet and all French historians of
that trend held precisely those historical views which were originally
preached systematically by Saint-Simon. In studying those views, we are
involuntarily and frequently reminded of the theory which later came
into existence and became known as historical materialism. Those views
were without doubt valuable material for the elaboration of this theory.
But for some time they got on very well with the most extreme forms of
historical idealism. Later, I will explain this apparently strange
circumstance. For my present purpose it will suffice to note that,
following Saint-Simon and Fourier, the overwhelming majority of the
French utopian socialists saw (true, regretfully, but still saw) in the
history of Europe a long process of class struggle which at times became
extremely acute.

The utopian socialists saw the same class struggle in the society in
which they lived; and indeed they never ceased to talk of it. They
bemoaned the existence of this struggle and worked to bring the warring
classes together. ^[\[65\]](#n65)^ In their practical part, their
various systems were nothing more than an aggregate of measures intended
to put an end to the class war and establish social peace. But the very
fact that they did bemoan the class war and strive for social peace is
evidence that they fully recognised the existence of that war. So the
question naturally arises: which classes were, in the opinion of the
French utopian socialists, the chief contestants in the war going on in
modern society? The answer to this question is extremely important for
the history of socialist ideas.

Saint-Simon held the view, as has been already indicated, that the most
important events of the internal life of the society of his time were
determined by the struggle of the new industrial order with the old
feudal system --- in short, of the industrialists with the feudalists.
To Saint-Simon, this struggle was the most important class struggle of
his time. He said:

In the course of fifteen centuries, the feudal system gradually
disorganised and the industrial system gradually organised. Tactful
behaviour on the part of the main representatives of industry will
suffice to establish the industrial system once and for all, and to
clear society of the ruins of the feudal structure in which our
ancestors at one time lived. ^[\[66\]](#n66)^

But who were those main representatives of industry? Not the
proletarians, of course. They were, first, the bankers and, secondly,
the big industrialists. Saint-Simon regarded them as the natural
representatives and leaders of the entire class of workers. We have seen
already how he sometimes intimidated them with what the workers might
do. But he did this only to remind them of their duties as the natural
leaders of the working class. It is also known that, at least towards
the end of his life, Saint-Simon put as the first of these duties
concern for the poorest part of the working class. 'All social
institutions', he said then, 'must aim at the moral, intellectual, and
physical improvement \[*amélioration*\] of the most numerous and poorest
class.' This was the dominant idea of his last work *Le nouveau
christianisme*. But 'the most numerous and poorest class' had to be
*under the guardianship* of the representatives of industry placed over
it; the *leading role* in social life, Saint-Simon argued, had to belong
to just those higher-placed representatives of industry --- the bankers
and industrialists.

In so far as he held this opinion, Saint-Simon was the immediate
continuer of the cause of the advanced eighteenth-century people, who
saw the victory of the third estate over the temporal and spiritual
aristocracy as their principal social task. The reader has, of course,
heard of the famous words uttered by Sieyes: 'What is the third estate?
Nothing. What must it become? Everything.' Saint-Simon was a son of the
eighteenth century. True, during the second half of his life the third
estate ceased to be '*nothing*' and became *very much.* But it was not
yet '*everything*' (I remind you that Saint-Simon died in 1825, in the
period of the Restoration), and he tried to make it 'everything' as
quickly as possible. That is why, while persisting in inviting the rich
to display concern for the lot of the poor, he did not analyse the
relationships within the third estate itself, that is, the relations
between the employers on the one hand and the wage-workers on the other.
His attention was wholly taken up with the mutual relations established
after the Revolution between the representatives of the old order and
the 'industrialists'. He gave a striking and fairly thorough analysis of
these relationships in his celebrated *Parabola*. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^

His pupils said more than once that, while sharing Saint-Simon's views,
they were simultaneously developing them further. It has to be admitted
that in many respects they considerably surpassed their teacher. For
instance, they were a great deal more interested in economic questions
than he had been. They tried to define the meaning of the expressions:
'idle class' and 'working class' from the point of view of economics.
Among the 'idle class' they included the landowners living on land rent,
and the capitalists whose incomes were made up of interest paid on their
capital. Enfantin had a lot to say about these categories of persons in
his articles on economics published in *Le Producteur*. It is worth
noting, though, that he identified the profits of the industrialists
with wages. He says outright, in objecting to Ricardo's theory of rent
(with extremely little success, I should add): 'We understand the term
"wages" to cover the employer's profits, since we regard his profits as
payment for his labour.' ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ Such a conception of the
relations between the employers and his wage-workers precluded
altogether any thought of antagonism between the interests of industrial
capital and wage labour. The reader may not have forgotten that many
years later Proudhon's ideas suffered from a similar unclarity. Earlier
in this article I quoted an extract from an article of his that appeared
in 1850, inviting the *bourgeoisie* to join with the proletariat in the
struggle against '*the noble man and the capitalist*'. ^[\[69\]](#n69)^
Invitations of this kind could have come only from the pen of a man who
understood capitalists to mean only those who received interest on
capital.

In examining the question of interest on capital, Enfantin dwells on the
fact that in industrially developed countries, the rate of interest is
considerably lower than in the backward countries. He concludes from
this that the income of all the 'idle class' in general, by the very
development of industry, tends constantly to *diminish*:

We think\... \[he says\] that the business of the idle man, the inactive
owner of property, grows worse and worse and that, like capital, the
land is rented out on conditions more and more favourable to those who
take the trouble to work it. ^[\[70\]](#n70)^

This, you can see, is quite an optimistic view of the state of affairs
in civilised society. To this should be added that, in Enfantin's
opinion, there was a constant increase *not only* of the share in the
national income taken by the owners *together* with the wage-workers: he
thought that the workers' share, too, was constantly increasing. It is
clear that if the total share of the national income received by the
*employers together with the workers* constitutes a given sum, the part
which goes to the *workers* proper can be increased only at the expense
of the share that goes into the pockets of the *employers*. This shows
that Enfantin had no grounds for considering that the interests of the
wage-worker were at one with the interests of the employer. But he does
not dwell on this side of the question at all. He is content with the
remark that now the workers are better fed and clothed than they were
before. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^ It did not occur to him that the improvement of
the living conditions of the working class could go hand in hand with a
diminution of their share in the national income, that is to say, with
an increase in their exploitation by the employers, that is, with their
*relative* impoverishment.

In general, it should be noted that Enfantin's knowledge of economics
was very superficial, though he was the chief theoretician in this field
in the pages of *Le Producteur.* Ricardo, with whom he disputed much,
was evidently known to him only at second hand, and JB Say appeared to
him to be a great economist. There is nothing surprising in this. The
main question for Enfantin as for all utopian socialists was not what
is, but what *should be.* It was natural, therefore, that he scrutinised
with care what *is* only until such times as his views on what *should
be* were clearly formed. But, again, as with all other utopian
socialists, even this conception was determined primarily by *moral*
considerations. Consequently, Enfantin lectures the bourgeois economists
on morality more often than he criticises their theories.
^[\[72\]](#n72)^

*Le Producteur* was being published at a time when the views of the
Saint-Simonists were still far from completely formed. It may be assumed
that subsequently the economic theories of this school became more
profound in content. In fact, that is not the case. The lectures
delivered by Isaac Pereire in 1831 reveal the same unclarity concerning
the relation between industrial capital and wage labour and the same
quite untenable argument that 'the dues paid by labour to idleness' are
constantly decreasing. 'As these dues decrease, not only will the
workers' happiness increase, but production will be able to become much
more regular.' ^[\[73\]](#n73)^

Taking into consideration the unclear views of the Saint-Simonists on
the economy of society in their day, it must be admitted that their
*theory*, to say nothing of their peaceful *mood*, provided them with no
grounds whatever for working out plans of practical activity based on
the existence of antagonistic interests of wage labour and business
capital. On the contrary, it was bound to impel them to preach social
peace. True, they recognised that the interests of the *working* class
and the class of *idle* owners were antagonistic. To eliminate this
antagonism, they proposed the abolition of inheritance, which they said
would result in the transfer of the means of production to social
ownership. In *this* respect they did really go a long way further than
their teacher, who had given no thought to changing the form of
property. But if, as Enfantin asserted, the business of the idle owner
was worsening all the time, in other words, if the position of this
class was becoming more and more difficult through the reduction of
interest rates, the very course of events would ensure the possibility
of a peaceful realisation of the most important of the reforms proposed
by the Saint-Simonists --- the abolition of inheritance. In this respect
too, therefore, the Saint-Simonists could preserve their cherished
belief in the peaceful course of social development.

The reader can easily realise that, in advancing the abolition of
inheritance, the Saint-Simonists frightened the life out of the
philistines of their day. The philistines looked on the Saint-Simonists
as communists, and even do so to some extent today. (Only recently, one
historian of Russian social thought referred to them as such.) However,
there was and is no reason to consider them as communists, a fact which
they themselves constantly pointed out in their publications.

According to the teaching of the Saint-Simonists, the means of
production which became the property of society would be placed at the
disposal of those producers who were most capable of operating them
successfully. But there was never any thought in their minds of
restoring small-scale industry; they were ardent supporters of
large-scale industrial enterprises. How was the income from these
enterprises to be distributed? The Saint-Simonists said: *to each
according to his ability, to each ability according to its works* (*à
chacun selon sa capacité, à chaque capacité selon ses oeuvres*). How to
determine works? We know that Enfantin believed that the industrialist's
profit constituted his wages. It is but a simple step from this to the
belief that if a particular owner receives an incomparably higher 'wage'
than his worker, this is a result of the difference in the amount of his
work. It is not surprising, therefore, that many socialists of other
schools, --- for instance, in France the communists, Louis Blanc and
others, in Russia NG Chernyshevsky --- decisively rejected the
Saint-Simonist principle of to each according to ability and works.
Arguments of this kind may seem quite pointless: what sense is there in
disputing how to divide the bear's skin before the animal is killed? And
it is easy to observe that the critical methods of Saint-Simonists'
socialist opponents were not always satisfactory. Indeed, they mostly
repeated the errors of the Saint-Simonists; questions that should have
been examined from the angle of *production relations, that is to say,
of social economy*, were discussed by them from the standpoint of
*morality, justice*, and suchlike *abstract principles.* Yet despite the
great error in their method, they were, after their own fashion, right.
The Saint-Simonist principle of distribution which they condemned
contained all the unclarity we noted already in the Saint-Simonist
teaching on the production relations of society of their day. He who
confuses the employer's profit with wages when speaking of present-day
society runs a very serious risk of retaining in his plan for a future
social system a fairly wide place for 'the exploitation of man by man'.
It is all the same to the proletarian who owns the factory in which by
his labour he enriches the employers: whether it belongs to the factory
owner himself, or to some other private person, or, finally, to society.
The Saint-Simonists could claim in their defence that in a society
constructed according to their plan industry would be organised and not
disorganised as it is now. The place of the present owners would be
taken by leaders of industry in the service of society and receiving
their remuneration from society. But this would again bring us back to
the old question: *how to assess the size of the remuneration to be
given to the 'leaders of industry*\'? In other words, will the
Saint-Simonist society not be based upon the exploitation of the vast
majority of the producing population by these relatively few leaders? To
this, the Saint-Simonists could again give no reply except to refer to
his 'works', which explains nothing. In fact, they simply could not
think out this subject, in *its economic* aspect, to the end.

### VI

Other schools of utopian socialism did not share the optimistic views of
the Saint-Simonists regarding the course of economic development in
modern society. Saint-Simon's great contemporary and rival, Fourier,
categorically refused to admit that the position of the working --- or,
as he expressed it, the poor --- class was improving. 'Social progress
is an illusion', he insisted. 'The wealthy class goes forward, but the
poor class remains as it was, at zero.' ^[\[74\]](#n74)^ At times he
displays even greater pessimism, stating that:

\... the position of the poor in modern society is worse than that of
the savage, who has at least the right to kill game and to fish where he
pleases, and even to steal from anyone apart from his fellow-tribesmen.
The savage, moreover, is as carefree as the animals, a trait that is
utterly foreign to civilised man. The freedom granted to the poor man by
present-day society is a sham, since while depriving him of the
advantages the savage has access to, it does not even guarantee him that
minimum means of subsistence that might be a compensation for the loss
of these advantages. ^[\[75\]](#n75)^

Finally, Fourier declares that the position of the people in civilised
society, in spite of the sophists who sing the praises of progress, is
worse than the lot of the wild beasts. ^[\[76\]](#n76)^ True to his
habit of calculating and classifying even what does not lend itself to
calculation and classification Fourier indicates twelve '*disgrâces des
industrieux*' (misfortunes of industrial workers) to which, for the sake
of exactitude, he adds another four. Although this attempt to calculate
the misfortunes of civilised man may provoke a smile --- the more so
since our author apologises for his calculation being incomplete and
suggests leaving it to more experienced people to finish --- it does
reveal a rare perspicacity. As an example, I shall refer to the 'second'
misfortune, which is that civilised man is engaged in labour that
overtaxes his strength, risks undermining his health, on which the
existence of his children and his own depend. Then there is Fourier's
'tenth' misfortune, which he calls anticipated poverty and which
consists of the worker's fear of losing his wage. Lastly, the 'seventh'
misfortune, caused by the increasing luxury of the rich, at the sight of
which the poor man feels himself to be even poorer (the present-day
theory of relative impoverishment). ^[\[77\]](#n77)^ If the
Saint-Simonists did not make any distinction between the positions of
the wage-workers and the employers, Fourier on the other hand sees that
the interests of these two social categories are antagonistic, and
asserts that in modern society the success of industrial enterprises is
founded upon the impoverishment of the workers, that is to say, the
reduction of their wages to the lowest possible level. ^[\[78\]](#n78)^
Whereas the Saint-Simonists see in the development of banks the last
word in progress, Fourier thunders against the bankers and the
stock-exchange speculators. Where the Saint-Simonists are enraptured by
the development of large-scale industry, Fourier proves that it brings
with it the concentration of capital and the restoration of feudalism in
a new financial, commercial and industrial form.

His followers express themselves in the same spirit. Considérant says:

The first feudalism, which emerged from military conquest, gave the land
to the military leaders and tied the conquered population to the persons
of the conquerors by the bonds of serfdom. Since the trade and
industrial war, in the form of that competition whereby Capital and
Speculation inevitably become the rulers over poor Labour has replaced
military war \[sic!\], it has tended to establish and in fact has always
established a new serfdom by means of its conquests. Now there comes
into being, not *personal and immediate dependence*, but a mediate and
collective dependence, mass rule over the destitute classes by the class
that owns capital, machinery and the instruments of labour. In fact,
*taken collectively* the urban and rural proletarians are in a position
of absolute dependence on the owners of the instruments of labour. This
great economic and political fact is expressed in the following formula
of practical life: *in order to have a piece of bread each worker must
find himself a master.* (I know that you now say *employer*, but in its
pristine simplicity the tongue keeps repeating *master*: and it will be
justified, until the New Order is established, until the economic
relations of the present feudal order, of financial, industrial and
commercial feudalism are replaced by new relations.) ^[\[79\]](#n79)^

Fourier already called the industrial crises occurring periodically in
modern society *crises of plethora*, and asserted that the *poverty* of
this society was engendered by its *wealth*. Considérant developed this
profound thought further. He pointed to the example of England, 'choking
from its own plethora', and pronounced absurd and inhuman a social order
that 'condemns the working class to hunger, and at the same time suffers
from a shortage of consumers'.

Competition destroys the intermediate social strata, he goes on, and
leads to the division of society into two classes, 'a few having
everything and a large number having nothing'. ^[\[80\]](#n80)^

Generally speaking, the Fourierists very often took the opposite view to
the Saint-Simonists on economic questions, and this was vividly shown in
their respective attitudes to the problem of the development of the
productive forces in France as she was then, as well as in the whole
civilised world. The Saint-Simonists were unreservedly enthusiastic in
welcoming the construction of railways, and dreamed of the cutting of
the Suez and Panama canals. ^[\[81\]](#n81)^ The Fourierists, on the
contrary, considered that before building railways it was essential to
reconcile the interests of the employers and the workers, and to
establish the correct distribution of products between capital, labour
and talent through the establishment of phalansteries. ^[\[82\]](#n82)^
Of course the Fourierists were completely in the wrong here; labour and
capital in France have not been 'reconciled' even up to the present day.
Yet what would France be like today without railways? In reply to the
argument that the construction of railways would lead to the
strengthening of industrial feudalism, Enfantin said that industrial
feudalism was inevitable as a transitional stage of social development.
That was right. But at once Enfantin slid back into utopia, adding that,
thanks to the discoveries of Saint-Simon and the Saint-Simonists, the
secret of peaceful social transformation was now known to mankind, so
that the latter was able consciously and without upheavals to put an end
to industrial feudalism. ^[\[83\]](#n83)^ He was also utopian when he
maintained that, just as it had been necessary, for example, in the
period of the Reformation to go along with Luther and Calvin, so now it
was necessary to 'fly to Rothschild'. The reformers of the nineteenth
century had quite a different task. The urge 'to Rothschild' was the
Saint-Simonist version of: 'Let's go for training to capitalism.'
^[\[84\]](#n84)^

Like the Fourierists, Louis Blanc decidedly did not share the
Saint-Simonists' optimistic views on the position of hired labour. In
his *Organisation du travail*, he wrote that, under the impact of
competition, wages tended consistently downwards, with the most serious
consequences for the working class: it was degenerating. And --- again
like the Fourierists --- Louis Blanc pointed to the growth of property
inequality in contemporary society, and in this respect he also spoke of
the concentration of landownership and not only of capital.
^[\[85\]](#n85)^ Whereas the Saint-Simonists opposed the *industrial*
class to the *idle* class, Louis Blanc opposes the '*people*' to the
'*bourgeoisie*'. But it is well worth noting that his definition of the
bourgeoisie fits the lower strata of this class more than it does the
higher. 'By the bourgeoisie', he says, 'I understand the aggregate of
those citizens who, owning either instruments of labour or capital, work
with means of their own and depend on others only to a certain extent.'
That is either very badly put or is very close to Proudhon's conception
of the bourgeoisie, that is, to the conception of the *petty*
bourgeoisie. No less remarkable is the fact that, in speaking of the
'people', Louis Blanc has in mind the *proletarians* proper, 'that
aggregate of citizens who, having no capital, are entirely dependent on
others as regards the primary necessities of life'. ^[\[86\]](#n86)^
Louis Blanc observes the formation of a new social class, but sees it
through the spectacles of old democratic conceptions, and therefore
gives this class an old name, dear to the hearts of the democrats.

I shall refer to two more socialist writers of those days: one of them
is still fairly well known, while the other has been completely
forgotten, although he fully deserves to be mentioned. I have in mind
Pierre Leroux and his friend Jean Reynaud. Both of them went through the
school of Saint-Simonism and early on took a critical attitude to this
school. However, here I am interested only in their views on the role
and position of labour in present-day society.

As early as 1832, when the vast majority of Saint-Simonists discerned in
the prevailing society only the antagonism of interests between the
working class and the idle owners, and regarded 'politics' as the
obsolete prejudice of backward people, Jean Reynaud published an article
in the April issue of *Revue Encyclopédique* under the heading: '*De la
nécessité d\'une représentation spéciale pour les prolétaires*', in
which he expounded views that were truly remarkable for that period:

I say \[he wrote\] that the people consists of two classes, distinct
both in their situation and their interests: the proletarians and the
bourgeoisie. I call proletarians the people who produce all the wealth
of the nation; who have nothing apart from the daily wage for their
labour; whose work depends on causes outside of their control; who from
the fruits of their own labour receive daily only a small part, which is
continuously being reduced by competition; whose future depends only on
the precarious hopes of an industry that is unreliable and chaotic in
its progress, and who have nothing to expect in their old age but a
place in hospital or an untimely death.

To this vivid description of the proletariat, there is added an equally
vivid description of the bourgeoisie:

By bourgeois I understand the people to whose fate the fate of the
proletarians is subordinated and chained; the people who possess capital
and live on the income from it; those who hold industry in their pay and
who raise or lower it according to their whims in consumption; who fully
enjoy the present and have no wish for their future except that what
they had yesterday should continue, and that there should exist for all
eternity the constitution which gives them the first place and the best
share.

It might perhaps be assumed on the basis of Reynaud's statement that the
bourgeoisie are essentially those who live on the income from their
capital, that like all other Saint-Simonists he too had in mind only the
*idle owners*, that is, the *rentiers*. Such an assumption would be
wrong. Further on in his article he explains his idea very well. As it
turns out, he puts among the bourgeoisie 'the 2000 manufacturers of
Lyons, the 500 manufacturers of St Etienne and all the feudal possessors
of industry'. This makes it clear that his definition fully includes the
*representatives of industrial capital.* He is perfectly well aware that
between the classes of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat there may be
also intermediate social strata. But he is not dismayed by this:

I may be told \[he says\] that these two classes do not exist, since
there is no insuperable barrier or indestructible wall between them, and
there exist bourgeois who work and proletarians who own property. To
this I will reply that between the most sharply distinct shades there
are always intermediate shades, and that in our colonies it will not
occur to anyone to deny the existence of black and white people, simply
because there are mulattoes and half-breeds among them.

Reynaud believed there had been a time when the bourgeoisie,
representing their own personal interests, simultaneously represented
the interests of the proletariat. That was in the period of the
Restoration. But now that the destruction of the feudal nobility, which
was prepared by the bourgeoisie, has been completed by the proletariat,
the interests of these two classes have parted, making it essential for
the proletariat to have special political representation.

It would be difficult to put this more clearly. Reynaud, however, is yet
a son of his time. He has not entirely lost the fearful recollections of
1793. He is afraid of civil war; consequently he makes reservations.
According to him, although the interests of the bourgeoisie are distinct
from the interests of the proletariat, nevertheless they do not
contradict each other (*ne sont pas contradictoires*). Therefore the two
classes can work amicably together to improve legislation.
^[\[87\]](#n87)^

Pierre Leroux held the same opinions on the relationship of the
proletariat to the bourgeoisie. ^[\[88\]](#n88)^ In the book I have just
mentioned in a footnote, *De la plutocratie ou du gouvernement des
riches*, he develops this view in detail. But the more detail he
provides, the more obvious and even the greater is the unclarity of this
view, an unclarity that can already be noticed to some extent in
Reynaud's work. It consists of this.

Reynaud had already said: 'I call proletarians the workers in the towns
and the peasants in the countryside' (*les paysans de campagne*). One
must suppose that in recognising the existence in present-day society of
*proletarians owning property*, he was thinking precisely of the
'*peasants in the countryside*'. With a wealth of detail, Leroux
enlarges on this kind of 'proletarian'. He asks: 'Is the peasant with a
hectare of land a proletarian or a property-owner?' In his opinion, he
is a proletarian, since his hectare of land furnishes him with a
livelihood only to the degree that he *applies heavy manual labour to it
daily.* What does it matter that this peasant is a *landowner*, if his
ownership of land permits him to live only by arduous daily work? It is
only when the instruments of labour have reached a certain limit that
they are sufficiently productive to bring in a rent adequate for the
subsistence of the owner. Within this limit one is a proletarian; one is
a property-owner only beyond it. ^[\[89\]](#n89)^

Leroux asks whether the man who owns a small plot of land is a
property-owner *or* a proletarian. This question presumes that one
cannot be a proletarian and an owner at one and the same time. But
immediately after this, Leroux goes on to declare that the man to whom a
hectare of land belongs, that is, the *owner* of one hectare, is a
*proletarian*. Here, the presumption that *one cannot be* simultaneously
a *property-owner* and a *proletarian* is quietly shelved. Why? Because
the owner of the plot *works*. But this suffices only to acknowledge him
as a *working-owner*. The identification of a working-owner with a
proletarian is, in any case, arbitrary. Why did Leroux consider it not
only permissible, but, indeed, inevitable? Only because the man who owns
a small plot of land is often very poor. To Pierre Leroux, *the poor man
and the proletarian* are one and the same. This is why he lists among
the proletarians all *beggars*, whom he calculates in France to number
four millions, whereas the number employed in industry and commerce, by
his own calculation, is not more than half of that figure.
^[\[90\]](#n90)^ So that in France, according to him, out of a
population of thirty-four and a half million there are as many as thirty
million proletarians. ^[\[91\]](#n91)^

In Reynaud's argument 'proletarian-owners' were compared with mulattoes
and half-breeds, who in the colonies occupy a middle position between
the black and the white races. Leroux, however, made out that these
'mulattoes' and 'half-breeds' constituted the larger part of the French
*proletariat*.

Needless to say, from the point of view of economics, Leroux's
calculations would often not hold water. But to understand him we have
to remember that he is arguing not so much from the standpoint of
*economics* as from the standpoint of *morality*. He saw his task not as
having to determine exactly the relations of production prevailing in
France, but to demonstrate how many French people were living in poverty
and by their poverty were a reminder of the need for social reform. And
inasmuch as he understood this to be his task he was in the right,
although this did not prevent him from making obvious errors in logic:
on the contrary, it caused him to make them.

From this angle, Leroux's methods of reasoning remind one very much of
our Narodniks' mode of thought. ^[\[92\]](#n92)^ Be that as it may, it
cannot be denied that his book *De la plutocratie* and some of his other
works --- for example, the articles published later under the title
*Malthus et les économistes, ou y aura-t-il toujours des pauvres?* ---
contain a much deeper analysis of the relations between the wage-worker
and the capitalist than what we find in the works of Enfantin and other
orthodox Saint-Simonists. And, of course, this is certainly a great
credit to him.

However, these first steps in socialist analysis sometimes lead to quite
unexpected theoretical results. To Fourier and his pupils, especially
Toussenel as well as Pierre Leroux, Désamy and others, the main culprits
of financial and industrial 'feudalism' were the *Jews*. Fourier
protested against equal rights for the Jews. Leroux pointed to them as
'the kings of our epoch'. ^[\[93\]](#n93)^ The Fourierist Toussenel, as
late as the first half of the 1840s, advocated an alliance between the
July monarchy and the people for the struggle against the Jews. 'Force
to power! Death to parasitism!' he proclaimed. 'War on the Jews! There
is the motto of the new revolution!' ^[\[94\]](#n94)^ These theoretical
errors, which, happily, did not do any great practical harm in France,
had not been surmounted by some varieties of utopian socialism right to
the end of their existence. And this, of course, is no small minus in
the algebraic sum of their distinguishing features.

In conclusion, I will add that the *economic* views of the French
socialists were far removed from the clarity and orderliness of the
economic views expounded by English socialist writers in the 1820s and
1830s: Hodgskin, Thompson, Gray, Edmonds, Bray and others. The reason
for this is clear: Britain was very far in advance of France in economic
development.

### VII

Let us look back. In the person of Saint-Simon, French utopian socialism
enters the scene as the direct continuation of the work performed by the
ideologists of the third estate in the eighteenth century. It champions
the interests of this estate against those of the aristocracy. But in
doing so it has two distinctive features. First of all, under the
influence of the events of 1793, it rejects the idea of the class
struggle. ^[\[95\]](#n95)^ Secondly, it insists on attention to the
plight of the disinherited, proclaiming --- even in the form of
religious precepts --- as a duty the all-round improvement of the
condition of 'the poorest and most numerous class'. The fulfilling of
this duty falls primarily on 'the leaders of industry', who are ordained
to play a directing role in social life. To Saint-Simon and the
Saint-Simonists, the interests of the leaders of industry are in
complete conformity with the interests of the working class.

Fourier and his followers penetrate much more deeply into the mysteries
of the rising capitalist order. Nevertheless, they no less determinedly
reject the class struggle; they, too, address themselves to the 'rich'
and not to the 'poor'. The great majority of the founders of other
socialist systems follow the example set by these first two schools of
utopian socialism. The plans of social reform drawn up by these founders
represent nothing else but a series of measures promising to reconcile
the classes through the establishment of social harmony. The authors of
these plans consider that the initiative for their realisation must
belong to the upper classes. In other words, the utopian socialists
leave no room for the *self-activity of the proletariat*: indeed, the
very concept of the latter, at first, does not emerge from their general
conception of the 'working class'. This is in keeping with the
comparatively undeveloped state of social relations in France in the
first quarter of the nineteenth century. The very rejection of politics,
which we know to be one of the main distinguishing features of utopian
socialism, is in the closest causal connection with these
poorly-developed social relations. Consciousness does not determine
being; it is being that determines consciousness. So long as the
proletariat had not emerged as an independent social force, the
political struggle could signify only the struggle between different
sections of the ruling class, who had not the slightest interest in the
fate of 'the poorest and most numerous class'. Consequently the
political struggle presented no interest at all for the utopian
socialists, inasmuch as they were seeking to better the lot of just that
class. Besides, politics spells struggle, while the utopian socialists
did not want struggle: their aim was to reconcile all sections of
society. Consequently, they declared politics a mistake, and
concentrated their attention on the social field. It seemed to them that
reforms adopted in this field had no relation to politics, and so social
reformers could live at peace with any government. ^[\[96\]](#n96)^ It
is timely to add, finally, that the formation of such a view was
facilitated by the reaction against the belief, current in the
eighteenth century, that the political activity of the rulers was the
*cause* and the social system the *effect*.

The utopian socialists retained their political indifference for a long
time. We know already that this indifference explains their sometimes
naive and sometimes unattractive political *intriguing*. But as France's
economic development advanced, the contradiction of interests between
wage-labour and industrial capital became more acute. And as it became
more acute, the '*poor class*' of that country became the *proletariat*.
I made reference earlier to Reynaud's statement to the effect that the
destruction of the nobility had been prepared by the bourgeoisie and
completed by the proletariat. These remarkable words show that, already
at the beginning of the 1830s, some representatives of French utopian
socialism (true, very few), had begun to recognise the enormous
*political* importance of the working class. This awakening
consciousness was undoubtedly aroused by the impressions of the July
revolution. If it did not develop much between July 1830 and February
1848, the collapse of the monarchy of Louis Philippe gave it a powerful
impulse. The Fourierists, who had previously declared politics to be a
mistake, themselves began to engage in politics. Elected as a
'representative of the people', Considérant joined the Montagnards and,
in 1849, had to flee the country because of his participation in the
well-known demonstration of 13 June. ^[\[97\]](#n97)^ In the
revolutionary period of 1848 to 1850, Proudhon, Pierre Leroux, Louis
Blanc, Buchez, Vidal and some others were deputies too. Of all the
outstanding representatives of utopian socialism, Cabet was the only one
occupied in this period mainly with establishing his communist colony
'Icaria' in Texas. 'Politics' turned out to be stronger than utopia. It
imposed itself on utopian socialism, which had erstwhile called it an
error. ^[\[98\]](#n98)^ But even while acting on the political scene,
the utopian socialists did not cease to be utopians. In the period of
the most acute class struggle, they went on dreaming of the
reconciliation of classes. In the pamphlet I have already cited, *Le
socialisme devant le vieux monde, ou le vivant devant les morts*,
Considérant expressed his sincere regret that the bourgeoisie had given
a bad example to the proletariat by forcibly abolishing the privileges
of the nobility during the Great Revolution. On 14 April 1849, the same
Considérant delivered a big speech before the National Assembly in which
he proposed that the Assembly allocate funds to the Fourierists for the
setting up of phalansteries. It need hardly be said that the Assembly
did not grant any funds. Finally, I will mention the well-known errors
committed by Louis Blanc in 1848.

Dragged into the political arena by the very course of events in France,
the utopian socialists were unable to work out correct tactical
principles for the simple reason that there was no sound theoretical
basis to be found for such principles in utopian socialism.
^[\[99\]](#n99)^ This brings us to the question: what then is the
distinguishing feature, the presence of which in a given socialist
system imparts to it a utopian character, regardless of whether details
of the system are worthy of attention and approval? This question is the
more relevant here since anyone with an inadequate knowledge of the
subject might imagine that the word 'utopian' has no precise theoretical
meaning, and when applied to some plan or system simply indicates
disapproval. Indeed the word 'utopia' was known to the French utopian
socialists, and when one of them, say Fourier, wished to express his
dissatisfaction with some aspects of some other socialist school, for
example, the Saint-Simonist, he called it, among other things,
*utopian*. Of course, to proclaim that a particular system was utopian
was tantamount to proclaiming it impracticable. But not one of the
utopian socialists had a clear conception of the criterion by which the
practicability of a given system could be judged. This is why the word
'utopia' had only polemical significance in the writings of the utopian
socialists. Nowadays, we see this differently.

### VIII

In condemning the bad example set the proletariat by the bourgeoisie in
forcibly abolishing the privileges of the nobility, Considérant believed
that as early as the end of the eighteenth century it was feasible in
France to project a plan of social reform which would by degrees win
over all Frenchmen, irrespective of title, rank or estate. The whole
trouble was that no one had devised such a plan. That such plans could
be invented followed from the fact that their appearance depended on
chance. Indeed, Fourier wrote a whole dissertation on this theme, in
which he related how chance had led him to discover the 'calculus of
attraction' (*calcul de l\'attraction*). He said that, like Newton, he
arrived at his brilliant discovery thanks to an apple he ate in a Paris
restaurant. Subsequently he even remarked that 'there were four famous
apples, two of them noted for the trouble they caused (Adam's apple and
the apple of Paris), and the other two for having enriched science'.
Fourier went so far as to say that these four famous apples were worthy
of a special page in the history of human thought. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^
His artless gratitude to the apple is a good illustration of the fact
that Fourier had no idea of *man*'s *knowledge developing in conformity
to law.* He was convinced that discoveries depend entirely on 'chance'.
It did not even occur to him that in the history of human thought the
action of 'chance' itself may be in causal dependence on a course of
events in conformity to law. The utopian socialists not only did not
recognise that the course of events determines the progress of ideas; on
the contrary, they believed that the development of ideas is the
cardinal cause of the historical development of mankind. This was a
purely idealist view, borrowed by them from the French Enlighteners of
the eighteenth century, who stubbornly maintained that *opinion governs
the world* (*c\'est l\'opinion, qui gouverne le monde*). Reading the
profound utterances of Saint-Simon on the role of the class struggle in
the internal history of French society, one might think that he was a
man who had completely abandoned the standpoint of historical idealism.
In fact, he kept to that standpoint firmly to the end of his days. It
may be said that he carried the idealist view of history to the extreme.
Not only did he consider the development of ideas as the ultimate cause
of the development of social relations, but among ideas he attributed
the most important place to *scientific ideas ---* the 'scientific
system of the world' --- from which flowed *religious ideas* which, in
turn, determined man's *moral concepts.* At the first glance, it is not
easy to understand how Saint-Simon squared his extreme historical
idealism with the idea we know he had that the law on property is the
basic law of society. But the fact is that, even though Saint-Simon
believed that property relations are at the root of every given social
system, he nevertheless regarded them as having been brought into being
by human sentiment and opinion. Thus to him, just as to the
eighteenth-century Enlighteners, the world was governed, in the final
analysis, by '*opinion*'. This idealist outlook was transmitted in its
entirety to his pupils. The very same outlook is met with among other
utopian socialists. We have already seen how little Fourier was able to
link the course of development of human thought with the course of
development of human life. His most outstanding pupil, Considérant,
wrote: 'Ideas are the mothers of facts, and today's facts are the
children of yesterday's ideas.' ^[\[101\]](#n101)^ Considérant did not
ask himself where yesterday's ideas came from. Neither did any of the
other utopian socialists. When they were faced with the question of how
the ideas of today --- say, the ideas of the Saint-Simonist or the
Fourierist school --- would become the facts of tomorrow, they --- again
like the eighteenth-century Enlighteners --- confined themselves to
pointing to the unconquerable force of truth. In upholding this
viewpoint, it was natural for them to reject the class struggle and
politics as a weapon of that struggle, for once revealed the truth must
be equally accessible to all social classes. More than that. The people
of the upper classes, having more leisure and a certain education, are
more able to assimilate truth. This makes it perfectly clear that the
tactics of the utopian socialists were closely bound up with their
historical idealism. I should add here that their political intrigues
were also not unconnected with this idealism. Take the example of
Fourier. If he did discover the truth by chance, thanks to a chance
apple, then any kind of chance circumstance could promote its
dissemination. Therefore it is equally useful to knock at all doors, to
try to influence all and sundry, and, probably, even in particular those
who have much money or much power. And so Fourier obstinately tried to
bring influence to bear on the mighty of this world, though of course
quite without success.

While describing their opponents' systems as *utopian*, the socialists
of the period under review with complete conviction referred to their
own systems as *scientific*. ^[\[102\]](#n102)^ What did they take as a
scientific criterion? *Whether the given system corresponded to 'the
nature of man*'. But to take as term of reference human nature, that is
to say, the nature of man generally, taken independently of particular
social relationships, is to abandon the ground of historical reality and
to rely on an abstract conception: and this road leads directly to
utopia. The more often these writers appeal to human nature, while
accusing their opponents of utopianism, the more clearly is revealed the
utopian character of their own theories.

In taking their conception of human nature as the criterion of
scientific construction, the utopian socialists naturally deemed it
possible to devise a *perfect* social system: the perfect social system
being exactly that which conformed fully to the particular reformer's
conception of human nature. This was one of the motives behind the
heated arguments that occurred among the utopian socialists, for
example, on the principle of the distribution of products in the future
society. They lost sight of the point that the mode of distribution
would certainly change with the growth of society's productive forces.

Thus, *the utopian is one who endeavours to construct a perfect social
system on the basis of some abstract principle.* All socialists in the
period we are discussing come under this definition. So there is no
cause to wonder that we now call them utopians without in any way being
inspired by ill-will towards them. From the viewpoint of science,
utopianism is but a phase in the development of socialist thought. This
phase came to an end only when the advanced societies of the civilised
world had reached a certain level of economic development. Social being
is not determined by consciousness, consciousness is determined by
social being.

We have seen that this ultimate truth remained beyond the grasp of the
utopian socialists. They were convinced that social being was
conditioned by 'opinion'. Only by taking account of this shall we be
able to comprehend how, for example, Saint-Simon could arrive at his
'religion'.

He says that religious ideas flow from the scientific system of the
world. It follows that with the change of this system religious ideas
must also change. But since the system has changed very much in
comparison with what it was in the Middle Ages, the time has now arrived
for the emergence of new religious ideas. With this in mind, Saint-Simon
invented a '*new Christianity*'. It would be easy to show that he
himself was a confirmed unbeliever. So the question arises: why did he
create a new religion? The answer to this perplexing question is that
Saint-Simon regarded religion from the standpoint of its *usefulness*:
religious ideas determine *moral concepts*, consequently, whoever wishes
to influence the moral conduct of his contemporaries must turn to
religion. That is what Saint-Simon did. If my explanation seems
improbable to the reader, I would remind him that Saint-Simon looked on
this question too through the eyes of the eighteenth century: that is to
say, he believed that religions are instituted by wise 'legislators' in
the interests of social well-being. ^[\[103\]](#n103)^

Approximately the same considerations were probably also behind the work
of Cabet, *Le vrai Christianisme suivant Jesus Christ*.
^[\[104\]](#n104)^ In inventing his 'true Christianity', Cabet desired
to imitate the wise legislators of older days, as the eighteenth-century
philosophers imagined them.

By saying this, I do not want to assert that all the socialist writers
we are interested in here shared the views of the eighteenth century on
religion. That would be an unwarranted exaggeration. Not all of them had
the same attitude to religion as Saint-Simon and Cabet. First of all,
the Romantic reaction against the philosophical ideas of the eighteenth
century, which was widespread among French intellectuals, also had its
influence among the socialists of the 1830s and 1840s, that is to say,
socialists, so to speak, of 'the second generation', and significantly
weakened the influence on them of the anti-religious ideas inherited
from the philosophy of the Enlightenment. Saint-Simon's own pupils felt
the attraction of the new religion invented by their teacher, not with
their heads but with their hearts; with the result that their meetings
were sometimes conducted in a spirit of real religious ecstasy. We must
remember, too, that when socialism acquired great influence among the
then French intelligentsia, it attracted even such people as had never
at any time or in any way been subjected to the influence of
eighteenth-century philosophy. The most outstanding among these was
undoubtedly Jean Lamennais. ^[\[105\]](#n105)^ It was not by chance that
George Sand, in her *Histoire de ma vie*, portrayed Lamennais in such
vivid and fascinating colours. He was really a very remarkable man. In
him were combined the powerful religious eloquence of the ancient Jewish
prophets, the temperament of a revolutionary and a warm sympathy for the
people in its miseries. After reading his *Paroles d*\'*un croyant*
(1834) Chateaubriand said: 'This priest wants to build a revolutionary
club in his belfry.' Very likely he did. But while setting about the
building of a 'revolutionary club', Lamennais still remained a Catholic
priest. Even after he broke with the Church, his ideas did not throw off
the yoke of old theological customs; and just because of this his
religious views and sentiments cannot be considered as typical of French
socialism of those days. The same might well be said of Philippe Buchez,
^[\[106\]](#n106)^ who, after a temporary infatuation with socialism in
his youth, soon returned to Catholicism.

The 'religious seekings' of the French utopian socialists of the 'second
generation' can be characterised only by religions such as those of the
Saint-Simonists (but, I repeat, not Saint-Simon), Pierre Leroux, etc.
The extent to which these religions were connected with the Romantic
reaction against the Enlightenment philosophy of the eighteenth century
may be seen, by the way, in the fact that many Saint-Simonists read with
enthusiasm the works of Joseph de Maistre and other writers of that
trend. This important circumstance shows that the romantic reaction
affected French utopian socialism at a time when it itself still had
absolutely nothing in common with any kind of aspiration to freedom.
Consequently, we are entitled to compare the 'religious seekings' of the
socialists of that day with their rejection of the class struggle and
their endeavours to secure social peace at any price. All this: the
'seekings' for a religion, the aversion for the class struggle, and the
love of peace which they elevated into a dogma, were nothing else but
the result of the disappointment and weariness that followed 'the
catastrophe of 1793'. In the eyes of the utopian socialists, the
terrifying year of revolutionary struggle was the most convincing
evidence in favour of their belief that the class struggle in general
was utterly futile. Indeed, some of them said that the futility of the
class struggle was best demonstrated by the example of 1793.
^[\[107\]](#n107)^ Being unsympathetic to the revolutionaries of the
eighteenth century, they began to pay careful attention to what was said
and written by the enemies of the revolution. And though the
theoreticians of reaction did not succeed in winning them over, although
they continued in part the theoretical work of the eighteenth century,
and in part took their own separate and, in a sense, new road,
nevertheless the reaction left noticeable traces in their views. If this
is not kept in mind, some important aspects of French utopian socialism
will remain incomprehensible. Among these are its 'religious seekings'
in the form they took in the 1830s and 1840s.

### IX

Now it is time to say at least a few words about the trend in French
utopian socialism which I referred to above as being the exception to
the general rule. Contrary to the general rule, this trend, firstly, was
thoroughly impregnated with revolutionary spirit; secondly, it did not
reject politics; thirdly, it was foreign to 'religious seekings'. The
most notable exponent of this trend was Auguste Blanqui,
^[\[108\]](#n108)^ who proclaimed the slogan: 'Ni dieu, ni maître.'
(\'Neither God nor master.') ^[\[109\]](#n109)^ Whence came this trend
which so sharply contradicted 'the spirit of the times\'?

To understand its origin one must remember that it was known initially
as *Babouvism*. Those who belonged to this trend considered themselves
to be followers of Babeuf, the famous communist conspirator of the end
of the eighteenth century. ^[\[110\]](#n110)^ In the first half of the
1830s, the most influential figure among the French Babouvists was one
who had participated in the 'Conspiracy of Equals', ^[\[111\]](#n111)^ a
descendant of Michelangelo whose name was Filippo Buonarroti, and who
wrote the history of this conspiracy. ^[\[112\]](#n112)^ It is generally
known that Babeuf and the other participants of the 'Conspiracy of
Equals' were extreme revolutionaries. 'We demand real equality or
death', they wrote in their manifesto. 'And we shall have it, it matters
not at what price. Woe betide those who place themselves between us and
it!' And so on. This language bears no resemblance to the language of
the nineteenth-century utopian socialists. And those --- comparatively
very few --- French socialists who remained true to the testament of
Babeuf and his comrades were in no way disposed to social peace. Auguste
Blanqui contemptuously condemned this inclination of the French
socialists of his time, and they, for their part, looked with fear at
the incorrigible and tireless revolutionary conspirator.
^[\[113\]](#n113)^

We see therefore where the trend we are discussing came from. It was a
direct continuation of the revolutionary aspirations of the eighteenth
century. Since the great revolutionary storm had fatigued the population
of France and imbued a large section of the intelligentsia with a
negative attitude to the class struggle, this trend could not be a
strong one: it represented only a tiny ripple in the broad stream of
French socialist thought. ^[\[114\]](#n114)^ That is why I described it
as an exception to the general rule.

The reader will understand that the few representatives of the French
intellectuals who were unaffected by the scare due to the 'catastrophe
of 1793' had no special reason for rejecting the spiritual testament
handed down from the eighteenth century. Consequently, their attitude to
religion was exactly the same as that which distinguished the most
prominent spokesmen of French philosophy of the Enlightenment. Here we
have the source of August Blanqui's challenge: 'Neither God nor master!'
Similarly with regard to their appreciation of politics: here, too, they
followed the example of the men of the eighteenth century. And these men
did not turn their backs on politics: on the contrary, they attributed
an exaggerated importance to political activity. They were simple enough
to believe that the 'legislator' could reconstruct the whole of social
relations, and even the habits, tastes and aspirations of the citizens,
in accordance with his ideal. It is self-evident that the Babouvists and
Blanquists of the period we are considering, who had largely adopted
this conception of the activity of the 'legislator', were not at all
disposed to political indifference. Just the opposite: they were bound
to strive to put themselves in the position of 'legislators' in order to
realise their communist ideals. That is what they hoped to achieve by
means of secret societies and plots. Thus their tactics, which flowed
logically from their conception of the role of the 'legislator', were
directly opposed to the tactics of the then utopian socialists. But this
was not enough to provide a concrete basis for their tactics. The
communism of the Babouvists and the Blanquists suffered from utopianism
no less than the socialism of Saint-Simon or Fourier, Cabet or Pierre
Leroux. *Only it was utopianism of a different colour.* It was precisely
belief in the omnipotence of the 'legislator', that is, of politics,
which they had inherited from the eighteenth century that made it
utopian. *In this respect*, the revolutionary communism of that time
lagged far behind socialism, which, although it dreamed of class
reconciliation and committed an enormous theoretical error by its
negation of politics, nevertheless enriched theory through studies in
the *social field.* The consequence was that some utopian socialists,
the most numerous, concentrated their attention on '*social*' *theory*,
while others, representing an exception to the general rule,
concentrated on *political action*. Both sinned by their one-sidedness.
The elimination of such one-sidedness could only be a matter of the
future. It presupposed an entire revolution in theory. Only when
socialism renounced the *idealist* conception of history and assimilated
the *materialist* conception, did it acquire the theoretical possibility
of doing away with utopia. But it is outside the scope of this article
to relate the story of how the transition of socialism from utopia to
science took place in reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
marked as such.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} The word '*socialism*' first appeared in English and
French literature in the 1830s. The author of the article 'Socialism' in
the *Encyclopaedia Britannia* (Volume 22, p 205) states that the word
owes its origin to The Association of All Classes of All Nations formed
in England in 1835. On the other hand, Pierre Leroux contends that it
was used for the first time in an article written by him in 1834, 'De
l\'individualisme et du socialisme' (see *Oeuvres de Pierre Leroux*,
Volume 1 (1850), p 370, footnote). It should be remarked, however, that
in this article Leroux uses the word only in the sense of 'exaggerating
the idea of association'. Some time later it came to mean any striving
to reconstruct the social system with the aim of raising the well-being
of the lower classes and guaranteeing social peace. In view of the
extremely vague meaning of the term, the word *communism* was often
contrasted to it, as defining the much more definite aim of establishing
social equality by transforming the means of production, and sometimes
also the articles of consumption, into social property. Nowadays, the
word 'socialism' has almost replaced the word 'communism' but as
recompense it has lost its initial vagueness. Its present meaning
approximates to the original meaning of the word 'communism'.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 'The Holy Family',
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 130 --- Editor.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 'The Holy Family',
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 131 --- Editor.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Fourier was born at Besançon on 7 April 1772, and
died in Paris on 10 October 1837.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} 'Leipzig' is printed on the cover.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} *Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées
sociales*, p 3.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} By the *catastrophe of 1793* Fourier meant the
Jacobin dictatorship during the French Revolution --- Editor.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} *Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées
sociales*, p 7.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n9} See *Oeuvres complètes de Charles Fourier*, Volume 2
(Paris, 1841), p 319.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Ibid, Volume 4, p 254. Fourier would have us
believe that by travelling mounted on an anti-lion one could breakfast
in Paris, lunch in Lyons, and dine in Marseilles; one need only change
these good animals when they tire.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} Ibid, p 255.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} The book was issued in 1808, that is to say, during
the reign of Napoleon I, who, as is known, did not show indulgence to
'agitators'.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} *La fausse industrie, morcelée, répugnante,
mensongère et l*\'*antidote, l*\'*industrie naturelle, combinée*, p 337.
The book was published in 1835 and the note was obviously written under
the influence of Fieschi's attempt on the life of Louis Philippe (on 28
July of that year).

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} This page is not numbered, but the one following it
is marked M-616.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} We have noticed already that this is Fourier's way
of referring to the social structure of civilised societies.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} *Théorie des quatre mouvements*, p 8.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} Born in Paris on 17 October 1760; died there on 19
May 1825.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} See *Oeuvres choisies de C-H de Saint Simon*,
Volume 1 (Bruxelles, 1859), pp 20-21.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} Ibid, p 31.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} Ibid, p 27.

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} Where Fourier thunders against the 'philosophers',
Saint-Simon fulminates against the 'legists'. In his opinion, their
'metaphysical doctrines' explain the unsuccessful outcome of the French
Revolution. See *Du système industriel, par Henri Saint-Simon*, with the
epigraph: 'Dieu a dit: aimez-vous et secourez vous les uns les autres'
(Paris, 1821), preface, pp i-viii. \[God said: 'Love and help one
another.' --- Editor.\] Saint-Simon's concept of 'legist', or
*representative of 'metaphysical doctrine*' is analogous to Fourier's
concept (which we know from his book) of 'philosopher', or
representative of 'uncertain sciences'. To us, this concept is now
conveyed by the words *revolutionary intelligentsia*.

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} The italics are Saint-Simon's. See his *Adresse aux
philanthropes* in the aforesaid book, pp 297-99 and 302. I make the
point for those interested in the evolution of Saint-Simon's ideas that
the expressions '*le nouveau christianisme*', and '*le christianisme
définitif*' are to be met with already in this book, and that he
sometimes speaks in it in the style of the Scriptures, summonsing to
himself *les hérétiques en morale et en politique*, and so on (p 310).
Later we shall see how we must understand Saint-Simon's attempt to rely
on religion.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} This is what Saint-Simon called the equality for
which the communists were striving. He affirmed that such equality was
possible only in Eastern despotisms.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} *Du système industriel*, pp 205-07.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} Born in 1808; died in 1893.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} My italics.

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} *Débâcle de la politique en France*, pp 2, 52.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} Ibid, p 16, Considérant's italics.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} Ibid, p 63, Considérant's italics.

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} Ibid, p 147.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} I will recall that Considérant's brochure was
published in 1836, that is, at the most stormy period of Louis
Philippe's reign.

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} He says they are always ready to attach a policeman
to every noble sentiment (ibid, p 24). That is truly and strikingly apt.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} Ibid, p 57, Considérant's italics.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} Ibid, p 91. Cf his *Principes du socialisme,
manifeste de la démocratie au XIX siècle*, second edition (Paris, 1847).
In this work, written at a time when Considérant was already less
disposed to deny politics, the *revolutionary party* is otherwise called
*reactionary democracy*, since only peaceful democracy is progressive (p
45). Of all the revolutionaries, Considérant's most severe condemnation
is reserved for the '*political* communists', who 'resolutely adopt a
great material Revolution' (p 46). I shall have something to say about
these communists later.

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} Another of Fourier's pupils, the former
Sairit-Simonist A Paget says that his associates 'abandoned the field of
politics in order to exercise their intellect in the more fertile ground
of social questions' (*Introduction à l*\'*étude de la science sociale*,
Paris, 1838). Here *politics* is sharply contrasted with activity in the
domain of *social* questions. This contrasting of politics with social
questions is a common trait of the overwhelming majority of utopian
socialists. We shall see later what explains the exceptions to this
general rule. But it is precisely the rule and not the exception which
is characteristic of utopian socialism. This opposing of politics to
social activity, borrowed from the West, predominated also in Russian
literature until the victory of Marxism.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} See the article by Enfantin, 'Opuscules
financiers', in Volume 2 of *Producteur*, p 479.

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} In December 1828 the Saint-Simonists Enfantin,
Bazard and others organised a series of public lectures in Paris which
are known as the 'Lectures at the Street-Taranne'. A narrow circle of
the leaders of the Saint-Simonist school discussed the subject-matter of
each lecture. The first edition of the *Exposition of Saint-Simon*'s
*Theory* included a series of lectures delivered during the period from
17 December 1828 to 12 August 1829 and was issued in Paris in 1830 ---
Editor.

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} At the end of 1829 the Saint-Simonist school was
turned into a religious community, and Bazard and Enfantin were
proclaimed its 'fathers'. At the end of 1830, the most zealous adherents
to Saint-Simon's ideas constituted a 'family' residing in a separate
building. Subsequently Enfantin and Bayard parted and the Saint-Simonist
community dissolved --- Editor.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} See *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon et d*\'*Enfantin*,
Volume 4 (Paris, 1865), pp 58-59.

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} Flachat's italics.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} Ibid, pp 70-72.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} Ibid, p 58.

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} Born in Paris in 1797; died there in 1871.

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} See his Open Letter published in *Le Globe*. \[*Le
Globe ---* the Saint-Simonist organ founded in Paris in 1824. In 1832
its publication was discontinued --- Editor.\]

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} Born 29 October 1811; died 6 December 1882.

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} *Organisation du travail*, fourth edition (Paris,
1845), Introduction, pp v, 31-32. The first edition of this work was
published in 1840.

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} Born 15 January 1809; died 19 January 1865.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} Not having Proudhon's correspondence at hand, I am
quoting from *Abrégé des oeuvres de Proudhon* where the letter is
printed, though not in full, unfortunately, on pages 414-15.

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} During the first days of the French Republic in
1848 the question of the state flag was raised. The workers were for the
red flag, the bourgeoisie for the Tricolour which had been the flag of
the French Revolution and of Napoleon's empire. Workers' representatives
were forced to accept the Tricolour as the state flag of the French
Republic --- Editor.

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} See A Desjardins, *PJ Proudhon*, Volume 1 (Paris,
1896), p 90, note.

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} Cited from ibid, p 99.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} *La Voix du Peuple* (*The Voice of the People*) ---
a daily newspaper published by Proudhon in Paris from 1 October 1849 to
14 May 1850 --- Editor.

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} Quoted by Karl Diehl in *PJ Proudhon, seine Lehre
und sein Leben*, Part 3 (Jena, 1896), p 100.

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} *Voyage en Icarie* (Paris, 1845), p 565. Italics in
the original. Cabet was born on 2 January 1788, and died on 8 November
1856. The first edition of his book, *Voyage en Icarie*, was published
in March 1842. \[The first edition of Cabet's book published in Paris in
1840 was entitled *Voyage et aventures de lord William Carisdall en
Icarie*. In 1842 a second edition appeared under the title *Voyage en
Icarie. Roman philosophique et sociale* --- Editor.\]

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} 'Nous sommes *religieux*, c\'est-à-dire *pacifiques
et aimants* envers *tous les homines, toutes les classes, tous les
partis\...* Nous pensons que la violence est toujours funeste, toujours
*impie*.' \[\'We are *religious*, that is to say, *peaceful and love all
people, all classes, all parties\...* We think that violence is always
pernicious, always *ungodly*.\'\] So said Charles Lemonnier in a call to
the Saint-Simonists dated 7 July 1832. Further he declared that the
Saint-Simonists loved all parties but associated with none of them, and
laid down his *own* programme which was capable, as he thought, of
uniting people of all political opinions: 1) the immediate construction
of a railway from Paris to Marseilles; 2) the improvement of the
water-supply and sewage system of Paris; 3) the building of a road from
the Louvre to the Bastille. And so on.

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon et d'Enfantin*, Volume 8
(Paris, 1866), p 168. The letter is on pages 165-66 of this volume. The
Duchess of Berry was arrested on 6 November, and the letter was written
on 9 November 1832. It is clear from this how Enfantin hastened to draw
women 'into politics'. After what has been said it is scarcely necessary
to add that the word 'politics' had here a very peculiar meaning.

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} The Holy Alliance --- a reactionary alliance of
European monarchies founded in 1815 by tsarist Russia, Austria and
Prussia to suppress revolutionary movements in various countries and
preserve the monarchical regimes there --- Editor.

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon et d*\'*Enfantin*, Volume
10, pp 118-19.

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} However, the letter was favourably received by even
such a prominent Saint-Simonist as Olinde Rodrigues (see S Charlety,
*Histoire du Saint-Simonisme*, p 315, note).

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} On this subject see *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon et
d*\'*Enfantin*, Volume 10, pp 200, 205.

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} He derived his theory of *anarchy* from
Saint-Simon's idea that the role of government in social life diminishes
in the course of historical development, and in time will be reduced to
nothing.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} 'Se laver les mains dans la crotte.' (Desjardins,
*Proudhon*, Volume 1, p 190)

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} See the fifth edition of the book mentioned, p 93.
\[The reference is to the counter-revolutionary coup of 2 December 1851
by Louis Bonaparte, who was proclaimed Emperor of France under the name
of Napoleon III --- Editor.\]

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} See *Opinions littéraires, philosophiques et
industrielles* (Paris, 1825) pp 144-45. See also 'Catéchisme des
industriels' in *Oeuvres de Saint-Simon\...* (Paris, 1832), p 18.

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} See, for example, Considérant's *Principes du
socialisme*, pp 20-21.

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} *Oeuvres*, p 59.

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} This was published in 1819 in the *Organisateur*
and led to Saint-Simon being prosecuted. Incidentally, this literary
trial ended in a triumph for the accused, the jury finding him not
guilty.

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} *Le Producteur*, Volume 1, p 245.

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} My italics.

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} *Le Producteur*, Volume 1, p 245.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} Ibid, p 558.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} One very prominent Saint-Simonist, who later became
a famous financier, Isaac Pereire, in one of his lectures on political
economy read in 1831, promising to examine the question of wealth
distribution in contemporary society, said frankly: 'Nous examinerons la
moralité de cet état de choses.' \[\'We shall examine the morality of
this order of things.\'\] (*Religion saint-simonienne. Leçons sur
l\'industrie et les finances* (Paris, 1832), p 3) Do not imagine that
the word 'moralité' is used here in a figurative sense. Pereire says in
the preface to the volume of his lectures: 'In the first two lectures,
we set out to refute \[repousser\] the concept of *value* as it is
taught by present-day economists; we fought it because it is an
expression *of the struggle, the antagonism* prevailing in present-day
society.' That is nothing else but a lecture on morality addressed to
the bourgeois economists, instead of an analysis of the bourgeois
relations of production.

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} Ibid, p 14.

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} 'Publication de manuscripts', Volume 2, p 23,
quoted from Bourgin's *Fourier* (Paris, 1905), p 207.

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} *Oeuvres complètes de Ch Fourier*, Volume 3 (Paris,
1841), pp 163-70.

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} *Oeuvres complètes de Ch Fourier*, Volume 4, p 193.

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} Ibid, pp 191-92.

[[78.]{.info}]{#n78} *Publication de manuscripts*, Volume 3, p 4 quoted
from Bourgin's *Proudhon*, p 231.

[[79.]{.info}]{#n79} *Le socialisme devant le vieux monde, ou le vivant
devant les morts* (Paris, 1849), p 13. Compare *Principes du
socialisme*, p 6.

[[80.]{.info}]{#n80} *Principes du socialisme*, pp 9-11, 22-23.

[[81.]{.info}]{#n81} Enfantin himself took part in the French railway
business and apparently helped to improve it. At the end of 1846, he
founded the Société d\'études pour le canal de Suez, but when the
enterprise was well on the way to success, it was taken out of his hands
by Ferdinand de Lesseps. In this connection, see Charlety's *Histoire du
saint-simonisme*, pp 372, 398, 399, et seq.

[[82.]{.info}]{#n82} See the extremely interesting brochure by
Considérant, *Déraison et dangers de l*\'*engouement pour les chemins en
fer* (Paris, 1838). In the phalansteries, the product had to be divided
out as follows: five-twelfths to labour; four-twelfths to capital, and
three-twelfths to talent. So that in spite of all, the Fourierists were
at one with the Saint-Simonists in this sense, that in their plan for
social construction they also set aside a place for the exploitation of
labour by capital, as the communists of all shades pointed out at the
time.

[[83.]{.info}]{#n83} Charlety, op cit, p 368.

[[84.]{.info}]{#n84} Criticising the Narodnik views on the development
of capitalism in Russia, the 'legal Marxist' Struve wrote the following
in his book *Critical Remarks on Russia*'s *Economic Development* (St
Petersburg, 1894): 'Let us recognise our lack of culture and go for
training to capitalism.' --- Editor.

[[85.]{.info}]{#n85} See the second edition of this work, pp 10, 11, 50,
56, and 64.

[[86.]{.info}]{#n86} *Histoire de dix ans, 1830-1840*, fourth edition,
Volume 1, p 8, footnote.

[[87.]{.info}]{#n87} Reynaud's remarkable article is reproduced in part
in Chapter 34, 'Le prolétaire et le bourgeois', *De la plutocratie ou du
gouvernement des riches* by Pierre Leroux (Boussac, 1848), and
apparently was published in full in Volume 1 of the unfinished edition
of Pierre Leroux's *Works* (Paris, 1850), pp 346-64.

[[88.]{.info}]{#n88} Leroux is quite aware that his views on
industrialism differ radically from Saint-Simon's. He even polemicises
with his former teacher.

[[89.]{.info}]{#n89} See the second edition of this book (the first
edition was published in 1843), pp 23-24.

[[90.]{.info}]{#n90} Ibid, pp 79, 167.

[[91.]{.info}]{#n91} Ibid, p 25.

[[92.]{.info}]{#n92} I think that Mr Peshekhonov, for instance, would
have fully accepted them.

[[93.]{.info}]{#n93} See the collection of articles *Malthus et les
économistes*, Volume 1, 'Les juifs, rois de l\'époque'.

[[94.]{.info}]{#n94} *Les juifs, rois de l\'époque. Histoire de la
féodalité financière*, Volume 1, second edition (Paris, 1847), pp
286-90.

[[95.]{.info}]{#n95} Saint-Simon's rejection of the idea of class
struggle was, strictly speaking, a rejection of the *revolutionary* mode
of action. He did not reject, but advocated *peaceful* struggle by the
third estate against those who were defending the remnants of the old
order. It was only the thought of a struggle between the workers and the
employers which would have met a sharp and positive condemnation from
him. In any case, Saint-Simon was less *indifferent to politics* than
were his pupils.

[[96.]{.info}]{#n96} This was a mistake characteristic of not only the
utopian socialists. In his *Traité d'économie politique (discours
préliminaire*) JB Say asserts that 'in essence, wealth does not depend
on political organisation. A well-administered state can flourish under
any form of government. Examples are known of nations prospering under
absolute monarchs, and of other nations ruined under people's
governments', etc. We all know that JB Say was in science a typical
representative of the French bourgeoisie.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n97} On 13 June 1849 the petty-bourgeois Mountain party
organised a peaceful protest demonstration against the dispatch of the
French troops to suppress the revolution in Italy. The demonstration was
dispersed by the troops and many leaders of the Mountain were arrested
and banished, or were compelled to leave France --- Editor.

[[98.]{.info}]{#n98} At that time their attitude to the intelligentsia
was already more benevolent than in the period of Saint-Simon and
Fourier. However, generally speaking, they continued to condemn the
revolutionary mode of action.

[[99.]{.info}]{#n99} I recall the plan proposed by Toussenel relating to
an alliance of the people and the monarchy against the Jews.

[[100.]{.info}]{#n100} See my article objecting to Bernstein's report on
the possibility of scientific socialism. \[See 'Preface to the Third
Edition of Engels' *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific*', Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), pp
36-40 --- Editor. Available at \<
[http://www.marxists.org/archive/plekhanov/1902/preface-utopian.htm]{.underline}
\> --- MIA.\]

[[101.]{.info}]{#n101} *Le socialisme devant le vieux monde*, p 29.

[[102.]{.info}]{#n102} For instance, the Fourierist journal, *La
Phalange*, is known to have been called '*the organ of social science*'.
\[*La Phalange ---* (full title: *La Phalange. Revue de la science
sociale. Politique, Industrie, sciences, arts et littérature*) --- the
organ of the Fourierists published between 1832 and 1849 --- Editor.\]

[[103.]{.info}]{#n103} He strongly approved of a book issued in 1798 by
Dupuis, *Abrégé de l'origine de tous les cultes* which contains just
such a view on religion.

[[104.]{.info}]{#n104} The first edition appeared in 1846 and is said to
have had a great success among the workers.

[[105.]{.info}]{#n105} Born on 19 June 1782; died on 28 February 1854.
\[Plekhanov is mistaken; the name of the author he is referring to was
Felicité-Robert Lamennais --- Editor.\]

[[106.]{.info}]{#n106} Born in 1796; died in 1865.

[[107.]{.info}]{#n107} In opposition to them, the conscious bourgeois
ideologists --- Guizot, Thierry, Mignet and many others --- who did not
of course in the least approve of the statesmen of 1793, were decided
and conscious advocates of the class struggle, so long as it remained a
struggle of the bourgeoisie against the aristocracy. They started to
preach social peace only after 1848, when the proletariat took action. I
have explained this in detail in another place (see my preface to the
second edition of my translation of the *Manifesto of the Communist
Party*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2
(Moscow, 1976), pp 427-73 --- Editor.\]

[[108.]{.info}]{#n108} Born in 1805; died in 1880.

[[109.]{.info}]{#n109} '*Ni dieu, ni maître!*' ('Neither God nor
Master') --- the revolutionary slogan that the French revolutionary
Blanqui used as the heading for his newspaper --- Editor.

[[110.]{.info}]{#n110} FN Babeuf was born in 1764. He was sentenced to
death and died on the scaffold on 24 February 1797. On the eve of the
execution he made an unsuccessful attempt to commit suicide.

[[111.]{.info}]{#n111} *Conspiracy of Equals ---* a utopian communist
movement in France in 1795-96, guided by the conspiratorial society of
'equals' with Babeuf at its head. The aim of the society was to prepare
and carry out the revolution, to attain complete equality of men through
a communist reorganisation of society. The society of 'equals' attached
to communism roughly egalitarian features. The conspiracy was disclosed,
Babeuf and Darthé were sentenced to death, the rest of the members
exiled --- Editor.

[[112.]{.info}]{#n112} Bounarroti's book was entitled *Conspiration pour
l'égalité dite de Babeuf, suivie du Procès auquel elle donna lieu et des
pièces justificatives\...* and was published in 1828 --- Editor.

[[113.]{.info}]{#n113} He represented that trend of 'political
communism' which seemed to Considérant to be the most dangerous (see
above).

[[114.]{.info}]{#n114} I insist that the revolutionary storm at the end
of the eighteenth century engendered a negative attitude precisely to
the class struggle. This attitude did not exclude now and then an
inclination to a revolutionary mode of action. One of the two future
supreme fathers of Saint-Simonism, Bazard, belonged at one time to the
Carbonari. Buchez and several more of the future socialists were also in
the Carbonari. But the aspirations of the Carbonari were purely
'political', that is to say, they did not concern themselves with
property relations and so did not threaten to sound the call for 'the
war of the poor against the rich'. Socialism did concern itself with
property relations and consequently reminded people of that war. This is
why the former conspirators, Bazard, Buchez and others, hastened to
proclaim themselves *supporters of social peace* as soon as they became
socialists. Again: he will not understand the history of French utopian
socialism who forgets the effect of the 'catastrophe of 1793' on the
minds of the French intellectuals.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../../index.htm)
