---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1913

### Utopian Socialism in the Nineteenth Century

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: From Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 534-76.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article was written by Plekhanov for Mir
Publishers in August and September 1913 and was published in Volume 2 of
*The History of Western Literature in the Nineteenth Century*, in the
section "The Epoch of Romanticism" (Moscow, 1913).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \* \* \*

West European literature in the first half of the nineteenth century
was, as it is always and everywhere, an expression of social life. Since
an important part in the social life of that period began to be played
by phenomena the aggregate of which gave rise in social theory to the
so-called social question, it seems relevant to preface a review of that
literature with a brief outline of the teachings of the utopian
socialists. By stepping beyond the limits of the history of literature,
in the narrow meaning of the term, such a characterisation will help us
to understand the literary trends proper. But for lack of space I shall
have to confine myself to indicating the most important shades of
nineteenth-century utopian socialism and elucidating the main influences
that determined their development.

As Engels pointed out in his polemic with Dühring, nineteenth-century
socialism seems at first glance to be but a further development of the
conclusions arrived at by the eighteenth-century philosophy of
Enlightenment. As an example, I will mention that the socialist
theoreticians of that period very readily appeal to *natural law*
^[\[1\]](#n1)^ which held such an important place in the arguments of
the French Enlighteners. Besides, there is not the slightest doubt that
the socialists took over in its entirety the teaching on man adhered to
by these Enlighteners in general and the materialists --- La Mettrie,
Holbach, Diderot and Helvétius in France, and Hartley and Priestley in
England --- in particular. Thus, already William Godwin (1756-1836)
proceeded from the proposition worked out by the materialists that the
virtues and vices of every man are determined by circumstances which,
taken together, constitute the history of his life. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^
Godwin concluded from this that if this set of circumstances were given
the appropriate character, vice would be completely eradicated from the
world. After this he had only to decide precisely which measures were
capable of giving this set of circumstances the desired character. He
examined this question in his main work, *Inquiry Concerning Political
Justice and Its Influence on General Virtue and Happiness*, published in
1793. The results of his study were very similar to what is known now as
anarchist communism. In this respect, many of the nineteenth-century
socialists strongly differ from him. But they are at one with him in
that they take as their starting point the materialists' teaching on the
formation of the human character which they had assimilated.

This was the most important of the theoretical influences under which
the socialist doctrine of the nineteenth century took shape. Among the
*practical* influences, the most decisive was the influence of the
industrial revolution in Britain at the end of the eighteenth century as
well as of the political revolution which is called the Great French
Revolution --- especially the *terrorist* period of that revolution. It
goes without saying that the influence of the industrial revolution was
most strongly felt in Britain and the influence of the Great Revolution
in France.

### [A: British Utopian Socialism]{#a}

### I

I am allocating first place to Britain just because that country earlier
than all others went through the industrial revolution which for a long
time determined the internal history of civilised societies to come.
This revolution was characterised by the rapid development of machine
production, which affected production relations in the sense that
independent producers were replaced by hired workers, employed in more
or less large-scale enterprises under the command and for the benefit of
capitalists. This change in the production relations brought much severe
and prolonged suffering to the working population of Britain. Its
harmful results were aggravated by the so-called *enclosures*, which
accompanied the change-over from small to large-scale farming. The
reader will understand that the 'enclosures', that is, the seizure by
the big landowners of the lands belonging previously to village
communities and the 'consolidation' of small farms into large ones, were
bound to lead to the migration of a considerable part of the rural
population to industrial centres. It is easy to realise also that the
villagers expulsed from their old homes increased the supply of 'hands'
on the labour market, thereby lowering wages. Never before had pauperism
reached such formidable proportions in Britain as it did in the period
immediately following the 'industrial revolution'. In 1784, the poor tax
reached some five shillings per head of the population, and by 1818 it
had risen to thirteen shillings and three pence. Exhausted by want, the
working people of Britain were in a state of constant ferment:
agricultural labourers set fire to farms, industrial workers smashed
factory machines. These were the first, as yet instinctive, steps on the
way of protest taken by the oppressed against their oppressors. At the
beginning of this period only a very small section of the working class
had reached the degree of intellectual development which enabled it to
begin the conscious struggle for a better future. This section was
attracted by radical political theories and sympathised with the French
revolutionaries. Already in 1792, the London Corresponding Society
^[\[3\]](#n3)^ was formed, in which there were many workers, artisans
and small traders. Following the fashion of the French revolutionaries,
the members of this society addressed each other as *citizen*, and
displayed very revolutionary sentiments, especially after the execution
of Louis XVI. However thin the democratic stratum capable of becoming
inspired by the advanced ideas of the time, its threatening mood aroused
great alarm in the ruling circles, which were following with trepidation
what was then taking place in France. The British government adopted
against its domestic 'Jacobins' a series of repressive measures which
boiled down to restrictions on free speech, on the organising of trade
unions, and on assembly. At the same time the ideologists of the upper
classes felt themselves obliged to reinforce the efforts of the police
in maintaining order and to direct the '*spiritual weapon*' against the
revolutionaries. One of the literary monuments of this intellectual
reaction was the much-vaunted investigation by Malthus into the law of
population: ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ it was provoked by Godwin's above-mentioned
work on 'political justice'. Godwin attributed all human miseries to the
working of governments and social institutions, while Malthus tried to
show that they were caused not by governments or institutions, but by an
inexorable law of nature by which the population always grows faster
than the means of subsistence.

Although the British industrial revolution had such severe repercussions
on the condition of the working class, it also meant an enormous
increase in the country's productive forces. This was strikingly evident
to all investigators. It gave many of them the occasion to declare that
the sufferings of the working class were only temporary, and that in
general everything was going splendidly. This optimistic view however
was not shared by everyone. There were people who could not observe the
sufferings of others with such Olympian calm. The most courageous and
thoughtful of these created the British socialist literature of the
first half of the last century. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

In 1805, Dr Charles Hall (1745-1825) published the results of his
investigations ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ into the question of how 'civilisation'
--- he had in view, strictly speaking, the growth of the forces of
production in the civilised countries --- affected the condition of the
working people. Hall proved that the masses grew poorer because of
'civilisation': 'Hence, the increase of the wealth or power of some is
the cause of the increase of poverty and subjection of the others.'
^[\[7\]](#n7)^

This proposition is very important for the history of theory, since it
demonstrates how clearly British socialism in the person of Charles Hall
already perceived the opposition of interests between the 'rich' and the
'poor' classes. And it should be noted that by the 'poor' class Hall
meant the class of people who live by the sale of their 'labour', that
is to say, the *proletarians*, while by the 'rich' he meant the
capitalists and the landowners, whose prosperity is founded on the
economic exploitation of the 'poor'. As the 'rich' live by the economic
exploitation of the 'poor', the interests of these two classes are
diametrically opposed. In Hall's book there is a section (XV) which is
headed 'On the Different Interests of the Rich and Poor'. The gist of
our author's argument is as follows.

Every rich man must be considered as the *buyer*, every poor man as the
*seller*, of labour. It is in the interest of the rich man to get as
much as he can out of the labour he has bought of the poor man and to
pay as little as possible for it. In other words, he wants to get as
great a part as possible of the product created by the worker's labour;
the worker, on the other hand, endeavours to get as large a part as
possible of that product. Hence their mutual struggle. But it is an
unequal struggle. Deprived of the means of subsistence, the workers are
usually compelled to surrender, just as a garrison short of provisions
surrenders to the enemy. Moreover, strikes are often crushed by military
force, whereas only in a few states does the law forbid the masters to
combine for the purpose of lowering wages.

Hall compares the position of the agricultural labourer with that of the
farmer's ox or horse. If there is any difference, it is not in the
labourer's favour, for the master sustains no loss by the death of his
worker, but he does by the death of his ox or horse. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ The
masters show great resolution in defending their economic interests in
the struggle with the workers. As against this, the workers are not
equally resolute in the struggle against the masters; poverty deprives
them of the economic and moral powers of resistance. ^[\[9\]](#n9)^
Furthermore, the law takes the side of the masters and severely punishes
all violations of the rights of property. ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ In view of
this, the question arises: how large is that part of the annual national
income which is received by the working class taken as a whole? Hall
calculates that this class gets only one-eighth of the value of the
produce of its labour, the remaining seven-eighths going to 'the
masters'. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^

This conclusion cannot, of course, be accepted as correct. Hall
underestimated the share of the national income received by the workers.
But the reader will understand that there is no need now to expose our
author's mistake. Rather we should note that in spite of this
arithmetical error, he very well grasped the economic essence of the
exploitation of wage labour by capital.

Crime follows in the wake of poverty. Hall considered 'all, or almost
all what is called original corruption and evil disposition, to be the
effects of the system of civilisation; and particularly that prominent
feature of it, the great inequality of property'. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^
Civilisation corrupts the poor by material privations, but their
'masters' acquire vices common to rich people, and above all, the very
worst of all vices --- the propensity to oppress their fellow-creatures.
That is the reason why social morality would gain very much from the
abolition of inequality of property. But can it be abolished? Hall
thinks it can. He cites three instances from history where equality of
property was established; one among the Jews, another at Sparta, and a
third under the government of the Jesuits in Paraguay. 'In all these
cases, as far as we know, it was in a great degree successful.'
^[\[13\]](#n13)^

Touching on the question of measures that might be taken to eliminate
inequality of property, Hall insistently recommends great caution; and
not only caution. It is essential, he says, that the reform be in the
hands of persons who are disinterested and dispassionate. Such people
cannot be found among the oppressed, who would probably press on too
violently. We should rather appeal to the oppressors; for where the
matter concerns not us personally but others, we are seldom so hasty and
violent in implementing the demands of justice, no matter how highly we
value them. 'It would be better, therefore', says Hall, 'that the
redress of the grievances of the poor should originate from the rich
themselves.' ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ In other words, the interests of social
peace demand that inequality of property be eliminated by those who draw
all the advantages from it. This is typical not only of Hall; in
essence, the vast majority of the socialists of this period --- not only
in Britain, but on the continent of Europe --- held the same view on the
question. In this respect, the greatest of the British utopian
socialists, Robert Owen, ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ was close to Hall.

### II

At the beginning of the year 1800, Owen was manager of a large cotton
mill in New Lanark, Scotland. The 'poor' employed in the mill worked
much and earned little, were addicted to drunkenness, were often caught
stealing, and generally had a very low level of intellectual and moral
development. When he became manager of the mill, Owen hastened to
improve the material conditions of his workers. He cut the working day
to ten and a half hours, ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ and when the mill was idle for
some months owing to a shortage of raw materials, he did not throw the
'poor' on to the streets as usually happened, and still happens, during
'breakdowns' and crises; instead, he continued to pay them full wages.
Along with this he showed great concern for the upbringing and education
of the children. He was the first to introduce kindergartens into
Britain. The results of these efforts proved in every way excellent. The
moral level of the workers improved noticeably: the sense of their human
dignity was aroused in them. At the same time the profits of the
enterprise increased considerably. All this, taken together, turned New
Lanark into something extremely attractive to all those who in their
goodness of heart did not mind sparing the sheep so long as the wolves
did not go hungry. Owen acquired widespread fame as a philanthropist.
Even most highly-placed persons readily visited New Lanark and were
touched by the sight of the well-being of the 'poor' there. However,
Owen himself was by no means happy with what he had achieved in New
Lanark. He said justly that even though his workers enjoyed comparative
well-being, they were still his *slaves*. So the philanthropist, who had
moved even the most hardened reactionaries by his benevolent attitude to
the workers, gradually became transformed into a social reformer,
scaring the wits out of all the 'respectable' people of the United
Kingdom by his 'extremism'.

Like Hall, Owen was astounded by the paradoxical situation that the
growth of the productive forces in Britain led to the impoverishment of
the very people who were using them. He said: 'The world is now
saturated with wealth --- with inexhaustible means of still increasing
it --- and yet misery abounds! Such at this moment is the actual state
of human society.' *The means were there* to give wealth, enlightenment
and contentment to the people, yet, he went on, the great mass of the
world lived in the depths of poverty, in want of a sufficiency of food.
Things could not remain like that; a change for the better was needed.
And the change will be most easy. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ 'The world *knows*
and *feels* the existing evil: it will look at the new order of things
proposed --- approve --- will the change --- and it is
done.\'^[\[18\]](#n18)^

But to ensure that the world approve the proposed reform it was
necessary first to make clear to it what man is by nature, what he had
been made by the circumstances surrounding him, and what he could become
under new circumstances corresponding to the demands of reason.
According to Owen, man's mind had to be born again before he could be
wise and happy. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^ In order to promote the rebirth of the
human mind, Owen wrote his famous *Essays* on the formation of the human
character. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

Like Godwin, Owen was firmly convinced that man's character is
determined by the circumstances of his social surroundings, regardless
of his will. Man's views and habits are obtained from his environment,
and these determine his conduct. Therefore the population of any
country, or for that matter of the world at large, can have imparted to
it, by the appropriate measures, any kind of character, from the very
worst to the very best. The means necessary for this are at the command
of the government. The government can act in such a way that people can
live without knowing poverty, crime or punishment, for these are nothing
but the consequences of wrong education and government. Since the aim of
government is to make both the governed and those who govern happy, the
people who hold political power must immediately set about reforming the
social system. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^

The first step towards this reform should be to bring to the general
knowledge that no individual of the present generation will be deprived
of his property. Then must follow proclamation of freedom of conscience;
the abolition of institutions having a deleterious effect on people's
morals, a review of the Poor Law, and finally and most important, the
adoption of measures for the education and enlightenment of the people.

'Every state, to be well-governed, ought to direct its chief attention
to the formation of character; the best governed state will be that
which shall possess the best national system of education.'
^[\[22\]](#n22)^ The system of education, Owen says, must be uniform for
the whole state.

Almost the whole of Owen's subsequent literary and agitational activity
boiled down to further developing the views presented above and
passionately defending them before public opinion. Thus, adhering to the
principle that man's character is determined by the influence of the
conditions surrounding him, Owen raised the question of how favourable
were the conditions of the British workers of his day from childhood.
Knowing the workers' conditions of life well, even if only from his
observations at New Lanark, Owen could answer this question only by
saying that these conditions were most unfavourable. According to him,
the diffusion of manufactories throughout the country spoiled the
character of the inhabitants and this spoiled character made them
wretched. This moral evil was most lamentable, and could only be checked
by legislative interference and direction. ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ And this
could not be put off indefinitely. If the workers' position was already
worse than it had been formerly, with the passage of time it would
worsen still more. The export of manufactured goods had probably reached
its utmost height; it would now diminish by the competition of other
states, and this in turn would have a serious and alarming effect on the
condition of the working class. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^

Owen demanded the adoption of a Factory Act by Parliament to reduce the
working day to ten and a half hours at establishments using machines.
The Act had to provide for the prohibition of child labour under ten
years of age, and also of children over that age who were unable to read
or write. This was a quite specific demand for *factory legislation*.
Owen put this demand forward 'in the name of the millions of the
neglected poor'. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ It was granted, finally, in a much
curtailed form, by a Parliamentary Act in 1819. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^
Unfortunately even this Act, which had cheesepared Owen's demand,
remained a dead letter, as Parliament took no steps whatever to put it
into effect. Subsequently the Chief Inspector of Factories reported that
'prior to the Act of 1833, young persons and children were worked all
night, all day, or both *ad libitum*'. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^

Not confining himself to the demand for factory legislation, Owen tried
to secure a review of the Poor Law. He wished to have established for
the unemployed special villages where they could engage in agricultural
and industrial work. Owen called these villages, on which he placed
great hopes, 'villages of unity and mutual cooperation'.
^[\[28\]](#n28)^ He thought they would be the medium for the adoption of
serious measures for the proper education of the working people and
their inculcation with a rational view of life. Believing that these
'villages' could easily become prosperous, he saw them as a first step
on the road to a social system in which there would be neither 'poor'
nor 'rich', neither 'slaves' nor 'masters'. It was no accident that he
proposed to '*nationalise the poor*'. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ This was
essential to him because, in his initial plan, he had proposed that the
system of education, as I mentioned earlier when setting forth the
content of his *Essays*, should be uniform throughout the state.

As far back as 1817, Owen drew up a detailed estimate of the expenditure
likely to be incurred in building 'villages of unity and mutual
cooperation'. It is hardly worth saying now that the government had no
intention of granting the money needed for this venture. Later, in 1834,
they did indeed change the Poor Law, but not at all in the way the
reformer had suggested. Instead of 'villages of unity and mutual
cooperation', the destitute poor were confined to workhouses that were
no different from convict prisons.

Meeting with failure in his attempts to move the 'governors' to carry
out social reform, Owen, though he had not lost faith in their goodwill,
nevertheless felt compelled to attempt to undertake the task of bringing
his cherished ideas to fruition with his own resources, and with the
assistance of like-minded people. He began to establish communist
colonies in the United Kingdom and in North America. These attempts to
put the communist ideal into effect within the narrow limits of a single
settlement proved a failure and almost ruined Owen. There were many
reasons for this failure. One of the most important was revealed by Owen
himself when he said that the success of such enterprises presupposed
that their participants possessed certain moral propensities, which were
far from general among them at a time when the social environment so
strongly distorted the human character. It emerged, therefore, that the
communist communities were essential in order to give people a proper
education and, on the other hand, this education was a necessary
preliminary condition for the success of the communist communities. This
is the contradiction on which so many good intentions were wrecked
during the past century; and it can only be resolved by the historical
process of the development of society as *a whole* --- the process of
*gradually* adapting man's character to the *gradually* forming new
conditions of his existence. But utopian socialism took very little
account of the progress of historical development. Owen was fond of
saying that the new social order might come suddenly 'like a thief in
the night'.

### III

At a public meeting in 1817, Owen addressed these remarks to his
audience:

My friends, I tell you that hitherto you have been prevented from even
knowing what happiness really is, solely in consequence of the errors
--- gross errors --- that have been combined with the fundamental
notions of every religion that has hitherto been taught to men. And, in
consequence, they have made man the most inconsistent, and the most
miserable being in existence. By the errors of these systems he has been
made a weak imbecile animal; a furious bigot and fanatic; or a miserable
hypocrite. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^

Words like these had not been heard before in Britain, and they were
sufficient to arouse the indignation of all 'respectable' men against
Owen. He himself saw that 'respectable people' had begun to frown on him
as a blasphemer. But this did not in any way lessen his frankness or his
faith in the goodwill of the powers that be. In October 1830, he
delivered two lectures 'on genuine religion'. These lectures give but a
vague idea of the distinguishing features of 'true' religious doctrine.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^ But for all that they are clear evidence of Owen's deep
contempt for all 'hitherto existing religions'. In the first lecture, he
declared them to be the sole source of the disunion, mutual hatred and
crime that darkened human life. In the second, he said that they had
turned the world into one great madhouse. And he demonstrated that it
was urgently necessary to take measures to fight them. This again was
more than enough to infuriate all the 'respectable' gentlemen of the
United Kingdom. It might seem that Owen himself ought to have understood
that none of them could approve of measures *against* religions. But it
was just this that he did not want to understand.

In the second lecture he said that people who had cognised truth were
morally bound to help the government to put it into effect. He then
invited his audience to petition the King and both Houses of Parliament
to fight religions. The draft petition took for granted that the King
wished nothing better than the happiness of his subjects, but that their
happiness could only be achieved by substituting for the present
unnatural religion, in which, unfortunately, they continue to be
educated, a religion of truth and nature. Finally, this religion could
triumph without danger to society or, at the very most, only with some
temporary inconveniences. Hence the King should use his high position to
induce his Ministers to examine the role of religion in regard to the
formation of the human character. The petition to both Houses of
Parliament was couched in the same spirit. ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ The audience
endorsed Owen's draft petitions. Needless to say, the petitions brought
no advantage whatsoever to Owen's cause.

Religious concepts formed on a given social basis sanction this basis.
Whoever attacks religion shakes its social basis. The guardians of order
are therefore never disposed to toleration where the question of
religious convictions is concerned. They are even less disposed to
*fight* religion. Owen overlooked this. And that meant that he was
unable to draw all the practical conclusions following from his own
teaching on the formation of the human character.

If the character of every given person is determined by the conditions
of his upbringing, it is obvious that the character of each particular
social class is determined by its position in society. A class that
lives on the exploitation of other classes will always be ready to
defend social injustice, and not to rebel against it. In as much as Owen
hoped to move the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie to reforms that would
have ended the class division of society, without knowing it he came up
against the same contradiction that had thwarted eighteenth-century
materialist philosophy. This philosophy taught that man, with all his
opinions and habits, is the product of the social environment. And at
the same time it did not cease to repeat that the social environment
with all its properties is determined by people's opinion. '*C\'est
l\'opinion, qui gouverne le monde*', said the materialists, and with
them all the Enlighteners of the eighteenth century. Hence their appeals
to more or less enlightened despots, for they firmly believed in the
force of 'opinion'. Robert Owen was just as firm a believer in
'opinion'. As a follower of the eighteenth-century materialists, he
repeated word for word after them that 'opinions govern the world'.
^[\[33\]](#n33)^ Following their example, he tried to enlighten the
'governors'. In regard to the working class, he was evidently guided for
a long time by the impressions he had absorbed in New Lanark. He tried
with all his might to help the 'working poor', but he had no faith in
their independent activity. And, having no faith in their independent
activity, he could recommend to them only one course: never to enter
into conflict with the rich, but to conduct themselves in such a way
that the rich would not be afraid of taking the initiative for social
reform. In April 1819, he published in the newspapers 'An Address to the
Working Classes'. ^[\[34\]](#n34)^ Noting with regret that the working
classes were filled with anger at their condition, he repeated that the
character of man is determined by his social environment. Remembering
this, the workers should not in his opinion blame the 'rich' for their
attitude to the 'poor'. The rich will but one thing: to retain their
privileged social status. And the workers must respect that desire. What
was more, should the privileged wish to acquire still more wealth, the
workers must not oppose them. It was essential to occupy oneself not
with the past but with the future, that is to say, to concentrate all
attention on social reform. The reader may well ask what new element
could be brought about by a reform that not only preserved privileges
but enriched the privileged even more. The point is, however, that
according to Owen the colossal productive forces now at the disposal of
mankind would recompense the workers for all their concessions, if only
these productive forces were utilised in a planned way. Owen --- like
Rodbertus later on --- did not insist that the workers should receive
the whole product of their labour, but only their share of the product
should not be too small. As we see, his communism was reconciled to a
certain social inequality; but this inequality had to be under social
control, and should not go beyond the limits established by society.
Owen was convinced that the rich and the poor, the governors and the
governed, had really but one interest. ^[\[35\]](#n35)^ Until the very
end of his life, he was a staunch advocate of *social peace*.

Every class struggle is a political struggle. He who is against the
struggle of classes will naturally not attach any importance to their
political actions. It is not surprising that Owen was opposed to
Parliamentary reform. He found that, in general, electoral rights were
'not desirable' ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ until such times as the people received
proper education; he did not favour the democratic and republican
aspirations of his time. He thought that if the republicans and
democrats ceased threatening the governments there would in all
probability be a beneficial change in the government of the world.
^[\[37\]](#n37)^

Owen was never a member of the Chartist movement, ^[\[38\]](#n38)^ then
fighting for full *political* rights for the workers. But since the
upper classes did not evince the least desire to support his plans for
social reform, willy-nilly he ultimately had to set his hopes on the
workers' movement. In the early 1830s, when this movement broadened out
and even became menacing, Owen endeavoured to use the growing strength
of the proletariat to achieve his cherished ideas. In September 1832, he
organised an 'equitable labour exchange bazaar', ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ as he
called it, in London; almost simultaneously with this he entered into
close relations with the trades unions. However, here too the practical
results did not measure up to his expectations.

Equitable exchange meant the exchange of goods according to the utmost
of labour expended in their production. But if a particular product did
not correspond to social demand, no one would buy it and the labour
spent in its production would have gone for nothing. In order that
products should *always* be exchangeable proportionally to the sum of
labour embodied in each --- in other words, in order that the law of
*value* should not operate through a constant fluctuation of *prices*
--- planned organisation of production was essential. Production must be
so organised that the work of each producer be consciously directed to
satisfy definite social needs. So long as this is not the case,
fluctuation of prices is unavoidable which means that 'equitable
exchange' is also impossible. But when this planned production is
functioning, there will be no necessity for 'equitable exchange',
because the products will no longer be *exchanged* one for the other;
they will be *distributed* at rates determined by society among its
members. The 'equitable exchange bazaars' ^[\[40\]](#n40)^ were evidence
that Owen and his followers, for all their interest in economic
questions, still did not understand the difference between *commodity*
(unorganised) production on the one hand and *communist* (organised)
production on the other.

In aligning himself with the trades unions, Owen hoped they would help
him rapidly to build a whole range of cooperatives throughout the
country, which would be the basis of the new social system. In
accordance with his constant conviction, the social revolution had to be
accomplished *without struggle of any kind.* In striving for this, Owen
wished to transform an instrument of *class struggle* --- which the
trades unions always are to some extent or other --- into an instrument
of *peaceful* social reform. This plan, however, was quite utopian. Owen
soon realised that he and the trades unions were moving along different
paths: the same trades unions which were most sympathetic of all to the
cooperative idea were then preparing with special energy *for a general
strike*, something that never at any time or anywhere was possible
without infringing *social peace*. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^

Much greater practical success came the way of Owen and his followers in
the sphere of *consumers'* societies. Owen himself was not enthusiastic
about these societies, which he regarded as very close to 'trading
companies'.

I have outlined Owen's activity in such detail because it reflects so
vividly both the strong and weak sides of utopian socialism. Having done
so, I am now able to confine myself to brief references to these in my
further presentation.

Some investigators think that Owen's influence brought no advantage to
the British labour movement. This is an enormous, strange and
unpardonable error. Owen, an indefatigable propagandist of his ideas,
awakened the thoughts of the working class, placing before it the most
important --- *fundamental* --- problems of the social structure and
providing it with much data for the correct solution of these problems,
at least in theory. If his *practical* activity in general was *utopian*
in character, it must be admitted that here, too, he sometimes gave his
contemporaries extremely useful lessons. He was the true father of the
British cooperative movement. There was absolutely nothing utopian about
his demand for factory legislation. Nor was there anything utopian about
his suggestions on the need to provide at least elementary schooling for
the children and young persons working in the factories. In turning his
back on politics and condemning the class struggle, he was of course
very much in error. It is remarkable, though, that the workers who were
attracted by his message were able to correct his mistakes. In
assimilating Owen's cooperative and, to some extent, communist ideas,
the workers simultaneously took an active part in the *political*
movement of the British proletariat at that time. At least the most
gifted of them --- Lovett, Hetherington, Watson and others --- did so.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^

To all this should be added that in his fearless advocacy of 'true
religion' and rational relations between the sexes, Owen influenced the
development of the workers' consciousness not in the social field alone.
^[\[43\]](#n43)^

His immediate influence was felt not only in Great Britain and Ireland
but also in the United States of America. ^[\[44\]](#n44)^

### IV

A zealous adversary of socialism, Professor Foxwell of Cambridge
University, asserts that it was not Owen but Ricardo who gave British
socialism its most genuine spiritual weapon. ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ That is
not the case. True, Engels already remarked that, in so far as the
theories of contemporary socialism stemmed from bourgeois political
economy, almost all of them leaned on Ricardo's theory of value. There
was good enough reason for this. It is, however, beyond doubt that, at
least, many of the British socialists whose teachings relied on
Ricardo's theory of value were pupils of Owen, and turned to bourgeois
political economy precisely because, by utilising its conclusions, they
wished to proceed further in the direction taken by their teacher. Those
whom it would manifestly be wrong to call Owenites will be found to be
closely associated intellectually with the communist anarchist Godwin.
They turned to Ricardo only so as to be able through him to expose
political economy as being in contradiction with its own --- moreover
fundamental --- theoretical principles. Among Owen's pupils I will
refer, first of all, to William Thompson. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^ In the
Introduction to the work that I have just mentioned (see footnote)
Thompson asks how was it that a nation abounding more than any other in
the raw materials, machinery, dwellings and food, in intelligent and
industrious producers should still pine in privation. ^[\[47\]](#n47)^
This is the selfsame question which occupied Owen almost from the
beginning of the nineteenth century, and was quite definitely formulated
by him in some of his published works. Further, Thompson wonders why the
fruits of the workers' labour are mysteriously taken from them through
no fault of theirs. We meet the same question in almost all of Owen's
works. Thompson, however, recognises that it is precisely such questions
which induce 'us' to take an interest in the distribution of wealth.
Thus, if Thompson turned to Ricardo --- as he actually did, and indeed
borrowed much from him --- it was the outcome of Owen's previous
influence upon him. Of course, in matters of political economy, Ricardo
was very much stronger than Owen. But Thompson approached the problems
of political economy from a different side altogether from that of
Ricardo. The latter affirmed and demonstrated that labour is the only
source of the value of products. But he was quite reconciled with the
fact that bourgeois society condemned the workers to subjection and
distress. Thompson, on the other hand, could not accept this state of
affairs. He desired that the system of distribution of goods should
cease to contradict the basic law of their production. In other words,
he demanded that the value created by *labour* should go to the
*workers*. And in his exposition of this demand he followed in the
footsteps of Owen.

All the other British socialists who relied on Ricardo's economic
doctrine presented quite the same demand in their criticism of bourgeois
society. Ricardo's main work was published in 1817. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^
Already in 1821 there appeared, in the form of an open letter to Lord
John Russell, a short anonymous pamphlet exposing bourgeois society as
being founded on the exploitation of the workers. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^
Following this came a series of other productions which were remarkable
in their own way. Not all of them owed their origin to Robert Owen's
followers; some of them came from the pens of people more or less
strongly inclined to anarchism. Among Owen's pupils, besides Thompson, I
should include John Gray, John Bray, and from the writers who were more
or less drawn to anarchism --- Piercy Ravenstone and Thomas Hodgskin.
^[\[50\]](#n50)^

All these writers were for long completely forgotten. When they were
recalled --- partly owing to Marx, who mentioned them already in his
polemic with Proudhon --- their works were referred to as the source
from which Marx borrowed his teaching on the surplus product and surplus
value. It went so far that the Webbs referred to Marx as 'Hodgskin's
illustrious disciple'. ^[\[51\]](#n51)^ There is absolutely no truth
whatever in this. In the works of the British socialists, however, we
encounter not only theories of the exploitation of labour by capital but
even such expressions as 'surplus produce', 'surplus value', 'additional
value'. However, it is not a question of words but of scientific
concepts. As far as the latter are concerned, every well-informed and
*unbiased* person must admit that Hodgskin, for example, was, to say the
least, as far removed from Marx as Rodbertus. Marx is no longer named a
pupil of Rodbertus; it is to be hoped that we shall soon cease to hear
him being named a pupil of the British socialists of the 1820s.
^[\[52\]](#n52)^ However, enough of that. Although Marx was not a
'pupil' of Hodgskin, Thompson or Gray, the fact that these British
socialists attained a clarity of political and economic conceptions rare
for their times and, as Marx himself said, made a step forward of no
small importance in comparison with Ricardo, ^[\[53\]](#n53)^ is yet of
the highest importance for the history of socialist theory. In this
respect, they were far ahead of the French and German utopian
socialists. If our NG Chernyshevsky had been acquainted with them, he
would have probably translated one of their works instead of that of
John Stuart Mill.

#### [B: French Utopian Socialism]{#b}

### I

In the second half of the eighteenth century, while the industrial
revolution was proceeding in England, a desperate struggle was taking
place in France between the third estate and the old regime. The third
estate then embraced, to use a well-known expression, the whole of the
French people except the 'privileged'. The struggle against the
'privileged' was a *political* struggle. When political power was
snatched from the hands of the 'privileged' by the third estate, the
latter, naturally, used it to abolish all those economic and social
institutions which together formed the basis of the old political order.
All the very varied elements of the population constituting the third
estate were vitally interested in the battle against these institutions.
Consequently, the advanced French writers of the eighteenth century were
all agreed in their condemnation of the *old* social and political
order. But that was not all. They differed very little, either, in their
views of the *new* social order which they desired. Obviously in the
advanced camp certain shades of opinion were unavoidable. However,
despite these shades of opinion, that camp was unanimous in its striving
to establish that social order which we now call bourgeois. The strength
of this unanimous endeavour was so great that even people who had no
sympathy with the bourgeois ideal fell in with it. Here is an example.

The then very well-known Abbé de Mably, when polemicising with the
physiocrats, ^[\[54\]](#n54)^ declared against private property and the
social inequality it entails. In his own words, he 'could not abandon
the pleasing idea of community of property'. In other words, he defended
communism. But this convinced communist believed it was his duty to
state that the idea of community of property seemed to him to be
impracticable. 'No human power', he wrote, 'could now attempt to restore
equality without causing disorders much greater than those it wished to
abolish.' ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ Such was the force of things. Even while
admitting in theory the advantages of communism, one had to be content
with the idea of the old order being replaced, not by a communist, but
by a bourgeois order.

When the revolution brought triumph to the bourgeois system, a struggle
at once began among the heterogeneous elements constituting the third
estate. The social stratum which was at the time the embryo of the
modern proletariat began war against the 'rich', whom it put into the
same bracket as the aristocracy. Although the most outstanding political
representatives of this stratum --- such as Robespierre and Saint-Just
--- were far from holding communist ideas, communism did nevertheless
appear on the historical scene, in the person of 'Gracchus' Babeuf, in
the final act of the great revolutionary drama. The 'Conspiracy of
Equals' constituted by Babeuf and his associates was as it were a sort
of prologue to that still unfinished struggle between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie which is one of the most characteristic features of
the internal history of France in the nineteenth century. As a matter of
fact, no. It would be more accurate to describe the 'Conspiracy of
Equals' as the *prologue to the prologue* of this struggle. In the
arguments of Babeuf and his comrades we meet only faint and vague hints
of an understanding of the historical essence of the new social order
which they had condemned to destruction. They knew, and in different
ways repeated, the one theme: 'In a true society, there must be neither
rich nor poor' (\'*Dans une véritable société il ne doit y avoir ni
riches, ni pauvres.*') Since there were both rich and poor in the
society created by the revolution, the revolution could not be
considered as completed until this society had given way to a *true*
society. ^[\[56\]](#n56)^ How far removed the Babouvists' ideas were
from those we met with in our examination of British utopian socialism
may be very clearly seen from the following.

The British socialists attributed enormous historical significance to
the fact that modern society had at its command powerful forces of
production. In their view, the existence of these forces of production
had for the first time made it a practical possibility to transform
society so that there would be neither rich nor poor. In contrast to
this, some of the Babouvists were quite reconciled to the assumption
that the realisation of their communist ideals would bring 'the
destruction of all the arts', including, of course, the technical arts.
The Manifesto of 'Equals' says outright: 'Perish, if it must be, all the
arts, provided real equality is left to us.' ^[\[57\]](#n57)^ True, this
Manifesto, which was written by S Maréchal, did not please many of the
Babouvists and was not even distributed by them. However, Buonarroti
himself tells us that in defending the plan of communist revolution, he,
together with Debon, Darthé and Lepelletier, argued as follows: 'We were
told, moreover, that if it is true that inequality hastened the progress
of the really useful arts, it must cease today, that further progress
would add nothing to the real happiness of all.' ^[\[58\]](#n58)^ This
meant that mankind no longer had any significant need for the
development of technology. Probably Marx and Engels had in mind, by the
way, this kind of argument of the Babouvists when they wrote in *The
Communist Manifesto* that the revolutionary literature that accompanied
the first proletarian movements was reactionary since it preached
universal asceticism and the establishment of primitive equality.
^[\[59\]](#n59)^

The works of the nineteenth-century French socialists do not have this
ascetic feature; on the contrary, we find there a highly sympathetic
attitude to technical progress.

It may, perhaps, be said that even the strange and --- let the truth be
told! --- ridiculous dreams of Fourier, regarding anti-lions,
anti-sharks, anti-hippopotami and other suchlike kind animals which, in
due course, would serve man and thus increase his comforts, were no more
than a recognition, in extremely fantastic attire, of the importance and
boundless magnitude of future technical progress. But for all that ---
and this is of vast import for the history of theory --- the French
utopian socialists in the great majority of cases trailed far behind
their British counterparts in comprehending the true nature of the
direct social and economic consequences of the technical progress of
their time.

### II

As we are aware, the British socialists believed that the growth of the
productive forces deepened the division of society into two classes ---
the 'rich' and the 'poor'. At the same time, they saw the opposition
between these two classes as opposition between the employers and the
wage-workers. The employers appropriate the greater part of the value
created by the workers' labour. This was already clear to Charles Hall,
but was only gradually being understood by the French socialist writers.
And even those French socialists who realised that the most important
contradiction of contemporary society is that between the interests of
capital and those of wage-labour never grasped this with the same
lucidity that we see in the works of Thompson, Gray and Hodgskin.

Saint-Simon ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ directly continued the work accomplished by
the eighteenth-century ideologists of the third estate. He did not speak
of the employers exploiting the workers, but only of the employers and
workers *taken together* undergoing exploitation by the 'idle' class,
who comprised mainly the aristocracy and the bureaucracy. Saint-Simon
looked on the employers as the natural representatives and defenders of
the workers' interests. His pupils went further. Analysing the concept
'idle class', they included in it not only the *landowners* exploiting
the 'labouring class' by the receipt of land rent, but also the
*capitalists*. However, it should be noted that they understood the term
capitalists to mean only those whose income was derived from interest on
capital. The employer's profit, they held, coincided with the workers'
wages. ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ We find the same unclarity of view in Proudhon's
works --- and a quarter of a century later at that! ^[\[62\]](#n62)^ In
March 1850, he wrote:

The union of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat signifies now, as
previously, the liberation of the serf, the defensive and offensive
alliance of the industrialists with the workers against the capitalist
and the nobleman.

Louis Blanc ^[\[63\]](#n63)^ saw the matter more clearly. To him, the
social opposition we are discussing took the form of an opposition
between the *bourgeoisie* and the *people*. But by bourgeoisie he means
'the aggregate of those citizens who, owning either instruments of
labour or capital, work with means which are their own and depend on
others only to a certain extent'. What is meant here by 'only\'? And how
are we to understand Louis Blanc's idea that the citizens who in the
aggregate make up the bourgeoisie *work* with means which are their own?
Is he thinking here only of the petty --- *artisan* --- bourgeoisie? Or
are we to understand it in the sense that Louis Blanc, like the
Saint-Simonists, regarded the employers' profit as payment for their
labour? There is no reply to this. The people are defined by Louis Blanc
as 'the aggregate of the citizens who, having no capital, depend
entirely on others as regards the prime necessities of life'.
^[\[64\]](#n64)^ This by itself gives rise to no objection. But one may
'depend on others' in various ways: therefore Louis Blanc's concept of
the people does not coincide with the far more exact concept of the
hired worker used by the British socialists in their investigations. In
any case Louis Blanc was, in general, little interested in economic
concepts. Much greater attention was paid to them by Jean Reynaud
^[\[65\]](#n65)^ and Pierre Leroux. ^[\[66\]](#n66)^ Both of these had
belonged previously to the school of Saint-Simon, but had soon become
dissatisfied with its teaching. Reynaud asserted that the *people* was
composed of *two* classes with opposing interests --- the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie. He called proletarians 'the people who produce all
the wealth of the nation; who have nothing apart from the daily payment
for their labour'. The bourgeoisie he defined as 'the people who possess
capital and live on its income'. Recognising the correctness of these
definitions, Pierre Leroux even tried to calculate the number of
proletarians. He estimated that there were in France up to thirty
million of them. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^ That figure was, of course, too high.
There is nothing like that number of proletarians in France even at the
present time. The overestimation came about as a result of Leroux
including among the proletariat not only the peasantry but also the
beggars of France, of whom, he reckoned, there were up to four million.
Reynaud committed a similar error when he included the 'village
peasantry' among the proletariat, despite his own definition of the
concept 'proletarian'. On this question, the views of Reynaud and Leroux
are very close to those of our *Trudoviks*. ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ The reader
will understand why the economic views of the French socialists of the
utopian period were not distinguished by the clarity which was a feature
of the British utopian socialists' concepts: the distinctive features of
the capitalist relations of production were more sharply expressed in
Britain than in France. The clarity existing among the then British
socialists on economic matters did not prevent them from cherishing the
belief that the proletariat and the bourgeoisie --- two classes
diametrically opposed to each other in economic interests --- could
undertake social reform in complete agreement. The British socialists
discerned the existence of the class struggle in present-day society;
but they decisively condemned it, and under no circumstances would they
link with it the realisation of their plans for reform. Here there was
no difference between them and the majority of the French socialists.
Saint-Simon and the Saint-Simonists, Fourier and the Fourierists, Cabet,
Proudhon and Louis Blanc, sharply differing among themselves on many
problems, were all fully agreed that social reform presupposed not the
struggle but the complete reconciliation of classes.

We shall see later that not all the French utopian socialists rejected
the class struggle. For the moment, however, we must remember that the
majority of them were opposed to it and that this opposition explains
why they would have nothing to do with *politics*.

In the mid-1830s, Fourier's most outstanding pupil, Victor Considérant
^[\[69\]](#n69)^ expressed his satisfaction that interest in politics
among the French population had declined. He attributed this to the
'theoretical' errors of the politicians: instead of trying to find ways
and means to reconcile interests, the politicians gave support to this
mutual struggle, which, he said, was 'profitable only to those who
traffic in it'. ^[\[70\]](#n70)^

At first glance, the peaceful sentiments of the majority of the French
utopian socialists appear strange in a country where not long before the
storm of the Great Revolution had raged and where, it would seem,
advanced people should have held revolutionary tradition particularly
dear. But on closer examination it becomes obvious that it was precisely
the recollection of the recent revolution which predisposed advanced
ideologists, such as Considérant, to seek for measures which might put
an end to the class struggle. Their peaceful sentiments were a
psychological reaction to the revolutionary passions of 1793. The great
majority of the French utopian socialists were terrified at the thought
that the mutual struggle of interests might again reach the acuteness
which marked that memorable year. In his first work, *Théorie des quatre
mouvements et des destinées sociales*, published in 1808, Fourier spoke
with indignation of 'the catastrophe of 1793' which had brought
civilised society, as he put it, close to a state of barbarism.
Saint-Simon, for his part, had still earlier than Fourier described the
French Revolution as the most terrible outbreak and the greatest of all
scourges. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^ This attitude to the 'catastrophe of 1793'
even inspired Fourier with a negative view of the eighteenth-century
philosophy of Enlightenment, to which he, however, was indebted for the
basic principles of his own theory. Saint-Simon did not approve of that
philosophy either, at any rate in so far as it seemed to him to be
destructive and responsible for the events of 1793. Saint-Simon
considered that the most important task of social thought in the
nineteenth century was to study measures necessary '*to put an end to
revolution'.* ^[\[72\]](#n72)^ In the 1830s and 1840s his followers
tried to solve the same problem. The only difference was that they were
concerned, not with the revolution at the end of the eighteenth century,
but with the revolution of 1830. One of the main arguments they advanced
in favour of social reform was that this (\'association',
'organisation') would halt the revolution. They intimidated their
adversaries with the spectre of revolution. In 1840 Enfantin praised the
Saint-Simonists because in the 1830s, when the proletariat had just
tried out its strength in a successful revolt against the throne, they
had shouted: '*Voici les barbares!*' (\'Here come the barbarians!') And
he proudly added that now, too, ten years later, he does not cease to
repeat the same cry: 'Here come the barbarians!' ^[\[73\]](#n73)^

### III

Enfantin regarded the appearance of the proletariat on the historical
scene as being tantamount to the coming of 'the barbarians\'; so did the
majority of the French utopian socialists. ^[\[74\]](#n74)^ This is very
typical of their mode of thought in general and their attitude to the
political struggle in particular. They warmly defended the interests of
the working class; they mercilessly exposed many contradictions in
bourgeois society. Towards the end of his life, Saint-Simon taught that
'all social institutions must aim at the moral, intellectual and
physical improvement of the most numerous and poorest class'. Fourier
asserted with noble indignation that the workers' position in civilised
society was worse than that of wild beasts. ^[\[75\]](#n75)^ But, while
bewailing the sad lot of the working class and striving in every way to
help it, the utopian socialists did not believe in the independent
action of the working class, and when they did, they were afraid of it.
As we have only just seen, Enfantin regarded the appearance of the
proletariat as being tantamount to an invasion of barbarians. As early
as 1802, Saint-Simon, addressing 'the property-less class', said: 'See
what happened in France when your comrades held sway there; they brought
about famine.' ^[\[76\]](#n76)^

An interesting contrast: right up to the February revolution of 1848 the
bourgeois ideologists were by no means hostile to the political struggle
of classes. In 1820, Guizot wrote that the middle class had to win
political power if it wanted to assure its interests in the struggle
against the reactionaries who, for their part, were striving to get
power and to utilise it in their own interests. ^[\[77\]](#n77)^ And
when the reactionaries reproached him that, while preaching the class
struggle, he was thus exciting evil passions, he told them that the
whole history of France was 'made' by the war of classes, and that it
was shameful of them to forget that history simply because 'its
conclusions' had proved to be unfavourable to them. ^[\[78\]](#n78)^

Guizot believed in the independent action of the 'middle class', that is
to say, the bourgeoisie, and he was not in the least afraid of it. That
was why he demonstrated the necessity of the political struggle of
classes. Of course, he, too, did not approve of the 'catastrophe of
1793' --- far from it! But for a time he considered that its repetition
was out of the question. In 1848 he changed his opinion and became, in
his turn, an advocate of social peace. Thus the course of development of
social thought proceeded and changed in accordance with the course of
development of social life.

It is now time to remind the reader that a *minority* of the socialists
in France at that time was in no way opposed either to politics or to
the class struggle. In its mode of thought this minority differed
substantially from the majority with whom we have been occupied till
now. The minority was descended directly from Babeuf and those who
shared his views. One of the active participants of the 'Conspiracy of
Equals', a descendant of Michelangelo, Philippe Buonarroti,
^[\[79\]](#n79)^ a native of Tuscany who became a French citizen by
decree of the Convention, ^[\[80\]](#n80)^ appeared in
nineteenth-century utopian socialism as the bearer of the revolutionary
traditions of the Babouvists. His work (which I mentioned earlier),
*Histoire de la conspiration pour l\'égalité, dite de Babeuf, suivie du
procès auquel elle a donné lieu*, was published in Brussels in 1828 and
was of enormous importance in shaping the ideas of the revolutionary
minority of the French socialists. ^[\[81\]](#n81)^ The very fact that
this minority came under the influence of a former member of the
'Conspiracy of Equals' demonstrates that, as distinct from the majority,
it was not embarrassed by memories of the 'catastrophe of 1793'. The
most famous representative of this minority, Auguste Blanqui,
^[\[82\]](#n82)^ remained until the end of his long life an indomitable
revolutionary.

Whereas Saint-Simon insisted on measures which would *put an end to
revolution* and the majority of the French socialists quite agreed with
him on this, the minority, under the influence of Babouvism, fully
shared the view of the 'Equals' that the revolution had as yet not been
completed, since the rich had seized all the good things of life.
Therein lies the cardinal difference between the two trends of French
utopian socialism: one aimed to put an end to the revolution, the other
wished to continue it.

Those who desired to put an end to the revolution naturally endeavoured
to secure agreement among the warring social interests. Considérant
wrote: '*For each class the best means of ensuring its particular
interests is to link them with the interests of other classes.*'
^[\[83\]](#n83)^ All peaceable utopian socialists thought in such a way.
They only differed on the measures needed to harmonise the interests of
all classes in society. Almost every one of the peaceable founders of
socialist systems invented his own special plan to safeguard the
interests of the *propertied class.* For example, Fourier recommended
that in the future society the product of labour be so distributed that
the workers' share be five-twelfths, the capitalists' four-twelfths, and
the representatives of talent, three-twelfths of the total product. All
the other peaceable utopian plans of distribution invariably made some
concession or other to the capitalists; if it had been otherwise, the
interests of the propertied class would not have been assured and,
consequently, all hope of a *peaceful solution of the social problem*
would have been lost. Only those socialists who were not afraid of this
contingency, that is to say, those who were in favour of *revolutionary
action*, could afford to ignore the interests of the capitalists and the
'rich' generally. Such action was preferred by the 'Babouvists' at the
end of the eighteenth century and those French socialists of the
nineteenth century who were influenced by Babouvists. Since they saw no
need to spare the interests of the 'rich', people of this turn of mind
declared outright that they were not only revolutionaries but also
communists. Generally speaking, the concept 'socialism' then differed in
France from the concept 'communism' by the fact that in their draft
plans of the future social system the socialists allowed for some ---
often quite significant --- inequality of property, whereas the
communists rejected it.

As we have just seen, inclination to a revolutionary turn of mind was to
make it easier for French reformers to adopt a communist programme. And,
in fact, revolutionaries like Théodore Dézamy ^[\[84\]](#n84)^ and
Auguste Blanqui upheld the ideas of communism. However, not all the
communists of those days were revolutionaries; the most notable
representative of peaceful communism was Etienne Cabet. ^[\[85\]](#n85)^
He expressed most vividly the peaceable tendency of the majority of the
French socialists when he said: '*If I had the revolution in my grasp, I
would not open my hand even if I had to die in exile*.' ^[\[86\]](#n86)^
Like the eighteenth-century Enlighteners, Cabet believed in the
omnipotence of reason. He was of the opinion that the benefits of
communism could be understood and appreciated even by the propertied
class. The communist revolutionaries did not rely on this and,
consequently, preached the class struggle.

However, we should not think that their tactics resembled those of the
present-day international Social-Democracy, which also of course does
not reject either the class struggle or politics. They were
predominantly *conspirators*. In the history of international socialism
it is hardly possible to find another *conspirator* so typical as
Auguste Blanqui. Conspiratorial tactics leave very little room for the
independent action of the *masses*. Although the French communist
revolutionaries relied more on the masses than their contemporaries ---
the peaceable socialists, nevertheless, in their conception of the
future transformation of society, the masses were only to *support* the
conspirators, who were to carry through the main action by themselves.
^[\[87\]](#n87)^ Conspiratorial tactics are always an unmistakable sign
of the inequality of the working class. They become a thing of the past
as soon as the working class reaches a definite level of maturity.

### IV

The utopian socialists of all shades firmly believed in mankind's
progress. We know how much the young MY Saltykov was encouraged by
Saint-Simon's idea that the golden age was not behind but ahead of us.
^[\[88\]](#n88)^ The eighteenth-century Enlighteners were also staunch
believers in progress. Suffice it to recall the noble Condorcet. The
distinguishing feature of socialism is, strictly speaking, not so much
belief in progress as the conviction that progress leads to the
abolition of the '*exploitation of man by man*'. This theme is
constantly to be met with in the speeches and writings of the
Saint-Simonists. ^[\[89\]](#n89)^

In the past \[they said\], the social system was always to some degree
or other based upon the exploitation of man by man; today the most
important progress will be to put an end to that exploitation, in
whatever form it may be conceived. ^[\[90\]](#n90)^

The socialists of all other schools also aspired to this end. Their
plans of social organisation in many cases stopped short of this aim. As
we already know, these plans often did not rule out a certain social
inequality which could, in the last resort, be based only on the
'exploitation of man by man'. The communists alone avoided this
inconsistency, which was explained, on the one hand, by the efforts to
reconcile the interests of all classes so as to avoid the class struggle
and, on the other hand, by lack of clarity as to what precisely
constituted the *economic essence* of that exploitation. Not without
reason did the communist Dézamy chide the Saint-Simonists that their
'aristocracy of capacities' (\'*l\'aristocratie des capacités*') and
'political theocracy' would in practice lead to almost the same state of
affairs then prevailing in society. ^[\[91\]](#n91)^ However, it was not
a question of plans of future social organisation, plans which in any
case never came to fruition. The important thing was that the utopian
socialists launched into social circulation a great idea which, once it
had penetrated the minds of the workers, became the most powerful
cultural force of the nineteenth century. The preaching of this idea is
probably the greatest service rendered by utopian socialism.

In its various ways of proving the necessity of abolishing the
exploitation of man by man, utopian socialism could not but touch upon
the effect of this exploitation on social morality. The British
socialists, especially Owen and Thompson, had already dilated on the
theme that the exploitation of man by man corrupted both the exploited
and the exploiters. The French socialists, too, devoted much space in
their writings to this subject. That is understandable. If the character
of man is determined by the conditions of its development --- and this
was repeated by all utopian socialists without exception --- it is
obvious that man's character will be good only where it is allowed to
develop in good conditions. In order to make these conditions good, the
defects of the prevailing social structure had to be got rid of. The
nineteenth-century utopian socialists rejected asceticism, and in one or
other way proclaimed the 'rehabilitation of the flesh'. ^[\[92\]](#n92)^
On these grounds they were attributed a striving to 'unleash evil
passions', to assure the triumph of man's *baser* needs over his more
exalted ones. This was foolish slander. The utopian socialists never
disregarded man's spiritual development. Some of them stated outright
that social reform was essential precisely in the interests of man's
spiritual growth, being, indeed, its preliminary condition. Already in
the writings of the Saint-Simonists there are many strikingly apt
illustrations of how poor are the prospects for morality in modern
society. This society, they say, is incapable of *preventing* crimes, it
can only *punish* them; consequently, the 'hangman is the sole
authorised professor of morality'. ^[\[93\]](#n93)^ It is a point of
interest that, in repudiating the 'hangman', the Saint-Simonists
generally repudiated violence as a means of improving human morality.
Here again the socialists of all other schools concurred. Even the
communist revolutionaries acknowledged violence only as a means of
removing the obstacles to social transformation. They were just as
energetic as the Saint-Simonists in denying the ability of the 'hangman'
to be a 'professor' of social morality. They, too, understood perfectly
well that crimes are prevented not by punishment, but only by
eliminating the social causes which incline man's will to evil. *In this
sense*, the most extreme revolutionaries, the most indefatigable
conspirators, were the convinced advocates of 'not opposing evil by
force'.

### V

The views of the utopian socialists on *education* are also extremely
important. We already know the close link between Owen's concern for the
upbringing of the younger generation and his doctrine on the formation
of the human character. This doctrine was shared by the socialists of
all countries; so it is not surprising that all of them attached immense
importance to education. Among the French utopian socialists, the most
profound views on education were expounded by Fourier.

Man is not born corrupt, he is corrupted by circumstances. A child has
in embryo all the passions proper to an adult. These should not be
suppressed, but given suitable direction. If this is done, says Fourier,
the passions will become the source of all that is good, great, useful
and generous. But they cannot be given suitable direction under the
present social order. Its contradictions put the pedagogue in an
impasse, as a result of which education is now but an empty word. The
children of the poor cannot be educated in the same way as the children
of the rich and privileged. The poor man's son chooses his career at the
dictates of necessity; he cannot follow his natural bent. True, the rich
man's son has the material means to follow his calling, but his nature
is spoiled by the depraving influence of the exclusive position held in
society by the privileged class. Education will cease to be an empty
word only when 'civilisation', as Fourier calls the bourgeois system,
gives place to a rational social order. Today work is a heavy burden and
a curse to the workers. In a community organised in conformity with the
demands of reason, in the phalanstery, work will be an attractive
(*attrayant*) occupation. The spectacle of labour enthusiastically
performed by groups of adults will have a highly beneficial effect upon
the rising generation. From its earliest years it will learn to love
work. This will be all the easier since, in general, children like to
work, and are always eager to imitate the work of adults. This
inclination will find its right application only in the phalanstery.
There all the children's toys will become simultaneously implements of
labour, and every game a productive occupation. Thus, without
compulsion, playing and imitating, the child will be taught all the
kinds of work for which it feels an aptitude. But that is not enough.
*Labour* must find meaning in *knowledge*, and knowledge must be
acquired by the young generation in the process of labour useful to
society. This means, incidentally, that instruction, in Fourier's
opinion, must take the form known in modern pedagogy as the *laboratory
system.* And this instruction, which as far as possible will take place
out of doors, will have nothing *compulsory* in it. Children and young
persons themselves will select freely what they will study and who will
teach them.

Only such a system of instruction will, in Fourier's view, provide for
the maximum development of the child's natural abilities. Its salutary
action will be supplemented by the fact that the abolition of the
prevailing social contradictions will broaden the scope for the
development of man's social instincts. The productivity of labour will
reach its highest peak only when man is able to engage in his favourite
occupation *in the society of comrades congenial to him.*

The reader will agree that all these considerations on education are of
very great value. Here is another most interesting point. Fourier held
that, beginning from three or four years of age, children should be
taught by means of various types of joint exercises the mastering *of
measured movements*, something in the style of the rhythmical gymnastics
of Jacques Dalcroze which now meet with such favour everywhere. In the
system of the brilliant French utopian, Fourier, '*measured or material
harmony',* (\'*l\'harmonie mesurée ou matérielle*') was one of the
conditions for harmony of the passions (\'*l\'harmonie passionnelle*').
^[\[94\]](#n94)^

### VI

French utopian socialism expressed opinions about art too. The
Saint-Simonists wrote a great deal about art, striving to make the
*poet* into a prophet, heralding new social truths. But possibly the
most thoughtful of all the utopian socialists on questions of art was
Pierre Leroux.

Leroux wrote that, as distinct from industry which had the aim of
influencing the external world, art was the expression of man's own
life. In other words, it was 'his life itself, conveying itself to other
men, realising itself, endeavouring to perpetuate itself'.
^[\[95\]](#n95)^ Proceeding from this thought, Leroux maintained that
art is neither the reproduction of *nature* nor its imitation. Neither
can art imitate *art*, that is to say, the art of a given period cannot
reproduce the art of another period. The true art of every particular
historical period reflects the aspirations of that period alone, and of
no other. 'Art grows from generation to generation, like a tall tree
that each year adds to its height and raises its top towards the heavens
while simultaneously sinking its roots deeper into the earth.'
^[\[96\]](#n96)^ The beautiful is called the principle of art: but that
is wrong, since artists quite frequently portray subjects that are ugly,
repulsive and even downright horrific. 'The domain of art is much more
extensive than that of the beautiful, because art is the artistic
expression of life, and life is not always beautiful.' ^[\[97\]](#n97)^
But in that case, what does to express life artistically mean? Leroux
believed that it meant expressing life through symbols. He is quite
definite on that score. 'The sole principle of art is the symbol', he
affirms (\'*Le principe unique de l\'art est le symbole*'),
^[\[98\]](#n98)^ he asserts. However, by symbolic expression he
understood, in general, the expression of life *in images.* When VG
Belinsky said that the thinker expressed his ideas by means of
syllogisms and the artist by images, he was in complete agreement with
Leroux. ^[\[99\]](#n99)^ In pursuing this idea 'Pyotr the Red-Headed'
came to the conclusion that the artist was free, but not as independent
as some believed. 'Art is life, which addresses itself to life.' The
artist commits a mistake if he ignores the life around him. *Art for
art's sake* is to Leroux 'a special kind of egoism'. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^
All the same, he feels that 'art for art's sake' is the fruit of the
artist's discontent with his social environment. Consequently, he is
ready to prefer art for art's sake to the banal art which depicts the
base --- Leroux says: 'the basely materialistic' --- propensities of
bourgeois society. At any rate, Leroux puts a much higher evaluation on
the 'morbid' poetry which gave birth to the *Werthers Leiden* and
*Faust* of Goethe:

Poets! \[he exclaims\] Show us hearts, as proud, as independent as those
portrayed by Goethe. Only give this independence some purpose, and let
it thus turn into heroism\... In brief, show us in all your works the
salvation of individual destiny linked with that of universal
destiny\... Out of the titans of Goethe and Byron make men, but do not
thereby deprive them of their noble character. ^[\[101\]](#n101)^

In their time, these views played an important role in the history of
France's literary development. Everyone knows that they greatly
influenced the literary activity of George Sand. In general, if there
were people among the French Romanticists who rejected the principle of
art for art's sake (for instance Victor Hugo apart from George Sand) it
is quite reasonable to suppose that their literary views were not shaped
without some help from the socialist literature of the time.

#### [C: German Utopian Socialism]{#c}

### I

In France and in Britain, utopian socialism was closely related
theoretically to the French eighteenth-century philosophy of
Enlightenment. This is only partly true of German utopian socialism.
Among the German socialists there were some whose views were formed
under the *immediate* influence of French *utopian socialism* and,
consequently, under the *indirect* influence of French *Enlighteners*.
But there were others among them whose social opinions stemmed not from
French but from German philosophy. Ludwig Feuerbach more than any other
of the German philosophers influenced the course of development of
German socialist theory. There was an entire school in German socialism
with theoretical structures which are quite incomprehensible without a
previous study of the philosophy of the author of *The Essence of
Christianity* (so-called true or philosophical socialism). That is why I
will touch on this school only in an article on the progress of German
philosophical thought from Hegel to Feuerbach. ^[\[102\]](#n102)^ Here I
shall deal only with that current of German socialism which kept aloof
from German philosophy, and arose from the influence of French socialist
literature on German minds.

If France at that time lagged far behind Britain in economic
development, Germany trailed a long way behind France. More than
three-fourths of the population in Prussia lived in the countryside, and
handicraft production was the predominant form in all German towns.
Modern industrial capitalism had made significant advances only in a
very few provinces, for example, in Rhenish Prussia. The legal position
of the German journeyman may be summed up in a few words: complete
defencelessness against arbitrary action by the police:

Whoever has even once visited the Vienna police headquarters in the
morning \[writes Violand\], will remember the hundreds of journeymen who
had to stand packed together for hours in a narrow corridor, waiting for
their 'road-books', while a policeman with a sabre or baton in his hand
kept an eye on them like an overseer watching slaves. It seemed as
though police and justice had conspired to drive these poor men to
despair. ^[\[103\]](#n103)^

It was these despairing poor, whom, in Violand's words, the authorities
treated like cattle, that were the chief disseminators of the ideas of
French socialism throughout Germany during the 1830s and 1840s. From
among them came the outstanding communist writer, Wilhelm Weitling (a
tailor by trade). ^[\[104\]](#n104)^ His views will take precedence
here. But before proceeding to discuss them, I have a few words to say
about one work of the talented Georg Büchner, who died early in life.
^[\[105\]](#n105)^

This work, published illegally, is entitled *Der Hessische Landbote*
(*The Hessen Rural Herald*). It was printed in July 1834, in a secret
printing press in Offenbach, and was addressed primarily to the
*peasantry*. This is a remarkable fact. We can find no direct appeals to
the peasantry either in English or French socialist literature. Even in
Germany, *The Hessen Rural Herald* remained unique. Weitling and his
associates wrote for the working class, that is to say, properly
speaking, for the artisans. Only the Russian socialists of the 1870s
addressed their appeals in the main to the peasantry.

The content of *The Hessen Rural Herald* is also, one might say,
Narodnik. It speaks of 'the immediate needs of the people' (to use an
expression our Narodniks often resorted to). In it Büchner contrasts the
free and untrammelled life of the rich man, which, he says, resembles
one continuous holiday, to the bitter life of the poor man, which he
likens to an eternal day of toil. Then he points to the burden of
taxation crushing the people and sharply criticises the existing system
of government. Lastly, he advises the people to rise against their
oppressors and cites examples from history, notably, the French
revolutions of 1789 and 1830, which prove the possibility of a
victorious people's uprising.

The revolutionary call to the peasantry stood no chance of success in
those days. The peasants handed over to the authorities the copies of
*The Hessen Rural Herald* scattered near their huts during the night.
The rest of the edition was confiscated by the police, and Büchner had
to flee. But the fact that he spoke to the peasantry in the language of
a revolutionary is typical of German socialist thought in the 1830s.
'*Friede den Hütten! Krieg den Palästen!*' (\'Peace to the huts! War to
the Palaces!') proclaimed Büchner in his *Landbote*. This was a call to
the class struggle. Weitling too addressed the same kind of appeal to
his readers. Peaceful moods were revealed and prevailed for a time only
in the works of those German socialist writers who had been through
Feuerbach's philosophical school.

In preaching the class struggle, Büchner did not, however, realise the
importance of politics in this struggle. He set no store by the
advantages of a constitutional regime. Like our Narodniks, he was afraid
that a constitution, by bringing about the domination of the
bourgeoisie, would worsen still further the position of the people:

If our Constitutionalists succeeded in overthrowing the German
governments and setting up a united monarchy or a republic,
^[\[106\]](#n106)^ that would only create a financial aristocracy here,
as in France. Better to let things stay as they are.

Such a view of a constitution also makes Büchner akin to our Narodniks.
Being a revolutionary, he was not, of course, a supporter of the
outrageous political system then existing. He also favoured a republic,
but not one which would usher in the rule of the financial aristocracy.
He wanted the revolution to guarantee above all the material interests
of the people. On the other hand, he considered that German liberalism
was impotent precisely because it neither desired nor was able to make
the interests of the working masses the basis of its political
aspirations.

For Büchner the question of freedom was a question of force. This is the
same idea which, many years later, was so well developed by Lassalle in
his speech on the essence of the Constitution.

Büchner also wrote a play, *Danton's Tod* (*The Death of Danton*). I
refrain from making a literary assessment of the play and shall merely
note that its 'pathos' lies in the unavailing and therefore tormenting
quest for conformity to law in the great movements of history. In one of
his letters to his betrothed, evidently dating to the period when he was
working on his play, Büchner wrote:

For several days already I have been taking up my pen every minute, but
cannot write a word. I have been studying the history of the revolution,
I have felt myself crushed, as it were, by the frightful fatalism of
history. I see in human nature the most repulsive mediocrity, and in
human relations an irresistible force imparted to all in general and no
one in particular. The individual personality is only foam on the crest
of the wave, greatness is only an accident, the power of genius only a
puppet-show, a ridiculous attempt to fight against an iron law, which at
best can only be discovered, but which it is impossible to master.

Nineteenth-century utopian socialism, just like the French Enlighteners
of the eighteenth century, could not solve the problem of conformity to
law in the historical development of mankind. I will say more. The
socialism of that period was utopian precisely because it was unable to
solve this question. However, Büchner's persistent efforts in this
direction show that he was no longer content with the point of view of
utopian socialism. When AI Herzen was writing his book *From the Other
Shore*, he struggled with the same problem that had much earlier worried
Büchner.

###### II

I have said that the artisan journeymen in Germany were the bearers of
French socialist ideas. Here is how this happened. As we know, after
finishing their apprenticeship they spent several years in travel. Their
travels frequently took them out of Germany, and while residing in more
advanced countries they came in contact with progressive social
movements there. In France they became acquainted with socialism, and
sympathised most with its extreme shade --- *communism*. The most
notable theoretician of German socialism at the time, the tailor
Weitling, whom I have already mentioned, also experienced the influence
of the French utopian socialists, and also became a communist.

Utopian socialism did not appeal to the objective course of historical
development, but to the better feelings of mankind. As German writers
say nowadays, it was *socialism of emotions.* Weitling was no exception
to this general rule. He, too, appealed to feeling, reinforcing his
calls with excerpts from the Bible. His first work, *Die Menschheit wie
sie ist und wie sie sein sollte* (*Mankind As It Is and As It Ought to
Be*), published in 1838, begins with these words from the Gospel:

But when He saw the multitudes He was moved with compassion on them\...
Then saith He unto His disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but
the labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that
He sends forth labourers into His harvest.

Weitling explains this passage in the sense that the harvest is mankind
ripening to perfection, and its fruit is the community of property on
earth. 'The commandment of love calls you to the harvest', he says to
his readers, 'and the reaping to enjoyment. If then you wish to reap and
find enjoyment, fulfil the commandment of love.' ^[\[107\]](#n107)^

Owen proceeded from the teaching on the formation of the human
character, that is to say, from the known concept of human nature. The
French utopian socialists based themselves on the same concept,
modifying it here and there to suit themselves. Weitling was no
exception. Following Fourier's example, he proceeded from an analysis of
the passions and needs of man; and constructed his plan of future
society upon the results of this analysis. ^[\[108\]](#n108)^ However,
he did not attribute any absolute significance to his plan. He said
himself that plans of this type are very good in that they prove the
possibility and necessity for social reform. 'The more such works there
are, the more proof the people will have of this. But the best work of
all on this subject we shall have to write with our blood.'
^[\[109\]](#n109)^ Here we feel a more or less vague consciousness of
the fact that the nature of the future society will be determined by the
objective course of social development, expressed by the way in the
revolutionary struggle of classes. Weitling addressed himself, not to
the 'rich' and not even to the whole of mankind without distinction of
title and rank, but only to the 'people of labour and affliction'. He
took Fourier severely to task for making concessions to capital in his
plan for the distribution of products. In Weitling's opinion, to make
such concessions was to sew old patches on humanity's new clothing and
to hold up to ridicule the present and all future generations.
^[\[110\]](#n110)^ He said that every replacement of the old by the new
was a revolution. Consequently, communists could not but be
revolutionaries. However, revolutions would not always be bloody.
^[\[111\]](#n111)^ Communists preferred a peaceful revolution to one
accompanied by bloodshed. But the course of transformation depended not
on them, but on the conduct of the upper classes and of governments. 'In
peaceful times, let us teach; in stormy times, let us act', wrote
Weitling. ^[\[112\]](#n112)^ However, he made reservations to this
formula which show that he did not have an entirely clear conception
either of the character of proletarian *action* or of what the workers
had to be *taught*. According to him, humanity was now mature enough to
understand all that might help it remove the knife pointed at its
throat. Weitling condemned Marx's opinion that Germany in its historical
progress towards communism could not by-pass the intermediate phase of
bourgeois rule. He wanted Germany to skip over this stage, just as later
our Narodniks desired that Russia should skip over it. In 1848 he
refused to agree with the proposition that the proletariat should
support the bourgeoisie in its struggle against the remnants of
feudalism and the absolute monarchy. Being convinced that everyone was
wise enough to wish to remove the knife pointed at his throat, Weitling
upheld the theory usually expressed in the words: 'The worse, the
better.' He believed that the worse the position of the working mass
became, the more likely it was to protest against the existing order of
things. The subsequent development of the European proletariat
demonstrated that actually this was not the case. Nevertheless, this
theory was repeated in full in the arguments of MA Bakunin. Among the
measures which Weitling believed could prove to be necessary in certain
circumstances of the struggle for social reconstruction, was one that
today seems very strange. He thought it possible to recommend to the
communists (true), only conditionally, in certain circumstances, that
they should appeal to the slum element of the urban population and adopt
'new tactics' in keeping with the low moral level of these elements. In
his main work, he expressed this thought only in hints, though fairly
transparent ones. ^[\[113\]](#n113)^ Later he came to express it more
clearly, building up a theory of the 'thieving proletariat' (*des
'stehlenden Proletariats')*. Weitling's associates rejected this theory.
^[\[114\]](#n114)^ But MA Bakunin subsequently created a theory close to
that of Weitling's, the doctrine of the '*brigand*' as the bulwark of
the revolutionary movement. To those who may be too unpleasantly
surprised by such theories, I would remind that the type of the
great-hearted and heroically bold brigand had quite a respectable place
in Romantic literature. ^[\[115\]](#n115)^ And not only in Romantic
literature; Schiller's Karl Moor was also a robber. Utopian socialism in
general paid a fairly high tribute to the fantastic.

### III

In Weitling's main work, which was warmly praised by Feuerbach and Marx,
there is much evidence that he understood, more clearly than many of the
French utopians, the objective logic of the mutual relations between the
classes in capitalist society. The reader will find a number of
interesting remarks also in those --- first --- chapters of his
*Garantien* which deal with the *origin* of classes and of class rule.
In his conception of the motive forces of social development, Weitling
remained unquestionably an idealist. However, one senses that he is no
longer satisfied with historical idealism, and that he dwells with
pleasure on those conjectures which at times occur to him, and which
suggest the possibility of a more profound explanation of at least some
aspects of social life. I am sure that it was this particular feature of
his main work which was one of the reasons why he won Marx's sympathy
and understanding. But for all that, Weitling's *Garantien* shows no
sign of its author having taken very much interest in economic theory as
such. He was a product of his times: and in his times the German
socialists did not as yet study economics.

I do not believe \[Engels wrote, in his reminiscences of the German
Communist League of the pre-Marxist period\] there was a single man in
the whole League at that time who had ever read a book on political
economy. But that mattered little; for the time being 'equality',
'brotherhood' and 'justice' helped them to surmount every theoretical
obstacle. ^[\[116\]](#n116)^

The German Communists obviously bore no resemblance to the British
socialists in this respect. It should not be forgotten, however, that as
early as the 1830s there was a socialist in Germany who was deeply
interested in economic questions and extremely well versed in the
literature of political economy. True, he stood quite apart. His name
was Johann-Karl Rodbertus Jagetzow. ^[\[117\]](#n117)^

He said of himself that his theory was only:

\... the consistent sequel of the proposition introduced into the
science by Smith, and still more profoundly substantiated by the school
of Ricardo, the proposition that all articles of consumption,
*economically considered, must be regarded only as products of labour,
as costing nothing apart from labour*. ^[\[118\]](#n118)^

This view of his on labour as the sole source of the value of articles
of consumption was expounded in the first of his books, published in
1842 and entitled *Zur Erkenntnis unserer staatswirtschaftlichen
Zustände*. A literal translation of this is 'Contribution to the
Knowledge of Our National Economic Conditions'. But in point of fact
Rodbertus did not occupy himself with national economic matters in the
proper meaning of the term. He studied the position of the worker in
capitalist society, and tried to devise measures that would contribute
to improving that position:

The main purpose of my researches \[he writes\] will be to increase the
share of the working classes in the national product, and that on a
solid foundation freed from the influences of the vicissitudes of the
market. I want to give this class the opportunity also to share in the
advance of productivity; I want to abolish that law which otherwise
could be fatal for our condition, namely, the law that, no matter how
much productivity increases, the workers are always reduced by virtue of
the market to a wage-level no higher than the necessary subsistence
level; a wage-level which deprives the workers of the possibility of
receiving the education of our time\... a wage-level which constitutes
the most glaring contradiction with their present legal position, with
that formal equality with the other estates proclaimed by our most
important institutions. ^[\[119\]](#n119)^

As wages in present-day conditions are always being reduced to the
workers' basest subsistence level, and since the productivity of labour
is constantly increasing, the working class receives an ever-lessening
share of the product which it creates by its labour:

I am convinced \[says Rodbertus\] that the wages of labour, regarded as
a quota of the product, fall in a proportion at least equal to, if not
greater than, that in which the productivity of labour rises.
^[\[120\]](#n120)^

And if a constant reduction of the workers' wages --- as a share of the
national product created by their labour --- can be proved, then such
menacing phenomena as *industrial crises* become quite understandable.
As a consequence of the relative reduction of wages, the workers'
purchasing power ceases to correspond to the development of the social
productive forces. This purchasing power does not increase, or even
decreases, while production increases and the markets are glutted with
goods. From this arise the difficulties in selling the goods, stagnation
in business, and finally industrial crises. Rodbertus is not daunted by
the objection that purchasing power remains in the hands of the upper
classes, and so continues to influence the market:

Value is inherent in a product \[he says\], but it does not rise above
the demand. What in the hands of a worker is still of value, in the
hands of others becomes superfluous, that is, an unsalable product. A
long halt must occur in national production to allow the accumulated
mass to be distributed, and only then should a large part of national
production be restructured so that what is taken from a worker could
amount, in the hands of another, to an increment in the purchasing power
in the market. ^[\[121\]](#n121)^

The reduction of the share of the working class in the national product
signifies its *impoverishment*. Rodbertus does not agree with Adam
Smith, who contended that a man was rich or poor to the degree that he
was assured the satisfaction of his needs. If this were true, the
well-to-do German of today would be richer than the kings of antiquity:
'By wealth \[of a person or a class\] we have to understand the
*relative share* \[of that person or class\] in the mass of products
determined by the current stage of the cultural development of a
people.' ^[\[122\]](#n122)^

So the growth of social wealth is accompanied by the relative
impoverishment of the class whose labour creates that wealth.
Five-sixths of the nation not only prove to be deprived of all the
blessings of culture, but have at times to endure the most frightful
miseries of destitution which hangs over them constantly. In previous
historical epochs, the privations of the working masses --- let us
assume --- were essential for the progress of civilisation. That no
longer holds good. Now the growth of the productive forces gives every
possibility of eliminating these privations. And Rodbertus asks in his
first letter to Kirchmann:

Can there be\... a more just demand than that the creators of the old
and new wealth also receive some advantage from this increase; than that
their income be increased or their labour-time shortened, or that an
ever greater number of them enter the ranks of those happy ones who are
preferentially entitled to reap the fruits of labour?

Convinced that there is nothing more just than this demand, Rodbertus
proposes a series of measures for the improvement of the workers' lot.

All these measures can be reduced to the regulation of wages by law. The
state must establish their level for each branch of production, and then
alter them in accordance with the rise in the productivity of national
labour. Such a determination of wages would lead logically to the
establishment of a new 'scale of value'.

Since all articles of consumption, from the point of view of political
economy, must be regarded only as products of labour, costing nothing
apart from labour, *only labour* can be the true 'scale of value'. In
present-day society, because of the fluctuation of market prices,
products are not always exchanged in accordance with the amount of
labour expended on their production. This evil must be eliminated by
state intervention. The state must put into circulation 'labour money',
that is, certificates indicating how much labour had been spent on the
production of a given article. In brief, Rodbertus arrives here at the
same idea of the organisation of exchange which arose first in Britain
in the 1820s and then went from there to France (Proudhon). It would be
superfluous to enlarge upon it.

It should be added, however, that all such measures were for Rodbertus
only of temporary significance. He said that later --- in some five
hundred years --- communist society would be established, and then the
exploitation of man by man would come to an end altogether.

In proposing his solution of the 'social question', Rodbertus never
tired of repeating that this solution must be *absolutely peaceable.* He
believed neither in 'barricades' nor in 'kerosene', nor yet in the
independent political action of the proletariat. He expected everything
to come from above, from the royal power which, in his opinion, should
and could become 'social' (*soziales Königthum*).

My exposition of Rodbertus' views has been taken from various of his
works, starting with *Zur Erkenntnis*, published in 1842, etc. It is
worthwhile noting, however, that he presented all his views in condensed
form as early as the late 1830s, in an article which he sent to the
*Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung*, but which that paper did not accept.
The article was reprinted in *Briefe und sozialpolitische Aufsätze* by
Dr Rodbertus-Jagetzow published by Rudolph Meyer in 1882 in Berlin. (See
pp 575-86 in Volume 2: 'Fragmente aus einem alten Manuskript'.) It is
interesting in many respects. But the following points deserve the most
attention: first, his view of the working class as barbarians
(\'Barbaren an Geist und Sitte' --- barbarians in spirit and morals);
^[\[123\]](#n123)^ secondly, the fear that the barbarians living within
the ranks of civilised society might become its rulers, just as the
barbarians of antiquity became the rulers of Rome. Everything went well
so long as it was a question of the present-day barbarians being used by
the state in its struggle against the bourgeoisie. But on whom would the
state rely in the struggle against these barbarians? Would the latter
struggle for long against themselves? In the interests of its
self-preservation society will have to carry out social reform.
^[\[124\]](#n124)^

Rodbertus was afraid of the working class. If he had been less afraid of
this class, he would have been less inclined both to his principal
utopia --- a 'social' monarchy, and his secondary utopias closely
connected with it, like 'labour money'.

Today bourgeois economists are fond of repeating that Marx took his
economic theory from the British socialists. Some twenty to twenty-five
years ago, when they were hardly acquainted with British socialist
literature, they 'discovered' that Marx owed his position as an
economist entirely to Rodbertus. One argument is as unfounded as the
other. Moreover, the greater part of Rodbertus' works appeared at a time
when Marx's economic views were already fully formed in their main
features. Nevertheless, Rodbertus holds a place of honour among the
German economists, ^[\[125\]](#n125)^ whom, be it said in passing, he
regarded with profound disdain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} *Natural law ---* doctrine that law supposedly
emerged from the reason and conception of man and independently of the
state --- Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Leslie Stephen finds that in intellectual temperament
Godwin, more than any other English thinker, resembled the French
theorists of the pre-revolutionary period (*History of English Thought
in the Eighteenth Century by Leslie Stephen*, Volume 2, Second Edition
(London, 1881), p 264). Let us assume that is so. But Godwin's
theoretical premise was exactly the same as, for example, that of Owen,
Fourier and other outstanding socialists of the European continent.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} The *London Corresponding Society*, formed in 1792,
was the first working-class political organisation in England. The
members of the society corresponded with each other, hence the name.
Officially it merely presented a programme of universal suffrage and
annual parliamentary elections; most of its members were in favour of a
republic --- Editor.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} The reference is to Malthus' work *An Essay on the
Principle of Population*, published in 1798 --- Editor.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} The 'enclosures' gave rise to a whole literature
devoted to the agrarian reform. This literature, for example, the works
of Thomas Spence, William Ogilvie and Thomas Paine, is in its way very
remarkable, and played a fairly significant part in promoting the
development of socialist theory in Britain. However, I cannot deal with
this here, if only because, belonging to the eighteenth century, it is
outside the scope of my theme even chronologically.

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Charles Hall's work was entitled *Effects of
Civilisation on the People in European States* --- Editor.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} British socialist writings of the first half of the
nineteenth century are now very rare. Consequently, in speaking of some
of them, I am compelled to quote from recently published German
translations. B Oldenberg translated into German Hall's book under the
title of *Die Wirkungen der Zivilisation auf die Massen* (Leipzig,
1905). This was the fourth in a series published by the late Professor G
Adler under the general title of *Hauptwerke des Sozialismus und der
Sozialpolitik.* The quotation from Hall is on page 29 of Oldenberg's
translation.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Ibid, p 38.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} Ibid, pp 38-39.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Ibid, p 47. It should be pointed out that British
law then treated a strike as a criminal offence.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} Ibid, p 40.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} Ibid, p 76.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} Ibid, p 82.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} Ibid, p 49.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} Born on 14 March 1771, in Newtown, North Wales;
died on 17 November 1858.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} In Britain in the 1830s and 1840s the working day
in many enterprises still lasted 14 to 16 hours. The shorter working
hours introduced by Parliament in 1833 applied only to juveniles of
between 13 and 18 years of age; their working day was reduced to 12
hours --- Editor.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} The last five words are in English in the original
--- Editor.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} \[The last four words are in English in the
original --- Editor.\] See his letter, which was printed in a number of
London newspapers on 9 August 1817, and reproduced in *The Life of
Robert Owen Written by Himself* (London, 1857), as supplementary to his
autobiography. The volume in question is referred to as IA. I shall
frequently refer to it below.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} See *The Life\...*, IA, pp 84, 86.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} The full title of this work is *A New View of
Society: or Essays on the Principle of the Formation of the Human
Character, and Application of the Principle to the Practice.* There are
four of these Essays; two of them appeared at the end of 1812, and the
other two at the beginning of 1813.

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} Here and elsewhere I am quoting from the second
edition of *Essays* (1816); see pp 19, 90 and 91.

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} Ibid, p 149.

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} See *Observations on the Effects of the
Manufacturing System, With Hints for the Improvement of Those Parts of
it Which Are Most Injurious to Health and Morals: Dedicated Most
Respectfully to the British Legislature* (1815). Reprinted in *The Life
of Robert Owen*, IA. The words mentioned are on p 38; cf also p 39.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Ibid, p 39. It would be too easy to prove that Owen
was mistaken in considering that in 1815 British exports had reached
their 'utmost height'. It is useful to note, however, that in Owen's
views the *theory of the markets* was already beginning to play a part
not unlike that which was assigned to it in the teaching of our
Narodniks in the 1880s.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} The words in inverted commas are in English in the
original --- Editor.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} Child labour under nine years of age was prohibited
at cotton mills by the Act of 1819; the working day for children and
juveniles from nine to 16 years of age was 13.5 hours --- Editor.

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1, published by ON
Popova, p 215 \[in Russian\]. \[Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow,
1974), p 264 --- Editor.\]

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} *Observations\...*, p 78. \[The words in inverted
commas are in English in the original --- Editor.\]

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} *The Life\...,* IA, p 60 *et seq*. \[The italicised
words are in English in the original --- Editor.\]

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} *The Life\...*, IA, p 115.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} It had evidently to consist of a materialist view
of nature, slightly modified by the usual phraseology of deism and
supplemented by socialist morality.

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} Both lectures are reproduced as a supplement to
Owen's *Lectures on an Entire New State of Society.*

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} \'Lecture 11', *Lectures on an Entire New State*,
etc, p 151. \[The words in inverted commas are in English in the
original --- Editor.\]

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} Even yet in Britain they speak of the 'working
classes' instead of the 'working class'.

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} *The Life\...,* IA, pp 229-30.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} The last two words are in English in the original
--- Editor.

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} *The Life\...,* IA, Introduction, Part 3.

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} *Chartism* --- a mass revolutionary movement of
British workers in the 1830s and 1840s. The movement started with huge
meetings and demonstrations and was carried under the slogan of the
People's Charter, which demanded changes in the electoral law. The three
petitions submitted to Parliament were rejected and after 1848 the
movement declined --- Editor.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} The words in inverted commas are in English in the
original --- Editor.

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} Besides the one in London, another was opened at
Birmingham.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} In this essay I have been discussing only the
history of certain *ideas* and not the history of a social *movement;*
but in passing I will remark that the period of Owen's association with
the trades unions was one in which the British workers were rather
strongly inclined to practical methods of class struggle, very highly
reminiscent of those dear to the hearts of our present-day
'revolutionary' syndicalists.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} The recently published book by Max Beer,
*Geschichte des Sozialismus in England*, has more to say of them (p 280
*et seq*). Hetherington's will is worthy of special note (pp 282-83).
Lovett and Hetherington were active members of the Chartist movement.
There is an autobiography of Lovett, *The Life and Struggles of William
Lovett, in his Pursuit of Bread, Knowledge and Freedom* (London, 1876).

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} Hetherington's will shows how the most talented
workers understood his true religion: 'The only religion useful to man
consists exclusively of the practice of morality, and in the mutual
interchange of kind actions.'

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} See Chapter 2, 'The Owenite Period', in Morris
Hillquit, *History of Socialism in the United States* (New York, 1903).
There are both German and Russian translations.

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} See page 71 *et seq* of his essay 'Geschichte der
sozialistischen Ideen in England' which is an Introduction to the German
translation of the now fairly well-known work by William Thompson,
*Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most
Conducive to Human Happiness.* In referring to this work, I shall be
quoting the German translation by Oswald Collmann published in Berlin in
1903.

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} Born in 1785; died in 1833.

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} See page 16 of the German translation.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} It is called *Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation.*

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} It is entitled *The Source and Remedy of the
National Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell.* Marx mentions it
in *Theorien über den Mehrwert*, Volume 3 (Stuttgart, 1910), pp 281-306.
\[Karl Marx, *Theories of Surplus Value*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), pp
238-57 --- Editor.\]

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} Thompson's study of distribution came out in 1824;
in the following year he published *Labour Rewarded.* In the same year,
Gray (1798-1850) published *A Lecture on Human Happiness* and in 1831
*Social System.* John Bray's book *Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy:
Or, the Age of Might and the Age of Right* is important for the history
of economic theory (it was published in Leeds in 1839). It is
remarkable, by the way, for the fact that in it Bray seemingly showed a
tendency to abandon the idealist view of history common to all the
utopians and adopt the standpoint of the materialist explanation of
history (see his argument on page 26 that society cannot at will change
the direction of its opinions). True, this tendency did not impel Bray
to make a serious analysis of the basic causes of social development. I
will mention here, too, TR Edmonds' book, *Practical Moral and Political
Economy* (London, 1828). According to Edmonds, the working class
receives only a third of the value it produces; the remaining two-thirds
go to the employers (pp 107, 116 and 288). This is quite close to the
truth for Britain even today. His views on the social causes of
*pauperism* (pp 109-10) are also well worth attention. In 1821,
Ravenstone published the pamphlet *A Few Doubts as to the Correctness of
Some Opinions Generally Entertained on the Subjects of Population and
Political Economy.* Among Hodgskin's works the most important for us
here are: 1. *Labour: Defended Against the Claims of Capital* (London,
1825); 2. *Popular Political Economy*; 3. *The Natural and Artificial
Right of Property Contrasted* (London, 1832). Concerning Ravenstone and
Hodgskin, see Marx's work mentioned above (pp 306-80) \[Karl Marx,
*Theories of Surplus Value*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), pp 257-319 ---
Editor\]. There is also a work on Hodgskin by Elie Halevy, entitled
*Thomas Hodgskin (1787- 1869*) (Paris, 1903).

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} *The History of Trade Unionism* (London, 1894), p
147.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} Hodgskin's real relationship to Marx may be seen in
the --- note, very sympathetic --- criticism of Hodgskin's views in
Volume 3 --- which I have already mentioned --- of *Theorien über den
Mehrwert.* In political economy, Marx has the same relation to the
British socialists as he has to Auguste Thierry, Guizot or Mignet in the
scientific explanation of history. In both cases they are not teachers
of Marx but only predecessors, who prepared some --- true, very valuable
--- material for the theoretical edifice later constructed by Marx. As
far as Marx's predecessors are concerned, in considering the history of
the scientific solution of the question of the exploitation of wage
labour by capital, one should not confine oneself to the British
socialists of the first half of the nineteenth century. Some English
writers of the seventeenth century had already displayed a fairly clear
comprehension of the nature and origin of this exploitation. (See, for
example, *The Law of Freedom in a Platform: Or, True Magistracy
Restored. Humbly Presented to Oliver Cromwell*, by Gerard Winstanley
(London, 1651), p 12; see also *Proposals for Raising a College of
Industry of All Useful Trades and Husbandry with Profit for the Rich, a
Plentiful Living for the Poor and a Good Education for Youth* (London,
1695), p 21; and finally, *Essays About the Poor, Manufactures, Trade
Plantations, and Immorality, etc*, by John Sellers (London, 1699), pp
5-6.) It is strange that no one has yet taken the trouble to discover
that Marx borrowed his economic theory from the authors of the
above-mentioned works.

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} Karl Marx, *Theories of Surplus Value*, Volume 3
(Moscow, 1975), p 238 --- Editor.

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} *Physiocrats ---* representatives of a trend in
bourgeois classical political economy which arose in France in the
1750s. They proclaimed unrestricted rule of private ownership, rejected
protectionism and demanded freedom of trade and competition. They
advocated a 'Laissez faire, laissez passer' economic policy --- Editor.

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} Monsieur l\'Abbé de Mably, *Doutes proposés aux
philosophes économistes sur l\'ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés
politiques* (A la Haye, 1768), p 15.

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} See *Analyse de la doctrine de Babeuf, tribun du
peuple, proscrit par le directoire exécutif pour avoir dit la vérité.*
Published as a supplement to F Buonarroti's famous book, *Gracchus
Babeuf et la conjuration des égaux.* I have at hand the Paris edition of
1869, which is somewhat abridged.

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} *Gracchus Babeuf*, etc, p 70.

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} Ibid, pp 48 and 50.

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p 514 --- Editor.

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} Born on 17 October 1760; died on 19 May 1825.

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} See *Le Producteur*, Volume 1, p 245.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} Born in 1809; died in 1865.

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} Born in 1811; died in 1882.

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} *Histoire de dix ans, 1830-1840*, fourth edition,
Volume 1, p 4, footnote.

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} Born in 1806; died in 1863.

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} Born in 1797; died in 1871.

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} See *De la ploutocratie* (Boussac, 1848), p 25. The
first edition of this book was issued in 1843.

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} *Trudoviks ---* a group of petty-bourgeois
democrats in the state dumas in Russia composed of peasants and
intellectuals of Narodnik leanings. The Trudoviks demanded abolition of
all estate and national restrictions, and democratisation of local
self-government. The Trudovik agrarian programme was based on Narodnik
principles of egalitarian land tenure and alienation of privately-owned
land with compensation --- Editor.

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} Born in 1808; died in 1893.

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} *Débâcle de la politique en France* (Paris, 1836),
p 16.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} *Oeuvres choisies de C-H de Saint-Simon*, Volume 1
(Bruxelles, 1859), pp 20-21.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} My italics.

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} *Correspondance politique, 1835-1840* (Paris,
1849), p 6.

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} Echoes of such views on the proletarians may be
heard in some of AI Herzen's discourses.

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} *Oeuvres complètes de Ch Fourier*, Volume 4 (Paris,
1841), pp 191-92.

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} *Oeuvres choisies*, Volume 1, p 27.

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} *Du Gouvernement de la France et du ministère
actuel* (Paris, 1820), p 237.

[[78.]{.info}]{#n78} See Avant-propos to the third edition of the above
book, *Du Gouvernement de la France*, etc.

[[79.]{.info}]{#n79} Born in 1761 in Pisa; died in 1837 in Paris.

[[80.]{.info}]{#n80} *Convention ---* the third National Assembly during
the French Revolution. It was established as a higher representative
institution in France and lasted from September 1792 till 26 October
1795. It proclaimed the First French Republic, completed the abolition
of feudalism and ruthlessly disposed of all counter-revolutionary and
conciliatory elements --- Editor.

[[81.]{.info}]{#n81} On this, see Chernov's book *Le parti républicain
en France* (Paris, 1901), pp 80-89, 281-82. It should be noted, however,
that Mr Chernov gives an incorrect description of the attitude of
Blanqui to Babouvism and to Saint-Simonism.

[[82.]{.info}]{#n82} Born in 1805; died on 1 January 1881.

[[83.]{.info}]{#n83} *Débâcle de la politique en France*, p 63,
Considérant's italics.

[[84.]{.info}]{#n84} Very little is said about him by the historians of
French socialism, although in certain respects his views are worthy of
close attention. I regret that space does not allow me to present his
teaching here. I shall mention only this. More than any other, it shows
how closely connected were the ideas of the French utopian socialists
--- and especially of their Left wing, the communists --- with the
French materialists of the eighteenth century. Dézamy relied mainly on
Helvétius, whom he referred to as a bold innovator and an immortal
thinker. Dézamy's main work, *Code de la communauté*, was published in
Paris in 1843. In 1841 he published the newspaper *L\'Humanitaire*. It
is interesting to note that Marx, in his polemic with the Bauer
brothers, described the Dézamy trend as scientific. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, 'The Holy Family', *Collected Works*, Volume 4
(Moscow, 1975), p 131 --- Editor.\]

[[85.]{.info}]{#n85} Born in 1788; died in 1856.

[[86.]{.info}]{#n86} *Voyage en Icarie* (1855), p 565. The italics are
Cabet's. This book (*Voyage to Icaria*) was first published in March
1842. It is the best known of all Cabet's works; it describes the life
of an imaginary communist society.

[[87.]{.info}]{#n87} Regarding F Buonarroti's attitude to the
independent action of the people, see the interesting remark in Paul
Robiquet's *Buonarroti et la secte des Egaux d\'après les documents
inédits* (Paris, 1910), p 282.

[[88.]{.info}]{#n88} 'the Golden Age, which a blind tradition has
hitherto placed in the past, is before us.' --- this is one of the
principal theses of Saint-Simon's philosophical historical system, which
he used as an epigraph to his work *Opinions littéraires, philosophiques
et industrielles.* The same words were used as an epigraph to the
Saint-Simonist journal *Le Producteur*. In his series of essays
*Abroad*, Saltykov-Shchedrin wrote: '\... from there (from\... France of
Saint-Simon, Cabet, Fourier\...) faith in humanity poured into us, from
there the conviction came that "the golden age" is not behind us but in
front of us\... In short, everything good, everything desirable and
everything that is full of love --- all this came from there.'
\[Editor\]

[[89.]{.info}]{#n89} In the works of Saint-Simon there are but allusions
to it; we have already pointed out that in some respects the followers
of Saint-Simon went much further than their teacher.

[[90.]{.info}]{#n90} See *Doctrine saint-simonienne. Exposition* (Paris,
1854), p 207.

[[91.]{.info}]{#n91} *Code de la communauté*, p 49.

[[92.]{.info}]{#n92} Sometimes this 'rehabilitation' itself was
presented in a utopian form: for example, some of Enfantin's fantasies
on the relations between the sexes. But in essence it meant the
intention 'here on earth to mount to the kingdom of heaven', as Heine
put it somewhat later. \[From Heinrich Heine's poem *Deutschland. Ein
Wintermärchen* (*Germany: Winter's Tale*) --- Editor.\] (See, by the
way, *De l\'Humanité*, by Pierre Leroux, Volume 1, 1845 edition, p 176
*et seq*.)

[[93.]{.info}]{#n93} *Doctrine saint-simonienne*, p 235.

[[94.]{.info}]{#n94} See *Oeuvres complètes de Fourier*, Volume 5, pp
1-84; *On Rhythm*, pp 75-80.

[[95.]{.info}]{#n95} See his *Discourse aux artistes*, which appeared
for the first time in the November and December issues of *Revue
Encyclopédique* for 1831 and was reproduced in his *Oeuvres*, Volume 1
(Paris, 1850). The passage quoted is on page 66.

[[96.]{.info}]{#n96} *Discourse aux artistes*, p 67.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n97} The same thought was expressed later by NG
Chernyshevsky and Count Leo Tolstoy.

[[98.]{.info}]{#n98} *Discourse aux artistes*, pp 65-67.

[[99.]{.info}]{#n99} It is known that the leading Russian 'Westerners'
of the 1840s were extremely favourably inclined to Pierre Leroux, whom,
for the sake of caution, they gave the *nom de plume* of 'Pyotr Ryzhy'
(\'Pyotr the Red-Headed'). Of course, their sympathies were not confined
solely to his *literary* views. But it does no harm to point out that
they were in agreement with him, too, on the fundamental questions of
aesthetics. \[*Westerners ---* a trend in Russian social thought in the
mid-nineteenth century that admitted that Russia would follow the same
path of development as Western Europe (hence the name) and pass through
the capitalist stage. The Westerners stressed the progressive nature of
the bourgeois system (in comparison with serf-owning Russia), had a
negative attitude towards serfdom, their political ideals being the
constitutional monarchies and bourgeois parliamentary states in Western
Europe, Britain and France, in particular --- Editor.\]

[[100.]{.info}]{#n100} From the article 'Considérations sur Werther et
en général sur la poésie de notre époque' which appeared in 1839 and
subsequently in the first volume of Leroux's *Works*, pp 431-51. The
remark on the egoism of art for art's sake is on page 447.

[[101.]{.info}]{#n101} Ibid, p 450.

[[102.]{.info}]{#n102} See article 'From Idealism to Materialism' in
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow,
1976). Plekhanov did not write the article about 'true socialists' ---
Editor.

[[103.]{.info}]{#n103} See Bernhard Becker, *Die Reaktion in Deutschland
gegen die Revolution von 1848* (Braunschweig, 1873), p 68.

[[104.]{.info}]{#n104} Born in 1808; left for America in 1849 and died
in 1871.

[[105.]{.info}]{#n105} Born in 1813; died in 1837. He was the brother of
Ludwig Büchner who became prominent later.

[[106.]{.info}]{#n106} The Constitutionalists were working for the
political unification of Germany.

[[107.]{.info}]{#n107} See page 7 of the New York edition of this work,
1854.

[[108.]{.info}]{#n108} Ten peasants form a 'Zug' and appoint a
'Zugführer\'; ten 'Zugführers' appoint an 'Ackermann\'; one hundred
'Ackermänner' appoint a 'Landwirtschaftsrath' and so on, and so forth
(*Die Menschheit*, p 32). This is how agricultural work is to organised
in Weitling's future society. He goes into similar detail in describing
other sides of its life, I see no point in quoting them here.

[[109.]{.info}]{#n109} Ibid, p 30.

[[110.]{.info}]{#n110} See his main work *Garantien der Harmonie und
Freiheit*, published at the end of 1842. It was republished in Berlin in
1908 on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary of Weitling's birth,
with a biographical introduction and notes by Mehring. The reference to
Fourier's plan of distribution of products is on pages 224 and 225 of
that edition.

[[111.]{.info}]{#n111} Ibid, pp 226-27.

[[112.]{.info}]{#n112} Ibid, p 235.

[[113.]{.info}]{#n113} See ibid, pp 235-36.

[[114.]{.info}]{#n114} On this matter and the attitude of other
communists to it, see G Adler, *Die Geschichte der ersten
sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland mit besonderen
Rücksicht auf die einwirkenden Theorien* (Breslau, 1885), pp 43-44. I
hasten to add that Weitling himself soon ceased to defend his 'new
tactics'.

[[115.]{.info}]{#n115} See the interesting remarks on this subject in I
Ivanov's preface to the Russian translation of Byron's *The Corsair*
(*Complete Works of Byron*, published by Efron-Brockhaus, Volume 1 (St
Petersburg, 1904), pp 274-76 \[in Russian\]).

[[116.]{.info}]{#n116} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 178 --- Editor.

[[117.]{.info}]{#n117} Born in 1805; died in 1875.

[[118.]{.info}]{#n118} Italicised by Rodbertus.

[[119.]{.info}]{#n119} *Zur Erkenntnis*, pp 28-29, footnote.

[[120.]{.info}]{#n120} *Zur Beleuchtung der sozialen Frage* (Berlin,
1875), p 25. This book is a reprint of the *Social Letters to von
Kirchmann* published in 1850-51. It contains the second and third
letters. Originally there were three letters. A fourth was published
after the death of Rodbertus under the title of *Das Kapital* (Berlin,
1884).

[[121.]{.info}]{#n121} *Zeitschrift für die gesammte
Staatswissenschaft*, Parts 1 and 2 (1878), p 345. Rodbertus' pamphlet
*Der normal-Arbeitstag* is reprinted there.

[[122.]{.info}]{#n122} *Zur Erkenntnis*, pp 38-39.

[[123.]{.info}]{#n123} Compare with Enfantin's views given above.

[[124.]{.info}]{#n124} See p 579 in Volume 2 of the R Meyer publication
just quoted.

[[125.]{.info}]{#n125} On Rodbertus, see Engels' preface to the German
translation of Marx's *Misère de la philosophie* (*The Poverty of
Philosophy*, originally published in French; there is a Russian
translation by VI Zasulich edited by myself) \[Karl Marx, *The Poverty
of Philosophy* (Moscow, 1975), pp 9-24 (\'Marx and Hodbertus', preface
to the First German edition of Marx's *Poverty of Philosophy*) ---
Editor\], and *Theorien über den Mehrwert*, by Marx, Volume 2, second
section of the first part (Die Grundrente) \[Karl Marx, *Theories of
Surplus-Value*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1975), pp 15-113 --- Editor\].
Rodbertus' views were first expounded in Russian at the beginning of the
1880s by the late NI Sieber (in *Yuridichesky Vestnik*) and by myself
(in *Otechestvenniye zapiski*) \[*Yuridichesky Vestnik* (*Juridical
Herald*) --- a liberal bourgeois monthly published in Moscow from 1867
to 1892. *Otechestvenniye Zapiski* (*Fatherland Notes*) --- literary and
political journal published in St Petersburg from 1820 to 1884. In the
period between 1839 and 1846 it became one of the best progressive
magazines of its time. Vissarion Belinsky and Alexander Herzen were
among its editors. From 1863 Nikolai Nekrasov and Mikhail
Saltykov-Shchedrin were its editors, and it became a
revolutionary-democratic journal --- Editor.\] My articles on Rodbertus
were reprinted in the collection *Over Twenty Years* (under the pen name
of Beltov), pp 503-647. Besides these, see T Kozak, *Rodbertus,
sozial-ökonomische Ansichten* (Jena, 1882); Georg Adler, *Rodbertus, der
Begründer des wissenschaftlichen Sozialismus* (Leipzig, 1883); Dietzel,
*Karl Rodbertus, Darstellung seines Lebens und seiner Lehre* (two parts,
Jena, 1886-87); Jentsch, *Rodbertus* (Stuttgart, 1899); Gonner, *Social
Philosophy of Rodbertus* (London, 1899).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[G. V. Plekhanov Archive](../../index.htm)

1
