---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Mattick 1938

# The Masses & The Vanguard

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: [Kurasje
Archive](http://web.archive.org/web/20090221055640/www.kurasje.org/){target="_top"};\
[First Published]{.info}: in Living Marxism vol. 4, no. 4 August 1938
and reprinted in Red & Black Notes #6 and #7;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by [Andy
Blunden](../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/ablunden.htm), for
marxists.org 2003;\
[Proofed]{.info}: and corrected by Geoff Traugh, July 2005.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Economic and political changes proceed with bewildering rapidity since
the close of the world war. The old conceptions in the labour movement
have become faulty and inadequate and the working class organizations
present a scene of indecision and confusion.

In view of the changing economic and political situation it seems that
thorough reappraisement of the task of the working class becomes
necessary in order to find the forms of struggle and organization most
needful and effective.

The relation of "the party," "organization" or "vanguard" to the masses
plays a large part in contemporary working class discussion. That the
importance and indispensability of the vanguard or party is
overemphasized in working class circles is not surprising, since the
whole history and tradition of the movement tends in that direction.

The labour movement today is the fruit of economic and political
developments that found first expression in the Chartist movement in
England (1838-1848), the subsequent development of trade unions from the
fifties onward, and in the Lasallean movement in Germany in the sixties.
Corresponding to the degree of capitalist development trade unions and
political parties developed in the other countries of Europe and
America.

The overthrow of feudalism and the needs of capitalist industry in
themselves necessitated the marshaling of the proletariat and the
granting of certain democratic privileges by the capitalists. The latter
had been reorganizing society in line with their needs. The political
structure of feudalism was replaced by capitalist parliamentarianism.
The capitalist state, the instrument for administering the joint affairs
of the capitalist class, was established and adjusted to the needs of
the new class.

The bothersome proletariat whose assistance against the feudal forces
had been necessary now had to be reckoned with. Once called into action
it could not be entirely eliminated as a political factor. But it could
be coordinated. And this was done -- partly consciously with cunning and
partly by the very dynamics of capitalist economy -- as the working
class adjusted itself and submitted to the new order. It organized
unions whose limited objectives (better wages and conditions) could be
realized in an expanding capitalist economy. It played the game of
capitalist politics within the capitalist state (the practices and forms
of which were determined primarily by capitalist needs) and within these
limitations, achieved apparent successes.

But thereby the proletariat adopted capitalist forms of organization and
capitalist ideologies. The parties of the workers, like those of the
capitalists became limited corporations, the elemental needs of the
class were subordinated to political expediency. Revolutionary
objectives were displaced by horse-trading and manipulations for
political positions. The party became all-important, its immediate
objectives superseded those of the class. Where revolutionary situations
set into motion the class, whose tendency is to fight for the
realization of the revolutionary objective, the parties of the workers
"represented" the working class and were themselves "represented" by
parliamentarians whose very position in parliament constituted
resignation to their status as bargainers within a capitalist order
whose supremacy was no longer challenged.

The general coordination of workers' organizations to capitalism saw the
adoption of the same specialization in union and party activities that
challenged the hierarchy of industries. Managers, superintendent and
foremen saw their counterparts in presidents, organizers and secretaries
of labour organizations. Boards of directors, executive committees, etc.
The mass of organized workers like the mass of wage slaves in industry
left the work of direction and control to their betters.

This emasculation of workers' initiatives proceeded rapidly as
capitalism extended its sway. Until the world war put an end to further
peaceful and "orderly" capitalist expansion.

The risings in Russia, Hungary and Germany found a resurgence of mass
action and initiative. The social necessities compelled action by the
masses. But the traditions of the old labour movement in Western Europe
and the economic backwardness of Eastern Europe frustrated fulfillment
of labour's historic mission. Western Europe saw the masses defeated and
the rise of fascism *à la* Mussolini and Hitler, while Russia's backward
economy developed the "communism" in which the differentiation between
class and vanguard, the specialization of functions and the
regimentation of labour reached its highest point.

The leadership principle, the idea of the vanguard that must assume
responsibility for the proletarian revolution is based on the pre-war
conception of the labour movement, is unsound. The tasks of the
revolutionary and the communist reorganization of society cannot be
realized without the widest and fullest action of the masses themselves.
Theirs is the task and the solution thereof.

The decline of capitalist economy, the progressive paralysis, the
instability, the mass unemployment, the wage cuts and intensive
pauperization of the workers -- all of these compel action, in spite of
fascism *à la* Hitler or the disguised fascism of the AF of L.

The old organizations are either destroyed or voluntarily reduced to
impotence. Real action now is possible only outside the old
organizations. In Italy, Germany and Russia the White and Red fascisms
have already destroyed all old organizations and placed the workers
directly before the problem of finding the new forms of struggle. In
England, France and America the old organizations still maintain a
degree of illusion among workers, but their successive surrender to the
forces of reaction is undermining them rapidly.

The principles of independent struggle, solidarity and communism are
being forced upon them in the actual class struggle. With this powerful
trend toward mass consolidation and mass action the theory of regrouping
and realigning the militant organizations seems to be outdated. True
regroupment is essential, but it cannot be a mere merger of the existing
organizations. In the new conditions a revision of fighting forms is
necessary. "First clarity -- then unity." Even small groups recognizing
and urging the principles of independent mass movement are far more
significant than large groups that deprecate the power of the masses.

There are groups that perceive the defects and weaknesses of parties.
They often furnish sound criticism of the popular front combination and
the unions. But their criticism is limited. They lack a comprehensive
understanding of the new society. The tasks of the proletariat are not
completed with seizure of the means of production and the abolition of
private property. The questions of social reorganization must be put and
answered. Shall state socialism be rejected? What shall be the basis of
a society without wage slavery? What shall determine the economic
relations between factories? What shall determine the relations between
producers and their total product?

These questions and their answers are essential for an understanding of
the forms of struggle and organization today. Here the conflict between
the leadership principle and the principle of independent mass action
becomes apparent. For a thorough understanding of these questions leads
to the realization that the widest, all-embracing, direct activity of
the proletariat as a class is necessary to realize communism.

Of first importance is the abolition of the wage system. The will and
good wishes of men are not potent enough to retain this system after
revolution (as in Russia) without eventually surrendering to the
dynamics engendered by it. It is not enough to seize the means of
production and abolish private property. It is necessary to abolish the
basic condition of modern exploitation, wage slavery, and that act
brings on the succeeding measures of reorganization that would never be
invoked without the first step. Groups that do not put these questions,
no matter how sound their criticism otherwise, lack the most important
elements in the formation of sound revolutionary policy. The abolition
of the wages system must be carefully investigated in its relation to
politics and economics. We will here take up some of the political
implications.

First is the question of the seizure of power by the workers. The
principle of the masses (not party or vanguard) retaining power must be
emphasized. Communism cannot be introduced or realized by a party. Only
the proletariat as a whole can do that. Communism means that the workers
have taken their destiny into their own hands; that they have abolished
wages; that they have, with the suppression of the bureaucratic
apparatus, combined the legislative and executive powers. The unity of
the workers lies not in the sacrosanct merger of parties or trade
unions, but in the similarity of their needs and in the expression of
needs in mass action. All the problems of the workers must therefore be
viewed in relation to the developing self-action of the masses.

To say that the non-combative spirit of the political parties is due to
the malice or reformism of the leaders is wrong. The political parties
are impotent. They will do nothing, because they can do nothing. Because
of its economic weakness, capitalism has organized for suppression and
terror and is at present politically very strong, for it is forced to
exert all its effort to maintain itself. The accumulation of capital,
enormous throughout the world, has shrunk the yield of profit -- a fact
which, in the external policies, manifests itself through the
contradictions between nations; and in internal policies, through
"devaluation" and the attendant partial expropriation of the middle
class and the lowering of the subsistence level of the workers; and in
general by the centralization of the power of big capital units in the
hands of the state. Against this centralized power little movements can
to nothing.

The masses alone can combat it, for only they can destroy the power of
the state and become a political force. For that reason the fight based
on the craft organizations becomes objectively obsolete, and the large
mass movements, unrestricted by the limitations of such organizations,
must necessarily replace them.

Such is the new situation facing workers. But from it springs an actual
weakness. Since the old method of struggle by means of elections and
limited trade union activity has become quite futile, a new method, it
is true, has instinctively developed, but that method has not yet been
conscientiously, and therefore not effectively, applied. Where their
parties and unions are impotent, the masses already begin to express
their militancy through wildcat strikes. In America, England, France,
Belgium, Holland, Spain, Poland -- wildcat strikes develop, and through
them the masses present ample proof that their old organizations are no
longer fit for struggle. The wildcat strikes are not, however,
disorganized, as the name implies. They are denounced as such by union
bureaucrats, because they are strikes formed outside the official
organizations. The strikers themselves organize the strike, for it is an
old truth that only as an organized mass can workers struggle and
conquer. They form picket lines, provide for the repulsion of
strike-breakers, organize strike relief, create relations with other
factories. -- In a word, they themselves assume the leadership of their
own strike, and they organize it on a factory basis.

It is in these very movements that the strikers find their unity of
struggle. It is then that they take their destiny into their own hands
and unite "the legislative and executive power" by eliminating unions
and parties, as illustrated by several strikes in Belgium and Holland.

But independent class action is still weak. That the strikers, instead
of continuing their independent action toward widening their movement,
call upon the unions to join them, is an indication that under existing
conditions their movement cannot grow larger, and for that reason cannot
yet become a political force capable of fighting concentrated capital.
But it is a beginning.

Occasionally though, the independent struggle takes a big leap forward,
as with the Asturian miners' strikes in 1934, the Belgium miners in
1935, the strikes in France, Belgium and America in 1936, and the
Catalonian revolution in 1936. These outbreaks are evidence that a new
social force is surging among the workers, is finding workers'
leadership, is subjecting social institutions to the masses, and is
already on the march.

Strikes are no longer mere interruptions in profit-making or simple
economic disturbances. The independent strike derives its significance
from the action of workers as an organized class. With a system of
factory committees and workers' councils extending over wide areas the
proletariat creates the organs which regulate production, distribution,
and all the other functions of social life. In other words, the civil
administrative apparatus is deprived of all power, and the proletarian
dictatorship establishes itself. Thus, class organization in the very
struggle for power is at the same time organization, control, and
management of the productive forces of the entire society. It is the
basis of the association of free and equal producers, and consumers.
This, then, is the danger that the independent class movement presents
to the capitalist society. Wildcat strikes, though apparently of little
importance whether on a small or large scale, are embryonic communism. A
small wildcat strike, directed as it is by workers and in the interest
of workers, illustrates on a small scale the character of the future
proletarian power.

A regrouping of militants must be actuated by the knowledge that the
conditions of struggle make it necessary to unite the "legislative and
executive powers" in the hands of the factory workers. They must not
compromise on this position: All power to the committees of action and
the workers' councils. This is the class front. This is the road to
communism. To render workers conscious of the unity of organizational
forms of struggle, of class dictatorship, and of the economic frame of
communism, with its abolition of wages -- is the task of the militants.

The militants who call themselves the "Vanguard" have today the same
weakness that characterizes the masses at present. They still believe
that the unions or the one or the other party must direct the class
struggle, though with revolutionary methods. But if it be true that
decisive struggles are nearing, it is not enough to state that the
labour leaders are traitors. It is necessary, especially for today, to
formulate a plan for the formation of the class front and the forms of
its organizations. To this end the control of parties and unions must be
unconditionally fought. This is the crucial point in the struggle for
power.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Mattick Archive](../index.htm)
