---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# The Bankruptcy of Capitalism

### (1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** 1900\
**Source:** The Right To Be Lazy and Other Studies\
**Translated:** Charles Kerr\
**Online Version:** Lafargue Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000\
**Transcription/Markup:** [Sally
Ryan](../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm) & [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The nineteenth century was the century of capitalism. Capitalism filled
that century to overflowing with its commerce, its industry, its
manners, its fashions, its literature, its art, its science, its
philosophy, its religion, its politics and its civil code, more
universal than the laws imposed by Rome upon the nations of the ancient
world. The capitalist movement, starting from England, the United States
and France, has shaken the foundations of Europe and of the world. It
has forced the old feudal monarchies of Austria and Germany and the
barbaric despotism of Russia to put themselves in line; and in these
last days it has gone into the extreme East, into Japan, where it has
overthrown the feudal system and implanted the industry and the politics
of capitalism.

Capitalism has taken possession of our planet; its fleets bring together
the continents which oceans had separated; its railroads, spanning
mountains and deserts, furrow the earth; the electric wires, the nervous
system of the globe, bind all nations together, and their palpitations
reverberate in the great centers of population. Now for the first time
there is a contemporary history of the world. Events in Australia, the
Transvaal, China, are known in London, Paris, New York, at the moment
they are brought about, precisely as if they happened in the outskirts
of the city where the news is published.

Civilized nations live off the products of the whole earth. Egypt,
India, Louisiana, furnish the cotton, Australia the wool. Japan the
silk, China the tea, Brazil the coffee, New Zealand and the United
States the meat and grain. The capitalist carries in his stomach and on
his back the spoils of the universe.

The study of natural phenomena has undergone an unprecedented, an
unheard-of, development. New sciences, geology, chemistry, physics,
etc., have arisen. The industrial application of the forces of nature
and of the discoveries of science has taken on a still more startling
development; some of the geometrical discoveries of the scientists of
Alexandria, two thousand years old, have for the first time been
utilized.

The production of machine industry can provide for all demand and more.
The mechanical application of the forces of nature has increased man's
productive forces tenfold, a hundredfold. A few hours' daily labor,
furnished by the able-bodied members of the nation, would produce enough
to satisfy the material and intellectual needs of all.

But what has come of the colossal and wonderful development of science,
industry and commerce in the nineteenth century? Has it made humanity
stronger, healthier, happier? Has it given leisure to the producers? Has
it brought comfort and contentment to the people?

Never has work been so prolonged, so exhausting, so injurious to man\'s
body and so fatal to his intelligence. Never has the industrial labor
which undermines health, shortens life and starves the intellect been so
general, been imposed on such ever-growing masses of laborers. The men,
women and children of the proletariat are bent under the iron yoke of
machine industry. Poverty is their reward when they work, starvation
when they lose their jobs.

In former stages of society, famine appeared only when the earth refused
her harvests. In capitalist society, famine sits at the hearth of the
working class when granaries and cellars burst with the fruits of the
earth, and when the market is gorged with the products of industry.

All the toil, all the production, all the suffering of the working class
has but served to heighten its physical and mental destitution, to drag
it down from poverty into wretchedness.

Capitalism, controlling the means of production and directing the social
and political life of a century of science and industry, has become
bankrupt. The capitalists have not even proved competent, like the
owners of chattel slaves, to guarantee to their toilers the work to
provide their miserable livelihood; capitalism massacred them when they
dared demand the right to work -- a slave's right.

The capitalist class has also made a failure of itself. It has seized
upon the social wealth to enjoy it, and never was the ruling class more
incapable of enjoyment. The newly rich, those who have built up their
fortunes by accumulating the filchings from labor, live like strangers
in the midst of luxury and artistic treasures, with which they surround
themselves through a foolish vanity, to pay homage to their millions.

The leading capitalists, the millionaires and billionaires, are sad
specimens of the human race, useless and hurtful. The mark of degeneracy
is upon them. Their sickly offspring are old at birth. Their organs are
sapped with diseases. Exquisite meats and wines load down their tables,
but the stomach refuses to digest them; women expert in love perfume
their couches with youth and beauty, but their senses are benumbed. They
own palatial dwellings in enchanting sites, and they have no eyes, no
feeling for joyful nature, with its eternal youth and change. Sated and
disgusted with everything, they are followed everywhere by ennui as by
their shadows. They yawn at rising and when they go to bed. They yawn at
their fests and at their orgies. The began yawning in their mother's
womb.

The pessimism which, in the wake of capitalist property, made its
appearance in ancient Greece six centuries before Jesus Christ, and
which has since formed the foundation of the moral and religious
philosophy of the capitalist class, became the leading characteristic of
the philosophy of the second half of the nineteenth century. The
pessimism of Theognis sprang from the uncertainties and vicissitudes of
life in the Greek cities, torn by the perpetual wars between rich and
poor; the pessimism of the capitalist is the bitter fruit of satiety,
ennui and the impoverishment of the blood.

The capitalist class is falling into its second childhood; its
decreptitude appears in its literature, now returning to its starting
point. Romantic literature, the literary form proper to the capitalist
class, which started out with the romantic Christianity of
Chateaubriand, is returning to the same point, after passing through the
historical novel and the character novel. Capitalism, which in its
virile and combative youth in the eighteenth century had wished to
emancipate itself from Christianity, resigns itself in its old age to
practices of the grossest superstition.

The capitalist class, bankrupt, old, useless and hurtful, has finished
its historic mission; it persists as ruling class only through its
acquired momentum. The proletariat of the twentieth century will execute
the decree of history; will drive it from its position of social
control. Then the stupendous work in science and industry accomplished
by civilized humanity, at the price of such toil and suffering, will
engender peace and happiness; then will this vale of tears be
transformed into an earthly paradise.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 18.9.2003
