---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# The Rights of the Horse and the Rights of Man

### (1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** ca. 1900\
**Source:** The Right To Be Lazy and Other Studies\
**Translated:** Charles Kerr\
**Online Version:** Lafargue Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000\
**Transcription/Markup:** [Sally
Ryan](../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm) & [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capitalist Civilization has endowed the wage-worker with the
metaphysical Rights of Man, but this is only to rivet him more closely
and more firmly to his economic duty.

"I make you free," so speak the Rights of Man to the laborer, "free to
earn a wretched living and turn your employer into a millionaire; free
to sell him your liberty for a mouthful of bread. He will imprison you
ten hours or twelve hours in his workshops; he will not let you go till
you are wearied to the marrow of your bones, till you have just enough
strength left to gulp down your soup and sink into a heavy sleep. You
have but one of your rights that you may not sell, and that is the right
to pay taxes."

Progress and Civilization may be hard on wage-working humanity but they
have all a mother's tenderness for the animals which stupid bipeds call
"lower."

Civilization has especially favored the equine race: it would be too
great a task to go through the long list of its benefactions; I will
name but a few, of general notoriety, that I may awaken and inflame the
passionate desires of the workers, now torpid in their misery.

Horses are divided into distinct classes. The equine aristocracy enjoys
so many and so oppressive privileges, that if the human-faced brutes
which serve them as jockeys, trainers, stable valets and grooms were not
morally degraded to the point of not feeling their shame, they would
have rebelled against their lords and masters, whom they rub down,
groom, brush and comb, also making their beds, cleaning up their
excrements and receiving bites and kicks by way of thanks.

Aristocratic horses, like capitalists, do not work; and when they
exercise themselves in the fields they look disdainfully, with a
contempt, upon the human animals which plow and seed the lands, mow and
rake the meadows, to provide them with oats, clover, timothy and other
succulent plants.

These four-footed favorites of Civilization command such social
influence that they impose their wills upon the capitalists, their
brothers in privilege; they force the loftiest of them to come with
their beautiful ladies and take tea in the stables, inhaling the acrid
perfumes of their solid and liquid evacuations. And when these lords
consent to parade in public, they require from ten to twenty thousand
men and women to stack themselves up on uncomfortable seats, under the
broiling sun, to admire their exquisitely chiseled forms and their feats
of running and leaping. They respect none of the social dignities before
which the votaries of the Rights of Man bow in reverence. At Chantilly
not long ago one of the favorites for the grand prize launched a kick at
the king of Belgium, because it did not like the looks of his head. His
royal majesty, who adores horses, murmured an apology and withdrew.

It is fortunate that these horses, who can count more authentic
ancestors than the houses of Orleans and Hohenzollern, have not been
corrupted by their high social station; had they taken it into their
heads to rival the capitalists in aesthetic pretensions, profligate
luxury and depraved tastes, such as wearing lace and diamonds, and
drinking champagne and Chateau-Margaux, a blacker misery and more
overwhelming drudgery would he impending over the class of wage-workers.

Thrice happy is it for proletarian humanity that these equine
aristocrats have not taken the fancy of feeding upon human flesh, like
the old Bengal tigers which rove around the villages of India to carry
off women and children; if unhappily the horses had been man-eaters, the
capitalists, who can refuse them nothing, would have built
slaughter-houses for wage-workers, where they could carve out and dress
boy sirloins, woman hams and girl roasts to satisfy their anthropophagic
tastes.

The proletarian horses, not so well endowed, have to work for their peck
of oats, but the capitalist class, through deference for the aristocrats
of the equine race, concedes to the working horses rights that are far
more solid and real than those inscribed in the "Rights of Man." The
first of rights, the right to existence, which no civilized society will
recognize for laborers, is possessed by horses.

The colt, even before his birth, while still in the fetus state, begins
to enjoy the right to existence; his mother, when her pregnancy has
scarcely begun, is discharged from all work and sent into the country to
fashion the new being in peace and comfort; she remains near him to
suckle him and teach him to choose the delicious grasses of the meadow,
in which he gambols until he is grown.

The moralists and politicians of the "Rights of Man" think it would be
monstrous to grant such rights to the laborers; I raised a tempest in
the Chamber of Deputies when I asked that women, two months before and
two months after confinement, should have the right and the means to
absent themselves from the factory. My proposition upset the ethics of
civilization and shook the capitalist order. What an abominable
abomination -- to demand for babies the rights of colts.

As for the young proletarians, they can scarcely trot on their little
toes before they are condemned to hard labor in the prisons of
capitalism, while the colts develop freely under kindly Nature; care is
taken that they be completely formed before they are set to work and
their tasks are proportioned to their strength with a tender care.

This care on the part of the capitalists follows them all through their
lives. We may still recall the noble indignation of the bourgeois press
when it learned that the omnibus company was using peat and tannery
waste in its stalls as a substitute for straw: to think of the unhappy
horses having such poor litters! The more delicate souls of the
bourgeoisie have in every capitalist country organized societies for the
protection of animals, in order to prove that they can not be excited by
the fate of the small victims of industry. Schopenhauer, the bourgeois
philosopher, in whom was incarnated so perfectly the gross egoism of the
philistine, could not hear the cracking of a whip without his heart
being torn by it.

This same omnibus company, which works its laborers from fourteen to
sixteen hours a day, requires from its dear horses only five to seven
hours. It has bought green meadows in which they may recuperate from
fatigue or indisposition. Its policy is to expend more for the
entertainment of a quadrupled than for paying the wages of a biped. It
has never occurred to any legislator nor to any fanatical advocate of
the "Rights of Man" to reduce the horse's daily pittance in order to
assure him a retreat that would be of service to him only after his
death.

The Rights of Horses have not been posted up; they are "unwritten
rights," as Socrates called the laws implanted by Nature in the
consciousness of all men.

The horse has shown his wisdom in contenting himself with these rights,
with no thought of demanding those of the citizen; he has judged that he
would have been as stupid as man if he had sacrificed his mess of
lentils for the metaphysical banquet of Rights to Revolt, to Equality,
to Liberty, and other trivialities which to the proletariat are about as
useful as a cautery on a wooden leg.

Civilization, though partial to the equine race, has not shown herself
indifferent to the fate of the other animals. Sheep, like canons, pass
their days in pleasant and plentiful idleness; they are fed in the
stable on barley, lucerne, rutabagas and other roots, raised by
wage-workers; shepherds conduct them to feed in fat pastures, and when
the sun parches the plain, they are carried to where they can browse on
the tender grass of the mountains.

The Church, which has burned her heretics, and regrets that she can not
again bring up her faithful sons in the love of "mutton," represents
Jesus, under the form of a kind shepherd, bearing upon his shoulders a
weary lamb.

True, the love for the ram and the ewe is in the last analysis only the
love for the leg of mutton and the cutlet, just as the Liberty of the
Rights of Man is nothing but the slavery of the wage-worker, since our
jesuitical Civilization always disguises capitalist exploitation in
eternal principles and bourgeois egoism in noble sentiments; yet at
least the bourgeois tends and fattens the sheep up to the day of the
sacrifice, while he seizes the laborer still warm from the workshop and
lean from toil to send him to the shambles of Tonquin or Madagascar.

Laborers of all crafts, you who toil so hard to create your poverty in
producing the wealth of the capitalists, arise, arise! Since the
buffoons of parliament unfurl the Rights of Man, do you boldly demand
for yourselves, your wives and your children the Rights of the Horse.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 28.1.2005
