---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The New Danger

### (1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, April 1903.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The politics of France are so complicated that to the general public the
task of comprehending them would require a closer study than most are
able to give. Thus the fact that a leading French Socialist, M Jaurès,
has been elected to the position of a Vice-President of the French
Chamber was recorded in all our Irish papers as a great victory for the
Socialist party, and has been accepted as such by the general reader.
But few are aware of the true significance of the situation, viz, that
his election is but a move of the French capitalist class to disorganise
the Socialist forces by corrupting their leaders. M Jaurès is one of the
middle class element which, joining the Socialist party in search of a
'career', were, by virtue of their superior education, enabled to make
of themselves leaders of the working class movement.

Now, that working class movement having grown so formidable as to
convince every one that the day of its triumph is within measurable
distance, the capitalist government seeks for the weakest part of the
Socialist armour that it might destroy the dreaded force, and so seeking
it finds that this weakest part lies in the vanity and ambition of the
middle class leaders. First M Millerand accepted the bait, now M Jaurès.

In other words the capitalist governments of the world are now adopting
and improving upon the policy of corrupting or 'nobbling' the leaders
which has enabled the English governing class to disorganise every
serious attack upon their privileged position. Here in Ireland we have
seen our Home Rule leaders most successfully pursuing the same game. In
Dublin we have Mr Nannetti taken into the ranks of the Parliamentary
party in order to confuse the working class who were beginning to
distrust the Home Rulers; in Tipperary we had Kendal O'Brien, and in
Cork county Mr Sheehan, both of the Land and Labour Association, the
former a professed Socialist, and the latter being a vehement critic of
the enemies of the labourer, now pliant followers of the men who
antagonised their Association from its inception. In England we see the
capitalist Liberals running a 'safe' Labour man for a Tory seat,
Woolwich; in the United States we see men like Mayor Schmidt of San
Francisco ran by a capitalist party as a Labour Mayor, and boomed as
such by the capitalist press throughout the country, even whilst his
police were breaking up meetings of the Socialist Trade and Labour
Alliance in his own city, and in the eastern states capitalist political
parties placing upon their electoral ticket members of a nominally
Socialist party.

The universality of this capitalist dodge calls for an equally universal
move against it. Up to the present we regret to say there is not much
evidence that the Socialist parties of the world are clear upon the
course of action to be followed in fighting this insidious scheme. If we
except the Socialist Labour Party of the United States, and the Parti
Ouvrier of France, there is no Socialist party which does not betray
signs of wobbling upon the matter. In Germany the Social Democratic
Party has admitted into its ranks in the Reichstag the High Priest of
the men who accept such 'gifts from the Greeks', Bernstein; and in many
other Continental countries the party is in a state of internal war over
the matter. In England no one as yet has been asked into the Cabinet
from the Socialist ranks, but there are scores fighting to get in a
position to be asked, and hungering to accept.

The Social Democratic Federation has been drugged in this matter in the
most shameful fashion. At the Paris Congress their representatives were
induced to vote for Millerand -- the first of the intellectuals to sell
out -- chiefly by the representations of Quelch and Hyndman, and against
the advice and indignant remonstrance of the pioneers and veteran
fighters of the Socialist movement in France. Now that all Quelch and
Hyndman, & Co, said in favour of the compromise has been utterly
falsified, and the most bitter denunciations of Millerand most amply
justified, Hyndman joins in the cry against him, but even in doing so he
shows no sign of shame for having voted to condone the treachery he now
condemns.

This carefully stimulated indignation only excites amazement. In an
article in **Justice**, March 21, after recapitulating all the acts of
treachery of which Millerand has been guilty since Hyndman voted against
his condemnation the latter says: "But now comes the most serious part
of the whole affair. Millerand has just republished his speeches, with
an introduction." And this is "the most serious part of the whole
affair", in Hyndman's estimation. But to do our London comrade justice
he does not propose to leave us without a remedy. What is his remedy?
Consider! the Socialist movement is convulsed by this capitalist move,
and by the presence in the Socialist ranks of weaklings and ambitious
middle class elements ready to be corrupted, and in this moment of
international danger the man who is the trusted leader of the Socialist
movement in one of the most important countries in Europe, England,
proposes as a means, nay, as the *only* means of settling it all that
*he* should debate the matter with Millerand at a public meeting. This,
he says, is the "only way to bring the matter to an issue".

As a piece of opera-bouffe that would be excellent; as a piece of
serious politics it is beneath contempt.

As an exponent of Socialist economics Hyndman has no more ardent admirer
than the writer of this article, but we contend that as a political
guide his whole career has been one long series of blunders; a fact that
explains, as nothing else can explain, the wobbling state of the
movement in England. The key note of his character has been to preach
revolution and to practise compromise, and to do neither thoroughly.

But why should we criticise an English Socialist? Because what injures
the Socialist movement in one country injures it also in others, and
because this country is unfortunately tied to England and therefore is
influenced by her politics more than by any other. And the weakness of
the real revolutionary movement in England is a constant danger to the
hopes of freedom in Ireland.

As a matter of fact we would have criticised more often and more
unreservedly than we have done the position of our SDF comrades were it
not for the fact that they are English, and we had always an
uncomfortable feeling that did we criticise them it would please the
chauvinist Irishman, and we had no desire to flatter his narrow
prejudices at the expense of Socialists, no matter how mistaken these
latter were. But such considerations must yield to the greater gravity
of the present circumstances.

It is necessary in Ireland as well as in England to emphasise the point
that the policy of the capitalist at present throughout the world is the
policy of pretended sympathy with working class aspirations -- such
sympathy taking the form of positions for our leaders -- and the man who
can not diagnose the motives directing that move BEFORE the harm is
done, is a danger to the Socialist movement.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
