---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# Simple Socialist Truths

### (1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Socialist**, September 1903.\
Transcribed by Adam Buick.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Worker.** But if there were no masters, who would give me work?

**Socialist.** That's a question I am often asked; let us examine it. In
order to work, three things are required: a workshop, machines, and raw
material.

**W.** Right.

**S.** Who builds the workshop?

**W.** Masons.

**S.** Who made the machines?

**W.** Engineers.

**S.** Who grew the cotton you weave, who sheared the wool your wife
spins, who dug the mineral your son forges?

**W.** Husbandmen, shepherds, miners -- workers like myself.

**S.** Consequently, you, your wife, and your son can only work because
these various other workers have already supplied you with buildings,
machinery, and raw material.

**W.** That's so; I could not weave calico without cotton and without a
loom.

**S.** Well then, it is not the capitalist or master who gives you work,
but the mason, the engineer, the ploughman. Do you know how your master
has procured all that is necessary for your work?

**W.** He bought it.

**S.** Who gave him the money?

**W.** How do I know. His father had left him a little; to-day he is a
millionaire.

**S.** Has he earned his million by working his machines and weaving his
cotton?

**W.** Not very likely; it is by making **us** work that he gained his
million.

**S.** Then he has grown rich by loafing; that is the only way to make a
fortune. Those who work get just enough to live on. But, tell me, if you
and your fellow workers did not work, would not your master's machines
rust, and his cotton be eaten by insects?

**W.** Everything in the workshop would got to wreck and ruin if we did
not work.

**S.** Consequently, by working you are preserving the machines and raw
material necessary for your labour.

**W.** That is true; I had never thought of that.

**S.** Does your master look after what goes on in his works?

**W.** Not much; he makes a daily round to see us at our work, but he
keeps his hands in his pockets for fear of dirtying them. In the
spinning-mill, where my wife and daughter work, the masters are never
seen, although there are four of them; still less so in the foundry,
where my son works; the masters are never seen nor ever known; not even
their shadow is seen¾ it is a Limited Liability Company that owns the
works. Suppose you and I had five hundred francs saved up, we could buy
a share, and become one of the masters, without ever having put, or
without putting, a foot in the place.

**S.** Who, then, directs and superintends the work in this place
belonging to the shareholding masters, and in your own shop of one
master, seeing the masters are never there, or so seldom that it doesn't
count?

**W.** Managers and foremen.

**S.** But if it is workers who have built the workshop, made the
machines, and produced the raw materials; if it is workers who keep the
machines going, and managers and foremen who direct the work,¾ what does
the master do, then?

**W.** Nothing but twiddle his thumbs.

**S.** If there were a railway from here to the moon, we could send the
masters there, without a return ticket, and your weaving, your wife's
spinning, your son's moulding, would go on as before.. Do you know what
the profit was realised by your master last year?

**W.** We calculate that he must have got a hundred thousand francs.

**S.** How many workers does he employ¾ men, women and children, all
included?

**W.** A hundred.

**S.** What wages do they get?

**W.** On an average, about a thousand francs, counting in the salaries
of managers and foremen.

**S.** So that the hundred workers in the work receive altogether a
hundred thousand francs in wages, just enough to keep them from dying of
hunger, while your master pocketed a hundred thousand francs¾ for doing
nothing. Where did these two hundred thousand francs come from?

**W.** Not from the sky; I never saw it rain francs.

**S.** It is the workers in his works who have produced the hundred
thousand francs they received in wages, and, besides, the hundred
thousand francs profit of the master, who has employed part of that in
buying new machines.

**W.** There is no denying that.

**S.** Then it is the workers who produce the money which the master
devotes to buying new machines to make them work; it is the managers and
foremen, wage slaves like yourself, who direct the production; where,
then, does the master come in? What's he good for?

**W.** For exploiting labour.

**S.** Say rather, for robbing the labourer; that is clearer and more
exact.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 5.1.2004
