---
layout: default
title: 
---
George Plekhanov

### Dialectic and Logic

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: G. Plekhanov. Marxist Library Volume I. *Fundamental
Problems of Marxism. Dialectics and Logic*;\
[Translated]{.info}: by Eden and Cedar Paul, edited by D. Riazanov;\
[Published]{.info}: by International Publishers. New York. 1928;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by Marc Lispi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The philosophy of Marx and Engels is not only a materialist philosophy,
it is dialectical materialism. Two objections are, however, raised
against this doctrine. We are told, first of all, that dialectic itself
is not proof against criticism; and, secondly, that materialism is
incompatible with dialectic. Let us examine these objections.

The reader will probably remember how Bernstein explained what he termed
the "errors" of Marx and Engels. They were due, he said, to the
disastrous influence of dialectic. Customary logic holds fast to the
formula: "Yes is yes, and no is no"; whereas dialectic has a formula of
a diametrically opposite kind: "Yes is no, and no is yes." Detesting
this latter formula, Bernstein declares that it leads us into temptation
and involves us in the most dangerous errors.

Probably most readers who pass by the name of "educated" will agree with
Bernstein, seeing that, on the face of it, the formula "Yes is no, and
no is yes" is in flagrant contradiction with the fundamental and
immutable laws of thought. That is the aspect of the question we have
now to examine.

The fundamental laws of logic are three in number:

\(I\) The law of identity;

\(2\) The law of contradiction;

\(3\) The law of the excluded middle.

The law of identity (*principium identitatis*) declares: A is A (*omne
subjectum est praedicatum sui*), or A=A.

The law of contradiction, A is not not-A, is nothing more than the
negative form of the first law.

According to the law of the excluded middle (*principium exclusi
tertii*), two contradictory propositions, mutually exclusive, cannot
both of them be true. In fact, either A is B, or else A is not B. If one
of these propositions is true, the other is necessarily false; and
conversely. There is not, and cannot be, any middle course here.

Ueberweg points out that the law of contradiction and the law of the
excluded middle can be unified in the following logical rule: To every
definite question, understood in a definite sense, as to whether a given
characteristic attaches to a given object, we must reply either yes or
no; we cannot answer yes and no.

It is certainly hard to raise any objection to this. But if the
statement is true, that implies that the formula "Yes is no, and no is
yes" must be erroneous. Nothing will be left for us, then, but to laugh,
like Bernstein, and to raise our hands to heaven, when we see that
thinkers as profound as Heraclitus, Hegel and Marx have found it more
satisfying than the formula "Yes is yes, and no is no," a formula
solidly based upon the three fundamental laws of thought stated above.

This conclusion, fatal to dialectic, seems irrefutable. But, before we
accept it, let's examine the matter more closely.

The movement of matter underlies all the phenomena of nature. But what
is movement? It is an obvious contradiction. Should any one ask you
whether a body in motion is at a particular spot at a particular time,
you will be unable, with the best will in the world, to answer In
accordance with Ueberweg's rule, that is to say in accordance with the
formula, "Yes is yes, and no is no." A body in motion is at a given
point, and at the same time it is not there. We can only consider it in
accordance with the formula "Yes is no, and no is yes." This moving body
thus presents itself as an irrefutable argument in favor of the "logic
of contradiction"; and one who is unwilling to accept this logic will be
forced to proclaim, with Zeno, that motion is merely an illusion of the
senses.

But of all those who do not deny motion we shall ask: "What are we to
think of this fundamental law of thought which conflicts with the
fundamental fact of being? Must we not treat it with some
circumspection?"

We seem to be between the horns of a dilemma. Either we must accept the
fundamental laws of formal logic and deny motion; or else we must admit
motion and deny these laws. The dilemma is certainly a disagreeable one.
Let us see if there is no way of escaping it.

The movement of matter underlies all the phenomena of nature. But motion
is a contradiction. We must consider the question dialectically, that is
to say, as Bernstein would phrase it, in accordance with the formula
"Yes is no, and no is yes." Hence, we are compelled to admit that as
concerns this basis of all phenomena we are in the domain of the "logic
of contradiction." But the molecules of matter in motion becoming
conjoined one with another, form certain combinations; things, objects.
Such combinations are distinguished by more or less marked solidity;
they exist for a longer or shorter time, and then disappear, to be
replaced by others. The only thing which is eternal is the movement of
matter, matter itself, indestructible substance. But as soon as a
particular temporary combination of matter has come into existence as a
result of the eternal movement of matter, and as long as it has not yet
disappeared owing to this same movement, the question of its existence
must necessarily be solved in a positive sense. That is why, if anyone
points out to us the planet of Venus and asks us "Does this planet
exist?" we shall answer, unhesitatingly, "Yes." But if anyone asks us
whether witches exist, we shall answer, no less unhesitatingly, "No."
What does this mean? It means that when we are concerned with distinct
objects we must, in our judgments about them, follow the above-mentioned
rule of Ueberweg; and must, in general, conform to the fundamental laws
of thought. In that domain there prevails the formula agreeable to
Bernstein, "Yes is yes, and no is no."

Even there, however, the realm of this respectable formula is not
unrestricted. When we are asked a question as to the reality of an
object which already exists, we must give a positive answer. But when an
object is as yet only in course of becoming, we may often have a good
reason for hesitating as to our reply. When we see a man who has lost
most of the hair from his cranium, we say that he is bald. But how are
we to determine at what precise moment the loss of the hair of the head
makes a man bald?

To every definite question as to whether an object has this
characteristic or that, we must respond with a yes or a no. As to that
there can be no doubt whatever. But how are we to answer when an object
is undergoing a change, when it is in the act of losing a given
characteristic or is only in course of acquiring it? A definite answer
should, of course, be the rule in these cases likewise. But the answer
will not be a definite one unless it is couched in accordance with the
formula "Yes is no, and no is yes"; for it will be impossible to answer
in accordance with the formula "Either yes or no," as recommended by
Ueberweg.

The objection can, of course, be made that the characteristic which the
object is in course of losing has not yet ceased to exist and that the
one which it is in course of acquiring already exists, so that an answer
couched in accordance with the formula "Either yes, or no" is possible,
indeed obligatory, even when the object with which we have to do is
undergoing change. But such a contention is erroneous. A youth on whose
chin down is beginning to sprout is certainly growing a beard, but we
cannot for that reason speak of him as bearded. Down on the chin is not
a beard, although it gradually changes into a beard. If the change is to
become qualitative, it must reach a quantitative limit. One who forgets
this is unable to express a definite opinion concerning the qualities of
objects.

"Everything is in a flux, everything changes," said of old, the
philosopher of Ephesus. The combinations which we speak of as objects
are permanently in a state of more or less rapid change. In proportion
as such combinations remain the same combinations, we can judge them in
accordance with the formula "Yes is yes, and no is no." But in
proportion as they change to a degree in which they cease to exist as
formerly, we must appeal to the logic of contradiction; we must, even at
the risk of offending Bernstein and the whole tribe of metaphysicians,
say "Yes and no, they exist and they do not exist."

Just as inertia is a special case of movement, so thought in conformity
with the rules of formal logic (in conformity with the fundamental laws
of thought) is a special case of dialectical thought. It is recorded of
Cratylus, one of Plato's disciples, that he was not in agreement with
Heraclitus, who had said: "We cannot go down the same river twice."
Cratylus insisted that we could not do it even once, seeing that, while
we were going down the river, it, was changing, was becoming another
river. In the case of such judgments, the factor which constitutes the
extant being is, so to say, over-ruled by the factor of becoming. But
this is to misuse dialectic and not to make a proper use of it. Hegel
remarks: "The something' is the first negation of negation."

Those of our critics who are not completely ignorant of philosophical
literature are fond of referring to Trendelenburg, who is said to have
refuted all the arguments in favor of dialectic. But these gentlemen,
obviously, have misread Trendelenburg, if they have read him at all.
They have utterly forgotten (if they ever knew, which I doubt) one
little matter. Trendelenburg declared that the law of contradiction is
applicable, not to motion, but only to the objects created thereby. That
is sound. But motion does not merely create objects. As I have already
said, it is constantly modifying them. That is why the logic of movement
(the "logic of contradiction") never forfeits its rights over the
objects created by motion. That is why, moreover, even while we pay to
the fundamental laws of formal logic the homage which is their due, we
must remember that these laws are only valid within certain limits,
within limits which leave us free to pay homage also to dialectic. It is
thus that the law was really formulated by Trendelenburg, although he
himself did not draw all the conclusions derivable from the principle he
formulated -- a principle of outstanding importance to the theory of
cognition.

Let me add, in passing, that Trendelenburg's *Logische Untersuchungen*
contain a number of sound observations which do not tell against my view
but in favor of It. This may seem strange, but can be explained very
simply by the simple fact that Trendelenburg was really attacking
idealist dialectic. Thus he saw the defeat of dialectic in so far as it
affirms a movement inherent in and proper to the pure idea, a movement
which is an autocreation of being. Certainly such affirmation involves a
profound error. But who does not know that the fallacy attaches
exclusively to idealist dialectic? Who does not know that when Marx set
to work in order to put dialectic "on its feet," whereas it had been
standing on its head, he began by correcting this primary error, which
was the outcome of the old idealist foundation? Here is another
instance. Trendelenburg says that as an actual fact, in Hegel's system,
motion is the foundation of logic (which, it seems, does not require any
premises upon which to base itself). This statement is also correct, but
is once more an argument in favour of materialist dialectic. Now for a
third example, the most interesting one of them all. Trendelenburg tells
us it is wrong to imagine that, according to Hegel, nature is nothing
more than applied logic. On the contrary, the logic of Hegel is nowise a
creation of the pure idea; it is the outcome of an anticipatory
abstraction from nature: In Hegel's dialectic, almost everything has
been derived from experience; and if experience were to deprive
dialectic of all that experience has lent, dialectic would be poor
indeed. Perfectly true! But this is exactly what was said by those
disciples of Hegel who rose in revolt against their master's idealism
and went over to the materialist camp.

I could give plenty more examples, but they would take me away from my
subject. All I wanted was to show our critics that, in their campaign
against us, they would do well to avoid calling in the aid of
Trendelenburg.

To continue: I have said that motion is a contradiction in action; and
that, consequently, the fundamental laws of formal logic cannot be
applied to it. I must explain this proposition lest it should be
misunderstood. When we have to do with the passage from one kind of
movement to another (let us say, with the passage from mechanical
movement to heat), we must also reason in accordance with Ueberweg's
fundamental rule. We must say: "This kind of motion is either heat, or
else mechanical movement, or else\..." and so on. That is obvious. But
if so, it signifies that the fundamental laws of formal logic are,
within certain limits, applicable also to motion. The inference, once
more, is that dialectic does not suppress formal logic, but merely
deprives the laws of formal logic of the absolute value which
metaphysicians have ascribed to them.

If the reader has paid careful attention to what was said above, he will
have no difficulty in understanding how worthless is the contention so
often put forward that dialectic is incompatible with materialism. On
the contrary, our dialectic is based upon the materialist conception of
nature. If the materialist conception of nature were to crumble into
ruins, our dialectic would crumble with it. Conversely, without
dialectic, the materialist theory of cognition is incomplete, one-sided;
nay more, it is impossible.

In Hegel's system, dialectic coincides with metaphysics. For us,
dialectic is buttressed upon the doctrine of nature.

In Hegel's system, the demiurge \[creator\] of reality (to use Marx's
phrase) is the absolute idea. For us, the absolute idea is only an
abstraction from the motion by which all the combinations and all the
states of matter are produced.

According to Hegel, thought progresses thanks to the discovery and the
solution of contradictions contained in concepts. According to our
materialist doctrine, the contradictions contained in concepts are only
the reflection, the translation into the language of thought, of
contradictions which exist in phenomena owing to the contradictory
nature of their common foundation, namely movement.

According to Hegel. the march of things is determined by the march of
ideas; according to us, the march of ideas is explained by the march of
things, the march of thought by the march of life.

Materialism sets dialectic on its feet and thus strips from it the veil
of mystification in which it was wrapped by Hegel. Furthermore, in doing
so, it -displays the revolutionary character of dialectic.

"In its mystified form, dialectic became the fashion in Germany because
it seemed to elucidate the existing state of affairs. In its rational
form, it is a scandal and an abomination to the bourgeoisie and its
doctrinaire spokesmen because, while supplying a positive understanding
of the existing state of things, it at the same time furnishes an
understanding of the negation of that state of things and enables us to
recognise that that state of things will inevitably break up; it is an
abomination to them because it regards every historically developed
social form as in fluid movement, as transient, because it lets nothing
overawe it but is in its very nature critical and revolutionary.\"(From
the preface to the second German edition to the first volume of
*Capital*, 1873, new translation, 1928).

It is quite in order that the bourgeoisie, essentially reactionary,
should regard materialist dialectic with horror. But that persons who
sincerely sympathise with the revolutionary movement should disapprove
of materialist doctrine is both ridiculous and sad -- it is the climax
of absurdity.

One more point has to be considered. We know already that Ueberweg was
right, and we know how right he was, in demanding that those who think
should think logically, and in demanding definite answers to definite
questions as to whether this or that characteristic attaches to this or
that object. Now, however, let us suppose that we have to do with an
object which is not simple but complex and has diametrically conflicting
properties. Can the judgment demanded by Ueberweg be applied to such an
object? No, Ueberweg himself. just as strenuously opposed as
Trendelenburg to the Hegelian dialectic, considers that in this case we
must judge in accordance with another rule, known in logic under the
name of "*principium coincidentia oppositorum*" (the principle of the
coincidence of opposites). Well now, the immense majority of the
phenomena with which natural science and sociological science have to do
come within the category of such objects. The simplest globule of
protoplasm, the life of a society in the very earliest phase of
evolution -- one and the other exhibit diametrically conflicting
properties. Manifestly, then, we must reserve for the dialectical method
a very large place in natural science and in sociology. Since
investigators have begun to do this, these sciences have advanced with
rapid strides.

Would the reader like to know how dialectic has secured a recognised
position in biology? Let him recall the discussions regarding the nature
of species that were aroused by the promulgation of the theory of
evolution. Darwin and his adherents declared that the various species of
one and the same family of animals or plants are only the differentiated
descendants of a single primitive form. Furthermore, according to the
theory of evolution, all the genera of one order are likewise derived
from a single primordial form; and the same must be said of all the
orders belonging to a single class. On the other hand, according to
Darwin's adversaries, all the species of animals and plants are
completely independent one of another and only the individuals belonging
to a single species can be said to derive from a common form. This
latter conception of species had already been formulated by Linnaeus,
who said: "There are as many species as the Supreme Being created in the
beginning of things." That is a purely metaphysical conception, for the
metaphysician regards things and concepts as "distinct, unchangeable,
rigid objects, given once for all, to be examined one after another,
each independently of the others." (Engels) The dialectician, on the
contrary, Engels tells us, regards things and concepts "in their
connection, their interlacement, their movement, their appearance and
disappearance." This conception has made its way into biology with the
spread of the Darwinian theory, and has come to stay, whatever
rectifications may be made in the theory of evolution as science
advances.

To underline the importance of dialectic for sociology, it will suffice
to recall how socialism has developed from utopism to science.

The utopian socialists regarded "human nature" from an abstract point of
view and appraised social phenomena in accordance with the formula "Yes
is yes, and no is no." Property either was or was not conformable to
human nature; the monogamic family was or was not conformable to human
nature; and so on. Regarding human nature as unchangeable, utopian
socialists were justified in hoping that, among all possible systems of
social organisation, there must be one which was more conformable than
any other to that nature. Hence their wish to discover this best of all
possible systems, the one most conformable to human nature. Every
founder of a school believed that he had discovered it, and that is why
he advocated the adoption of his particular utopia. Mars introduced the
dialectical method into socialism, thus making of socialism a science
and giving the death-blow to utopism. Marx does not appeal to human
nature; he does not know of any social institutions which either do or
do not conform to human nature. Already in his *Misère de la
Phi1osophie*, we find this significant and characteristic criticism of
Proudhon; "Monsieur Proudhon is unaware that history in its entirety is
nothing other than a continuous modification of human nature." (*Misère
de la Phi1osophie*, Paris, 1896, p. 204)

In Capital, Man says that man, by acting on nature outside himself and
changing it, changes his own nature. This is a dialectical standpoint
from which a new outlook on the problems of social life can be secured.
Take, for instance, the question of private property. The utopists had
written at great length" arguing with one another and with the
economists, as to whether private property ought to exist, that is to
say, as to whether private property was conformable to human nature.
Marx put the question upon a concrete platform. According to his
doctrine, the forms and relations of property are determined by the
evolution of the forces of production. To one phase of evolution there
corresponds a specific form of property; to another phase, another form;
but there is no absolute solution, and cannot be one, for everything is
in a flux, everything changes. "Wisdom becomes folly; pleasure, pain."

Hegel says: "Contradiction leads forward." In the class struggle,
science finds a striking confirmation of this dialectical conception.
Unless we take the class struggle into account, it is impossible to
understand the evolution of social and mental life in a society divided
into classes.

But this "logic of contradiction," which, as we have seen, is the
reflection in the human brain of the eternal process of movement -- why
should it be called dialectic:? I will not undertake a lengthy
consideration of the question, and for answer I shall be content to
quote Kuno Fischer:

Human life resembles a dialogue in this sense that, with age and
experience, our views concerning persons and things undergo a gradual
change, like the opinions of the interlocutors in the course of a lively
and fruitful conversation. This involuntary and necessary change in our
outlooks on life and the world is the very tissue of experience\...That
is why Hegel, when comparing the evolution of consciousness with that of
a philosophical conversation. has given it the name of dialectic, or the
dialectic movement. Plato, Aristotle, Kant, each of them employed this
term in an important sense peculiar to himself; but in no philosophical'
system has it been given so comprehensive a meaning as in that of
Hegel."

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[George Plekhanov Archive](../../../index.htm)
