---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# Socialism and Nationalisation

### (June 1882)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Socialist Standard**, February/March, 1912. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}\
Transcribed by Adam Buick.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the present moment a kind of Socialism for the capitalists is being
created. It is very modest. It contents itself with the transformation
of certain industries into public services. Above all, it does not
compromise one. On the contrary it will rally a good number of
capitalists.

They are told: Look at the Post Office, that is a Socialist public
service, functioning admirably to the profit of the community, and more
cheaply than if it were entrusted to a private company as was formerly
the case. The gas supply, the railways and the building of workmen's
dwellings must also become public services. They will function to the
profit of the community and will chiefly benefit the capitalist class.

In capitalist society, the transformation of certain industries into
municipal or national services is the last form of capitalist
exploitation. It is because that form presents multiple and
incontestable advantages for the bourgeoisie that in every capitalist
country the same industries are becoming nationalised (Army, Police,
Post Office, Telegraphs, the Mint, etc.).

Certain monopolised industries, indeed, delivered up to the greed of
private companies, become instruments for the exploitation of other
sections of the capitalist class, and so powerful that they disturb the
whole bourgeois system.

Here are a few examples. The electric telegraph, on its introduction
into France, became a state service because the political interests of
the Government required it. In England and the Unites States, where the
same political interest did not exist, the telegraphs were established
by private companies. The English Government was compelled to buy them
out in the interests of all, particularly the speculators, who in the
transformation found means of obtaining scandalous profits. In the
United States the telegraph service is still in private hands. It is
monopolised by a gang of speculators who control the entire Press of the
country. Those speculators communicate telegrams only to newspapers in
vassalage to them, and which must pay such a heavy tax that many, being
unable to bear such a burden, do without telegraphic news altogether. In
America telegrams are the most important part of the newspapers; to
deprive them of these dispatches is to condemn them to languish and die.
In that republican Republic, which individualist Liberals take as the
ideal of their most daring dreams, the liberty of the Press is at the
mercy of a handful of speculators, without government force and without
responsibility, but in control of the telegraph service.

The railway monopoly is so exorbitant that a company can ruin at will an
industry or a town by differential or preferential tariffs. The danger
to which society is exposed by the private ownership of the means of
transport is so keenly felt that in France, England and the United
States, many capitalists in their own interests demand the
nationalisation of the railways. In capitalist society a private
industry only becomes a State service in order to better serve the
interest of the bourgeoisie. The advantages which the latter obtain are
of different kinds; we have just spoken of the social danger created by
the abandonment of certain industries to private exploitation, dangers
which disappear or are attenuated as soon as the State directs them but
there are others.

The State, by centralising administration, lessens the general charges;
it runs the service at a smaller cost. The State is accused of paying
everything more dearly than private enterprise; nevertheless, such is
not always the case when there is a question of the establishment of
means of communication, one of the most difficult and complex
enterprises in modern society. Thus the tramways constructed in France
have, with rare exceptions, cost an average of 250,000 to 300,000 francs
per kilometre as a first establishment charge. The railway from Alais to
the Rhone has eaten up per kilometre of line a sum of about 700,000
francs. M. Freycinet, who is not a bourgeois director for fun, has
established upon positive grounds that the State could construct
railways at a cost of 200,000 francs per kilometre. The State can
therefore sensibly diminish the prices of the services it exploits. It
is the capitalists who profit by the reduction, because it is they,
principally, who make use of them. Thus, what a number of workmen only
use the postal service once or twice a year! And how very numerous are
the commercial houses and industrial concerns which send out over ten
and twenty letters a day!

State services become a means to politicians for placing their tools or
dependants, and for giving good, fat sinecures to the sons-in-law of the
bourgeoisie. M. Cochery has accorded lucrative posts to Orleanists;
among others, to the son of Senator Laboulaye, the man of the inkpot.

Militants of the Parti Ouvrier may and must in their polemics against
the public men and the politicians of the capitalist class, make use of
this transformation of one time private industries into State services,
to show how the bourgeoisie themselves are led by the logic of events to
attack their own principles, which demand that society, represented by
the State, snatch no industry from private initiative. But they must not
desire, and still less demand, the transformation of fresh industries
into national services, and that for diverse reasons.

Because it is to the interest of the workers' party to embitter the
conflicts which lacerate the capitalist class, instead of seeking to
pacify them -- these antagonisms quicken the disorganisation of the
ruling class; because nationalisation increases the corruptive power of
capitalist politicians; because State employees, like workers in private
employ, strike and engage in a struggle with the exploiters.

The only Socialist reason that one might put forward for that
transformation is that perhaps it might simplify the revolutionary work
of expropriation by the workers' party; we will examine this on another
occasion.\
 

### Part II

In the last issue we were saying that the only Socialist reason that
might be given in favour of the transformation of certain private
industries into services administered by State or Commune, was that the
transformation would simplify the revolutionary task of expropriation to
be accomplished by the workers' party when masters of political power.
But this reason has not a leg to stand on. The advantages of the changes
would be far from balancing the many dangers presented, which we have
already briefly mentioned.

The first great revolutionary effort of the workers will be to seize the
central power; so long as this capitalist stronghold will not have been
captured, all proletarian measures will be refused -- even urgent ones
-- or if accorded, it will be in such a form that they become illusory,
and only benefit the capitalist class.

When the bourgeoisie are dispossessed of political power, then only will
the workers' party be able to commence their economic expropriation; but
those who demand the nationalisation of certain industries -- even under
present conditions -- say that the task of the workers' party will be
lightened because the bourgeoisie will already have been dispossessed of
a portion of the social means of production.

Not at all.

The great organisations of communication and credit (such as the
railways, the Bank of France, the Crédit Foncier, and the like), which
it is desired to put in the hands of the State, are already so admirably
centralised that, in order to seize them, it would be necessary to give
a kick to their directors and burn a few bundles of paper; it would be
just as easy to take possession of the Bank of France and its provincial
branches as it would be to take over the General Post Office and its
branches; it would be needful to send four men and a corporal, and to
put the high officials under lock and key, in order to paralyse their
intrigues and obtain information, if need were felt even for this.

Nationalisation would not facilitate the revolutionary task; but it
would give rise to financial swindles, and a fearful deterioration of
the Exchequer. In the second number of **L'Egalité** and in the **Revue
Socialiste** I have pointed out some of the scandalous robberies of
public funds which took place on the State purchase of the smaller
railways. All the political jobbers -- the Freycinets, Gambettas and
Wilsons -- their appetite whetted by the repurchase of the small lines,
demand the purchase of the trunk railways.

Although in a less degree, the expropriation of the great organisations
of production (iron-works, mines, textiles, etc.), will still be an easy
matter. It will be a question of displacing and confining if needful, a
few administrators or owners. But expropriation is only a part of the
historic task of the workers' party.

Those who busy themselves with State-Socialism, that is to say, those
who demand the nationalisation or municipalisation of certain services,
do not trouble at all about the lot of the workers engaged in them; but
even admitting that they sought to improve the lot of those employed
would they be able to do so? If they can, let them begin by improving
the conditions of the underpaid workers in the Post Office, in the State
tobacco factories, railways and State ironworks. The workshops of the
State and municipality are prisons quite as bad as private workshops, if
not worse.

The toilers are more greedily exploited in them than in private
enterprise; they are bent beneath an authority that is more powerfully
hierarchic; they can neither combine nor strike. And it could scarcely
be otherwise, the State and municipality being only the official
representatives of the capitalist class.

But the revolutionary power which will socialise the instruments of
labour taken from the capitalist class, will have to mount guard over
the general interests of society served by the socialised industries,
and in particular over the interests of those directly engaged in them.

Suppose the party of the proletariat had sent Mr Rothschild to Jericho
to look for records of his ancestors, and had seized the Northern of
France railways: and let us further suppose that it either would not or
could not establish gratuitous transport at the outset; it could arrange
matters somewhat in this way. Out of each 100 francs of receipts, 10
francs are set aside for depreciation and general expenses, and 30
francs are distributable to share and debenture holders. Now shares and
debentures being suppressed, the revolutionary government could divide
the portion taken by the shareholders for doing nothing in three parts.
One third could be left to the workers, one third go to cheapen freight,
and one third go as revenue to the State.

Thus the revolutionary government could immediately increase the
remuneration of the employees by nearly 16 per cent. It would have to
ensure that the remuneration were distributed in quite a different way
from the present where the less an administrator or high official works,
the more he is paid. To remedy this it need only leave those interested
to apportion the amount according to services and talents. The
revolutionary Government would also have to obtain guarantees that the
workers to whom it confided a social instrument, possessed all the
requisite qualities for its good working; and that it did not become a
means of exploiting certain grades of workers, as co-operative workshops
have become in present-day society.

This method of utilising the social means of production could only be a
passing one, imposed by the difficulties amidst which the workers' party
will have to struggle on the morrow of the revolution. But we can
perceive a period wherein, with the needs of consumption and the powers
of production scientifically calculated, consumption as well as
production will be free. There will be neither wages nor market prices.
Human society will then once more enter the period of communism.

Indeed, only a \'possibilist\' professor, ignorant of social conditions
and steeped in bourgeois prejudices, could offer the nationalisation of
public services as the Socialist ideal.

 

### Footnote by MIA

[1.](#f1){#n1} This article was given the subtitle "An early article by
Paul Lafargue" and was introduced by the following note:

Readers know the circumstances in which Paul Lafargue and Laura Marx
have ended life together, with their last words expressing their belief
in the early triumph of the cause for which they laboured. We bow before
death. Nevertheless we rejoice that, although Lafargue has laid down his
pen, his words still fight on behalf of the workers. The following
article, written in **L'Egalité** of June 2nd, 1882, is still trenchant
and useful.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.11.2003
