---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# An Object Lesson

### (15 December 1900)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Workers' Republic**, 15 December 1900.\
Republished in **Red Banner**, No.21.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

On Wednesday November 28, there appeared in the Dublin newspapers an
advertisement announcing the issue of shares in a new electrical
syndicate, the "British Electrical Street Tramways, Limited". We do not
suppose our readers are interested in that fact as probable subscribers
for the shares of this company, but we nevertheless venture to draw
their attention to the circumstance, because the advertisement in
question was in itself an eloquent tribute to the validity of many of
the points raised by Socialists in their criticism of the capitalist
system. The Syndicate is formed, the advertisement tells us, "to
construct and work lines of electric railways and tramways licensed by
special Acts of Parliament, or by Municipal or other authorities, and to
extend the service of traction vehicles in large towns".

Here we have a proposal by a number of rich men to engage in the
business of constructing and working electric trams, etc, in any town of
Great Britain and Ireland where they can procure permission to do so,
and coupled with the proposal is an estimate of the large profits to be
acquired by such a proceeding -- to be acquired by whoever purchases
shares in this company, even though the person so purchasing may be
entirely ignorant of all that pertains to electric traction, or unable
to visit any of the towns where the profits are to be earned.
Tender-hearted humanitarians and benevolent persons generally, aghast at
the miseries of the workers but loth to relinquish their belief in the
institution of private property, are never tired of proclaiming that the
cure-all for those miseries is to be found in the cultivation of
feelings of friendship between capitalists and their workers. They
affirm that strikes, lock-outs, and industrial disputes of all kinds
would be rendered impossible if the employers and employed were only to
meet and know each other better.

To this contention Socialists have always replied that the development
of modern industry renders impossible any such *rapprochement* between
the classes; that the employer is no longer a person but a thing -- a
company; that, the shares of said company being saleable on the market,
the personality of the shareholder is of a fleeting character, and that
consequently the possibility of human, personal, intercourse between
master and man is fast being destroyed by the inevitable tendency of
industry to fall into the hands of companies, and of companies to form
combinations or trusts. The man who holds shares in companies situated a
hundred or a thousand miles distant from his home cannot have a personal
regard for the employees who earn his dividends, and the employees
cannot be expected to remember in their prayers shareholders whose very
names are unknown to them. The fact of this company offering its shares
promiscuously to all who choose to buy, and proposing to exploit the
needs of towns wherever possible, proves this Socialist contention to be
absolutely correct. How can anyone believe that the monied people
rushing to buy these shares could be brought to regard as men and
brothers the unfortunate workmen whose labours they hope to profit by?

One other and more important point is brought out by this advertisement,
viz., that the private capitalist is no longer necessary. Apologists for
capitalism claim that the profits of the capitalist are the reward of
his brains and skill in organising; that without the brains and
organising genius of the capitalist industry would be impossible. But
here we observe in this case, as in the case of all capitalist
companies, that the profits are to be reaped by people who bring neither
brains, skill, nor even technical knowledge to the work -- who bring
nothing but cash to purchase the brains and muscle of other men.

All the organising and managerial functions of the company will be
performed by experts hired for the purpose. These experts need have no
interest in the company other than their salaries. It is obvious, then,
that when private capitalist companies can hire servants to perform the
brain work necessary for their schemes, the same class of persons could
be hired, if need be, by the public bodies, state or municipal, to
perform the same functions in the service of, and for the interest of,
the entire community.

By the hiring of salaried managers the capitalist class abandon all
right to use the plea that the community could not progress without
their aid; since personal supervision and direction by the capitalist
himself is not required, the public bodies who represent the community
can safely undertake the ownership and control of all the work of
production and distribution; and solve the problem of organising skill
and genius by the same method as that employed by the capitalist class
today, viz., by hiring technical experts to organise and direct.

Thus the first step in the Socialist organisation of industry is
illustrated by the last step in capitalist organisation. The capitalist
having voluntarily abdicated his personal *supervision*, in his own
interest, must now abdicate his personal *ownership*, in the general
interest.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.7.2005
