Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Appendix

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

\"2. Normal working day.\"

In no other country has the workers\' party limited itself to such an
indefinitedemand, but has always fixed the length of the working day
that it considersnormal under the given circumstances.

\

\"3. Restriction of female labor and prohibition of child labor.\"

The standardization of the working day must include the restriction
offemale labor, insofar as it relates to the duration, intermissions,
etc.,of the working day; otherwise, it could only mean the exclusion of
femalelabor from branches of industry that are especially unhealthy for
the femalebody, or are objectionable morally for the female sex. If that
is whatwas meant, it should have been said so.

\"Prohibition of child labor.\" Here it was absolutely essentialto state
the age limit.

A general prohibition of child labor is incompatible with theexistence
of large-scale industry and hence an empty, pious wish. Its
realization\-- if it were possible \-- would be reactionary, since, with
a strict regulationof the working time according to the different age
groups and other safetymeasures for the protection of children, an early
combination of productivelabor with education is one of the most potent
means for the transformationof present-day society.

\

\"4. State supervision of factory, workshop, and domestic industry.\"

In consideration of the Prusso-German state, it should definitely
havebeen demanded that the inspectors are to be removable only by a
court oflaw; that any worker can have them prosecuted for neglect of
duty; thatthey must belong to the medical profession.

\

\"5. Regulation of prison labor.\"

A petty demand in a general workers\' program. In any case, it should
havebeen clearly stated that there is no intention from fear of
competitionto allow ordinary criminals to be treated like beasts, and
especially thatthere is no desire to deprive them of their sole means of
betterment, productivelabor. This was surely the least one might have
expected from socialists.

\

\"6. An effective liability law.\"

It should have been stated what is meant by an \"effective\" liability
law.

Be it noted, incidentally, that, in speaking of the normal workingday,
the part of factory legislation that deals with health regulationsand
safety measures, etc., has been overlooked. The liability law comesinto
operation only when these regulations are infringed.

In short, this appendix also is distinguished by slovenly editing.

\

*Dixi et salvavi animam meam.*

\

\[I have spoken and saved my soul.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Marx/Engels Works Archive](../../index.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](index.htm)
