Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

1\. \"Labor is the source of wealth and all culture, and since useful
labor is possible only in society and through society, the proceeds of
labor belong undiminished with equal right to all members of society.\"

\

*First part of the paragraph*: \"Labor is the source of all wealth and
all culture.\"

Labor is *not the source* of all wealth. *Nature* is just as much the
source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth
consists!) as labor, which itself is only the manifestation of a force
of nature, human labor power. The above phrase is to be found in all
children\'s primers and is correct insofar as it is implied that labor
is performed with the appurtenant subjects and instruments. But a
socialist program cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to pass over in
silence the *conditions* that lone give them meaning. And insofar as man
from the beginning behaves toward nature, the primary source of all
instruments and subjects of labor, as an owner, treats her as belonging
to him, his labor becomes the source of use values, therefore also of
wealth. The bourgeois have very good grounds for falsely ascribing
*supernatural creative power* to labor; since precisely from the fact
that labor depends on nature it follows that the man who possesses no
other property than his labor power must, in all conditions of society
and culture, be the slave of other men who have made themselves the
owners of the material conditions of labor. He can only work with their
permission, hence live only with their permission.

Let us now leave the sentence as it stands, or rather limps. What could
one have expected in conclusion? Obviously this:

\"Since labor is the source of all wealth, no one in society can
appropriate wealth except as the product of labor. Therefore, if he
himself does not work, he lives by the labor of others and also acquires
his culture at the expense of the labor of others.\"

Instead of this, by means of the verbal river \"and since\", a
proposition is added in order to draw a conclusion from this and not
from the first one.

\

*Second part of the paragraph*: \"Useful labor is possible only in
society and through society.\"

According to the first proposition, labor was the source of all wealth
and all culture; therefore no society is possible without labor. Now we
learn, conversely, that no \"useful\" labor is possible without society.

One could just as well have said that only in society can useless and
even socially harmful labor become a branch of gainful occupation, that
only in society can one live by being idle, etc., etc. -- in short, once
could just as well have copied the whole of Rousseau.

And what is \"useful\" labor? Surely only labor which produces the
intended useful result. A savage -- and man was a savage after he had
ceased to be an ape -- who kills an animal with a stone, who collects
fruit, etc., performs \"useful\" labor.

\

*Thirdly, the conclusion*: \"Useful labor is possible only in society
and through society, the proceeds of labor belong undiminished with
equal right to all members of society.\"

A fine conclusion! If useful labor is possible only in society and
through society, the proceeds of labor belong to society -- and only so
much therefrom accrues to the individual worker as is not required to
maintain the \"condition\" of labor, society.

In fact, this proposition has at all times been made use of by the
champions of the *state of society prevailing at any given time*. First
comes the claims of the government and everything that sticks to it,
since it is the social organ for the maintenance of the social order;
then comes the claims of the various kinds of private property, for the
various kinds of private property are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases can be twisted and turned as desired.

The first and second parts of the paragraph have some intelligible
connection only in the following wording:

\"Labor becomes the source of wealth and culture only as social labor\",
or, what is the same thing, \"in and through society\".

This proposition is incontestably correct, for although isolated labor
(its material conditions presupposed) can create use value, it can
create neither wealth nor culture.

But equally incontestable is this other proposition:

\"In proportion as labor develops socially, and becomes thereby a source
of wealth and culture, poverty and destitution develop among the
workers, and wealth and culture among the nonworkers.\"

This is the law of all history hitherto. What, therefore, had to be done
here, instead of setting down general phrases about \"labor\" and
\"society\", was to prove concretely how in present capitalist society
the material, etc., conditions have at last been created which enable
and compel the workers to lift this social curse.

In fact, however, the whole paragraph, bungled in style and content, is
only there in order to inscribe the Lassallean catchword of the
\"undiminished proceeds of labor\" as a slogan at the top of the party
banner. I shall return later to the \"proceeds of labor\", \"equal
right\", etc., since the same thing recurs in a somewhat different form
further on.

\

2\. \"In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly
of the capitalist class; the resulting dependence of the working class
is the cause of misery and servitude in all forms.\"

This sentence, borrowed from the Rules of the International, is
incorrect in this \"improved\" edition.

In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly of the
landowners (the monopoly of property in land is even the basis of the
monopoly of capital) *and* the capitalists. In the passage in question,
the Rules of the International do not mention either one or the other
class of monopolists. They speak of the \"monopolizer of the means of
labor, that is, *the sources of life*.\" The addition, \"sources of
life\", makes it sufficiently clear that land is included in the
instruments of labor.

The correction was introduced because Lassalle, for reasons now
generally known, attacked *only* the capitalist class and not the
landowners. In England, the capitalist class is usually not even the
owner of the land on which his factory stands.

\

3\. \"The emancipation of labor demands the promotion of the instruments
of labor to the common property of society and the co-operative
regulation of the total labor, with a fair distribution of the proceeds
of labor.

\"Promotion of the instruments of labor to the common property\" ought
obviously to read their \"conversion into the common property\"; but
this is only passing.

What are the \"proceeds of labor\"? The product of labor, or its value?
And in the latter case, is it the total value of the product, or only
that part of the value which labor has newly added to the value of the
means of production consumed?

\"Proceeds of labor\" is a loose notion which Lassalle has put in the
place of definite economic conceptions.

What is \"a fair distribution\"?

Do not the bourgeois assert that the present-day distribution is
\"fair\"? And is it not, in fact, the only \"fair\" distribution on the
basis of the present-day mode of production? Are economic relations
regulated by legal conceptions, or do not, on the contrary, legal
relations arise out of economic ones? Have not also the socialist
sectarians the most varied notions about \"fair\" distribution?

To understand what is implied in this connection by the phrase \"fair
distribution\", we must take the first paragraph and this one together.
The latter presupposes a society wherein the instruments of labor are
common property and the total labor is co-operatively regulated, and
from the first paragraph we learn that \"the proceeds of labor belong
undiminished with equal right to all members of society.\"

\"To all members of society\"? To those who do not work as well? What
remains then of the \"undiminished\" proceeds of labor? Only to those
members of society who work? What remains then of the \"equal right\" of
all members of society?

But \"all members of society\" and \"equal right\" are obviously mere
phrases. The kernel consists in this, that in this communist society
every worker must receive the \"undiminished\" Lassallean \"proceeds of
labor\".

Let us take, first of all, the words \"proceeds of labor\" in the sense
of the product of labor; then the co-operative proceeds of labor are the
*total social product*.

From this must now be deducted: *First*, cover for replacement of the
means of production used up. *Second*, additional portion for expansion
of production. *Third*, reserve or insurance funds to provide against
accidents, dislocations caused by natural calamities, etc.

These deductions from the \"undiminished\" proceeds of labor are an
economic necessity, and their magnitude is to be determined according to
available means and forces, and partly by computation of probabilities,
but they are in no way calculable by equity.

There remains the other part of the total product, intended to serve as
means of consumption.

Before this is divided among the individuals, there has to be deducted
again, from it: *First*, the general costs of administration not
belonging to production. This part will, from the outset, be very
considerably restricted in comparison with present-day society, and it
diminishes in proportion as the new society develops. *Second*, that
which is intended for the common satisfaction of needs, such as schools,
health services, etc. From the outset, this part grows considerably in
comparison with present-day society, and it grows in proportion as the
new society develops. *Third*, funds for those unable to work, etc., in
short, for what is included under so-called official poor relief today.

Only now do we come to the \"distribution\" which the program, under
Lassallean influence, alone has in view in its narrow fashion -- namely,
to that part of the means of consumption which is divided among the
individual producers of the co-operative society.

The \"undiminished\" proceeds of labor have already unnoticeably become
converted into the \"diminished\" proceeds, although what the producer
is deprived of in his capacity as a private individual benefits him
directly or indirectly in his capacity as a member of society.

Just as the phrase of the \"undiminished\" proceeds of labor has
disappeared, so now does the phrase of the \"proceeds of labor\"
disappear altogether.

Within the co-operative society based on common ownership of the means
of production, the producers do not exchange their products; just as
little does the labor employed on the products appear here as the
*value* of these products, as a material quality possessed by them,
since now, in contrast to capitalist society, individual labor no longer
exists in an indirect fashion but directly as a component part of total
labor. The phrase \"proceeds of labor\", objectionable also today on
account of its ambiguity, thus loses all meaning.

What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as it has
*developed* on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just as it
*emerges* from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect,
economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the
birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges. Accordingly,
the individual producer receives back from society -- after the
deductions have been made -- exactly what he gives to it. What he has
given to it is his individual quantum of labor. For example, the social
working day consists of the sum of the individual hours of work; the
individual labor time of the individual producer is the part of the
social working day contributed by him, his share in it. He receives a
certificate from society that he has furnished such-and-such an amount
of labor (after deducting his labor for the common funds); and with this
certificate, he draws from the social stock of means of consumption as
much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount of labor which he
has given to society in one form, he receives back in another.

Here, obviously, the same principle prevails as that which regulates the
exchange of commodities, as far as this is exchange of equal values.
Content and form are changed, because under the altered circumstances no
one can give anything except his labor, and because, on the other hand,
nothing can pass to the ownership of individuals, except individual
means of consumption. But as far as the distribution of the latter among
the individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as in
the exchange of commodity equivalents: a given amount of labor in one
form is exchanged for an equal amount of labor in another form.

Hence, *equal right* here is still in principle -- *bourgeois right*,
although principle and practice are no longer at loggerheads, while the
exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange exists only on the average
and not in the individual case.

In spite of this advance, this equal right is still constantly
stigmatized by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers is
*proportional* to the labor they supply; the equality consists in the
fact that measurement is made with an *equal standard*, labor.

But one man is superior to another physically, or mentally, and supplies
more labor in the same time, or can labor for a longer time; and labor,
to serve as a measure, must be defined by its duration or intensity,
otherwise it ceases to be a standard of measurement. This *equal* right
is an unequal right for unequal labor. It recognizes no class
differences, because everyone is only a worker like everyone else; but
it tacitly recognizes unequal individual endowment, and thus productive
capacity, as a natural privilege. It is, therefore, a right of
inequality, in its content, like every right. Right, by its very nature,
can consist only in the application of an equal standard; but unequal
individuals (and they would not be different individuals if they were
not unequal) are measurable only by an equal standard insofar as they
are brought under an equal point of view, are taken from one definite
side only -- for instance, in the present case, are regarded *only as
workers* and nothing more is seen in them, everything else being
ignored. Further, one worker is married, another is not; one has more
children than another, and so on and so forth. Thus, with an equal
performance of labor, and hence an equal in the social consumption fund,
one will in fact receive more than another, one will be richer than
another, and so on. To avoid all these defects, right, instead of being
equal, would have to be unequal.

But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist society
as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged birth pangs from
capitalist society. Right can never be higher than the economic
structure of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby.

In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving
subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith
also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has vanished;
after labor has become not only a means of life but life\'s prime want;
after the productive forces have also increased with the all-around
development of the individual, and all the springs of co-operative
wealth flow more abundantly -- only then can the narrow horizon of
bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society inscribe on its
banners: From each according to his ability, to each according to his
needs!

I have dealt more at length with the \"undiminished\" proceeds of labor,
on the one hand, and with \"equal right\" and \"fair distribution\", on
the other, in order to show what a crime it is to attempt, on the one
hand, to force on our Party again, as dogmas, ideas which in a certain
period had some meaning but have now become obsolete verbal rubbish,
while again perverting, on the other, the realistic outlook, which it
cost so much effort to instill into the Party but which has now taken
root in it, by means of ideological nonsense about right and other trash
so common among the democrats and French socialists.

Quite apart from the analysis so far given, it was in general a mistake
to make a fuss about so-called distribution and put the principal stress
on it.

Any distribution whatever of the means of consumption is only a
consequence of the distribution of the conditions of production
themselves. The latter distribution, however, is a feature of the mode
of production itself. The capitalist mode of production, for example,
rests on the fact that the material conditions of production are in the
hands of nonworkers in the form of property in capital and land, while
the masses are only owners of the personal condition of production, of
labor power. If the elements of production are so distributed, then the
present-day distribution of the means of consumption results
automatically. If the material conditions of production are the
co-operative property of the workers themselves, then there likewise
results a distribution of the means of consumption different from the
present one. Vulgar socialism (and from it in turn a section of the
democrats) has taken over from the bourgeois economists the
consideration and treatment of distribution as independent of the mode
of production and hence the presentation of socialism as turning
principally on distribution. After the real relation has long been made
clear, why retrogress again?

\

4\. \"The emancipation of labor must be the work of the working class,
relative to which all other classes are only one reactionary mass.\"

The first strophe is taken from the introductory words of the Rules of
the International, but \"improved\". There it is said: \"The
emancipation of the working class must be the act of the workers
themselves\"; here, on the contrary, the \"working class\" has to
emancipate -- what? \"Labor.\" Let him understand who can.

In compensation, the antistrophe, on the other hand, is a Lassallean
quotation of the first water: \"relative to which\" (the working class)
\"all other classes are only one reactionary mass.\"

In the [Communist Manifesto](../../1848/communist-manifesto/ch01.htm) it
is said:

\"Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie today,
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes
decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product.\"

The bourgeoisie is here conceived as a revolutionary class -- as the
bearer of large-scale industry -- relative to the feudal lords and the
lower middle class, who desire to maintain all social positions that are
the creation of obsolete modes of production. thus, they do not form
together with the bourgeoisie \"only one reactionary mass\".

On the other hand, the proletariat is revolutionary relative to the
bourgeoisie because, having itself grown up on the basis of large-scale
industry, it strives to strip off from production the capitalist
character that the bourgeoisie seeks to perpetuate. But the *Manifesto*
adds that the \"lower middle class\" is becoming revolutionary \"in view
of \[its\] impending transfer to the proletariat\".

From this point of view, therefore, it is again nonsense to say that it,
together with the bourgeoisie, and with the feudal lords into the
bargain, \"form only one reactionary mass\" relative to the working
class.

Has one proclaimed to the artisan, small manufacturers, etc., and
peasants during the last elections: Relative to us, you, together with
the bourgeoisie and feudal lords, form one reactionary mass?

Lassalle knew the *Communist Manifesto* by heart, as his faithful
followers know the gospels written by him. If, therefore, he has
falsified it so grossly, this has occurred only to put a good color on
his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against the
bourgeoisie.

In the above paragraph, moreover, his oracular saying is dragged in by
main force without any connection with the botched quotation from the
Rules of the International. Thus, it is simply an impertinence, and
indeed not at all displeasing to Herr Bismarck, one of those cheap
pieces of insolence in which the Marat of Berlin deals. [\[ Marat of
Berlin a reference to Hasselmann, cheif editor of the *Neuer
Social-Demokrat*\]]{.inote}

\

5\. \"The working class strives for its emancipation first of all within
the framework of the present-day national states, conscious that the
necessary result of its efforts, which are common to the workers of all
civilized countries, will be the international brotherhood of peoples.\"

Lassalle, in opposition to the *Communist Manifesto* and to all earlier
socialism, conceived the workers\' movement from the narrowest national
standpoint. He is being followed in this -- and that after the work of
the International!

It is altogether self-evident that, to be able to fight at all, the
working class must organize itself at home *as a class* and that its own
country is the immediate arena of its struggle -- insofar as its class
struggle is national, not in substance, but, as the *Communist
Manifesto* says, \"in form\". But the \"framework of the present-day
national state\", for instance, the German Empire, is itself, in its
turn, economically \"within the framework\" of the world market,
politically \"within the framework\" of the system of states. Every
businessman knows that German trade is at the same time foreign trade,
and the greatness of Herr Bismarck consists, to be sure, precisely in
his pursuing a kind of *international* policy.

And to what does the German Workers\' party reduce its internationalism?
To the consciousness that the result of its efforts will be \"the
international brotherhood of peoples\" -- a phrase borrowed from the
bourgeois [League of Peace and
Freedom](../../../../../glossary/orgs/l/e.htm#league-peace-freedom),
which is intended to pass as equivalent to the international brotherhood
of working classes in the joint struggle against the ruling classes and
their governments. Not a word, therefore, about the international
functions of the German working class! And it is thus that it is to
challenge its own bourgeoisie -- which is already linked up in
brotherhood against it with the bourgeois of all other countries -- and
Herr Bismarck\'s international policy of conspiracy.

In fact, the internationalism of the program stands *even infinitely
below* that of the Free Trade party. The latter also asserts that the
result of its efforts will be \"the international brotherhood of
peoples\". But it also *does* something to make trade international and
by no means contents itself with the consciousness that all people are
carrying on trade at home.

The international activity of the working classes does not in any way
depend on the existence of the International Working Men\'s Association.
This was only the first attempt to create a central organ for the
activity; an attempt which was a lasting success on account of the
impulse which it gave but which was no longer realizable in its
historical form after the fall of the Paris Commune.

Bismarck\'s
[Norddeutsche](../../../../../glossary/periodicals/n/o.htm#norddeutsche-allgemeine-zeitung)
was absolutely right when it announced, to the satisfaction of its
master, that the German Workers\' party had sworn off internationalism
in the new program.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II](ch02.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](index.htm)
