Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

\"Starting from these basic principles, the German workers\'
partystrives by all legal means for the free state---and---socialist
society:that abolition of the wage system together with the iron law of
wages \--and---exploitation in every form; the elimination of all social
and politicalinequality.\"

\

I shall return to the \"free\" state later.

So, in future, the German Workers\' party has got to believe
inLassalle\'s \"iron law of wages\"! That this may not be lost, the
nonsenseis perpetrated of speaking of the \"abolition of the wage
system\" (it shouldread: system of wage labor), \"together with the iron
law of wages\". IfI abolish wage labor, then naturally I abolish its
laws also, whether theyare of \"iron\" or sponge. But Lassalle\'s attack
on wage labor turns almostsolely on this so-called law. In order,
therefore, to prove that Lassalle\'ssect has conquered, the \"wage
system\" must be abolished \"together withthe iron law of wages\" and
not without it.

It is well known that nothing of the \"iron law of wages\" is
Lassalle\'sexcept the word \"iron\" borrowed from Goethe\'s \"great,
eternal iron laws\". [[]{#1b}[\[1\]](#1)]{.note}The word \"iron\" is a
label by which the true believers recognize one another.But if I take
the law with Lassalle\'s stamp on it, and consequently inhis sense, then
I must also take it with his substantiation for it. Andwhat is that? As
Lange already showed, shortly after Lassalle\'s death,it is the
Malthusian theory of population (preached by Lange himself).But if this
theory is correct, then again I cannot abolish the law evenif I abolish
wage labor a hundred times over, because the law then governsnot only
the system of wage labor but *every* social system. Basingthemselves
directly on this, the economists have been proving for 50 yearsand more
that socialism cannot abolish poverty, which has its basis innature, but
can only make it *general*, distribute it simultaneouslyover the whole
surface of society!

But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the falseLassallean
formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogression consistsin
the following:

Since Lassalle\'s death, there has asserted itself in our partythe
scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be\--
namely, the *value*, or *price*, of *labor*---but onlya masked form for
the *value*, or *price*, of *labor power*.Thereby, the whole bourgeois
conception of wages hitherto, as well as allthe criticism hitherto
directed against this conception, was thrown overboardonce and for all.
It was made clear that the wage worker has permissionto work for his own
subsistence---that is, *to live*, only insofaras he works for a certain
time gratis for the capitalist (and hence alsofor the latter\'s
co-consumers of surplus value); that the whole capitalistsystem of
production turns on the increase of this gratis labor by extendingthe
working day, or by developing the productivity---that is, increasingthe
intensity or labor power, etc.; that, consequently, the system of
wagelabor is a system of slavery, and indeed of a slavery which becomes
moresevere in proportion as the social productive forces of labor
develop,whether the worker receives better or worse payment. And after
this understandinghas gained more and more ground in our party, some
return to Lassalle\'sdogma although they must have known that Lassalle
*did not know* whatwages were, but, following in the wake of the
bourgeois economists, tookthe appearance for the essence of the matter.

It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secretof
slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to
obsoletenotions were to inscribe on the program of the rebellion:
Slavery mustbe abolished because the feeding of slaves in the system of
slavery cannotexceed a certain low maximum!

Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our party werecapable
of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on the understanding thathas
spread among the mass of our party prove, by itself, with what
criminallevity and with what lack of conscience they set to work in
drawing upthis compromise program!

Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph,\"the
elimination of all social and political inequality\", it ought to
havebeen said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social
andpolitical inequality arising from them would disappear of itself.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[[\[1\]](#1b){#1}]{.note}Quoted from Goethe\'s *Das Göttliche*

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](ch03.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](index.htm)
