Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

\"The German Workers\' party, in order *to pave the way to the solution
of the social question*, demands the establishment of producers\'
co-operative societies *with state aid under the democratic control of
the toiling people*. The producers\' co-operative societies *are to be
called into being* for industry and agriculture on such a scale *that
the socialist organization of the total labor will arise from them.*\"

After the Lassallean \"iron law of wages\", the physic of the prophet.
The way to it is \"paved\" in worthy fashion. In place of the existing
class struggle appears a newspaper scribbler\'s phrase: \"the social
*question*\", to the \"solution\" of which one \"paves the way\".

Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of transformation of
society, the \"socialist organization of the total labor\" \"arises\"
from the \"state aid\" that the state gives to the producers\'
co-operative societies and which the *state*, not the workers, \"calls
into being\". It is worthy of Lassalle\'s imagination that with state
loans one can build a new society just as well as a new railway!

From the remnants of a sense of shame, \"state aid\" has been put \--
under the democratic control of the \"toiling people\".

In the first place, the majority of the \"toiling people\" in Germany
consists of peasants, not proletarians.

Second, \"democratic\" means in German \"Volksherrschaftlich\" [\[by the
rule of the people\]]{.inote}. But what does \"control by the rule of
the people of the toiling people\" mean? And particularly in the case of
a toiling people which, through these demands that it puts to the state,
expresses its full consciousness that it neither rules nor is ripe for
ruling!

It would be superfluous to deal here with the criticism of the recipe
prescribed by Buchez in the reign of Louis Philippe, in opposition to
the French socialists and accepted by the reactionary workers, of the
[Atelier](../../../../../glossary/periodicals/l/a.htm#l-atelier). The
chief offense does not lie in having inscribed this specific nostrum in
the program, but in taking, in general, a retrograde step from the
standpoint of a class movement to that of a sectarian movement.

That the workers desire to establish the conditions for co-operative
production on a social scale, and first of all on a national scale, in
their own country, only means that they are working to revolutionize the
present conditions of production, and it has nothing in common with the
foundation of co-operative societies with state aid. But as far as the
present co-operative societies are concerned, they are of value *only*
insofar as they are the independent creations of the workers and not
protégés either of the governments or of the bourgeois.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IV](ch04.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](index.htm)
