Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I come now to the democratic section.

\

A. \"The free basis of the state.\"

\

First of all, according to II, the German Workers\' party strives for
\"the free state\".

Free state --- what is this?

It is by no means the aim of the workers, who have got rid of the narrow
mentality of humble subjects, to set the state free. In the German
Empire, the \"state\" is almost as \"free\" as in Russia. Freedom
consists in converting the state from an organ superimposed upon society
into one completely subordinate to it; and today, too, the forms of
state are more free or less free to the extent that they restrict the
\"freedom of the state\".

The German Workers\' party --- at least if it adopts the program ---
shows that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep; in that, instead
of treating existing society (and this holds good for any future one) as
the *basis* of the existing state (or of the future state in the case of
future society), it treats the state rather as an independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, ethical, and libertarian bases.

And what of the riotous misuse which the program makes of the words
\"present-day state\", \"present-day society\", and of the still more
riotous misconception it creates in regard to the state to which it
addresses its demands?

\"Present-day society\" is capitalist society, which exists in all
civilized countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, more or
less modified by the particular historical development of each country,
more or less developed. On the other hand, the \"present-day state\"
changes with a country\'s frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German
Empire from what it is in Switzerland, and different in England from
what it is in the United States. The \"present-day state\" is therefore
a fiction.

Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilized countries,
in spite or their motley diversity of form, all have this in common:
that they are based on modern bourgeois society, only one more or less
capitalistically developed. They have, therefore, also certain essential
characteristics in common. In this sense, it is possible to speak of the
\"present-day state\" in contrast with the future, in which its present
root, bourgeois society, will have died off.

The question then arises: What transformation will the state undergo in
communist society? In other words, what social functions will remain in
existence there that are analogous to present state functions? This
question can only be answered scientifically, and one does not get a
flea-hop nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the
word \'people\' with the word \'state\'.

Between capitalist and communist society there lies the period of the
revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding to
this is also a political transition period in which the state can be
nothing but *the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat*.

Now the program does not deal with this nor with the future state of
communist society.

Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic litany
familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular rights,
a people\'s militia, etc. They are a mere echo of the bourgeois
[People\'s party](../../../../../glossary/orgs/p/e.htm#peoples-party),
of the [League of Peace and
Freedom](../../../../../glossary/orgs/l/e.htm#league-peace-freedom).
They are all demands which, insofar as they are not exaggerated in
fantastic presentation, have already been *realized*. Only the state to
which they belong does not lie within the borders of the German Empire,
but in Switzerland, the United States, etc. This sort of \"state of the
future\" is a present-day state, although existing outside the
\"framework\" of the German Empire.

But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German Workers\' party
expressly declares that it acts within \"the present-day national
state\", hence within its own state, the Prusso-German Empire --- its
demands would indeed be otherwise largely meaningless, since one only
demands what one has not got --- it should not have forgotten the chief
thing, namely, that all those pretty little gewgaws rest on the
recognition of the so-called sovereignty of the people and hence are
appropriate only in a *democratic republic*.

[]{#1b}

Since one has not the courage --- and wisely so, for the circumstances
demand caution --- to demand the democratic republic, as the French
workers\' programs under Louis Philippe and under Louis Napoleon did,
one should not have resorted, either, to the subterfuge, neither
\"honest\" [[\[1\]](#1)]{.note} nor decent, of demanding things which
have meaning only in a democratic republic from a state which is nothing
but a police-guarded military despotism, embellished with parliamentary
forms, alloyed with a feudal admixture, already influenced by the
bourgeoisie, and bureaucratically carpentered, and then to assure this
state into the bargain that one imagines one will be able to force such
things upon it \"by legal means\".

Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the democratic
republic, and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this last form of
state of bourgeois society that the class struggle has to be fought out
to a conclusion --- even it towers mountains above this kind of
democratism, which keeps within the limits of what is permitted by the
police and not permitted by logic.

That, in fact, by the word \"state\" is meant the government machine, or
the state insofar as it forms a special organism separated from society
through division of labor, is shown by the words \"the German Workers\'
party demands as the economic basis of the state: a single progressive
income tax\", etc. Taxes are the economic basis of the government
machinery and of nothing else. In the state of the future, existing in
Switzerland, this demand has been pretty well fulfilled. Income tax
presupposes various sources of income of the various social classes, and
hence capitalist society. It is, therefore, nothing remarkable that the
Liverpool financial reformers --- bourgeois headed by Gladstone\'s
brother --- are putting forward the same demand as the program.

\

B. \"The German Workers\' party demands as the intellectual and ethical
basis of the state:\
\"1. Universal and equal elementary education by the state. Universal
compulsory school attendance. Free instruction.\"

\"Equal elementary education\"? What idea lies behind these words? Is it
believed that in present-day society (and it is only with this one has
to deal) education can be *equal* for all classes? Or is it demanded
that the upper classes also shall be compulsorily reduced to the modicum
of education --- the elementary school --- that alone is compatible with
the economic conditions not only of the wage-workers but of the peasants
as well?

\"Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction.\" The former
exists even in Germany, the second in Switzerland and in the United
States in the case of elementary schools. If in some states of the
latter country higher education institutions are also \"free\", that
only means in fact defraying the cost of education of the upper classes
from the general tax receipts. Incidentally, the same holds good for
\"free administration of justice\" demanded under A, 5. The
administration of criminal justice is to be had free everywhere; that of
civil justice is concerned almost exclusively with conflicts over
property and hence affects almost exclusively the possessing classes.
Are they to carry on their litigation at the expense of the national
coffers?

This paragraph on the schools should at least have demanded technical
schools (theoretical and practical) in combination with the elementary
school.

\"Elementary education by the state\" is altogether objectionable.
Defining by a general law the expenditures on the elementary schools,
the qualifications of the teaching staff, the branches of instruction,
etc., and, as is done in the United States, supervising the fulfillment
of these legal specifications by state inspectors, is a very different
thing from appointing the state as the educator of the people!
Government and church should rather be equally excluded from any
influence on the school. Particularly, indeed, in the Prusso-German
Empire (and one should not take refuge in the rotten subterfuge that one
is speaking of a \"state of the future\"; we have seen how matters stand
in this respect) the state has need, on the contrary, of a very stern
education by the people.

But the whole program, for all its democratic clang, is tainted through
and through by the Lassallean sect\'s servile belief in the state, or,
what is no better, by a democratic belief in miracles; or rather it is a
compromise between these two kinds of belief in miracles, both equally
remote from socialism.

\"Freedom of science\" says paragraph of the Prussian Constitution. Why,
then, here?[.]{#god}

\"Freedom of conscience\"! If one desired, at this time of the
[Kulturkampf](../../../../../glossary/terms/k/u.htm#kulturkampf) to
remind liberalism of its old catchwords, it surely could have been done
only in the following form: Everyone should be able to attend his
religious as well as his bodily needs without the police sticking their
noses in. But the Workers\' party ought, at any rate in this connection,
to have expressed its awareness of the fact that bourgeois \"freedom of
conscience\" is nothing but the toleration of all possible kinds of
religious freedom of conscience, and that for its part it endeavours
rather to liberate the conscience from the witchery of religion. But one
chooses not to transgress the \"bourgeois\" level.

I have now come to the end, for the appendix that now follows in the
program does not constitute a characteristic component part of it.
Hence, I can be very brief.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[[\[1\]](#1b){#1}]{.note} Epitaph used by the
[Eisenachers](../../../../../glossary/orgs/g/e.htm#gsdlp). Here a play
on words in German.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Appendix](append.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme](index.htm)
