Karl Marx\
Critique of the Gotha Programme

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Foreword 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

[]{#1b}

The manuscript published here \-- the covering letter to Bracke as well
as the critique of the draft programme \-- was sent in 1875, shortly
before the [Gotha Unity
Congress](../../../../../glossary/events/g/o.htm#gotha-congress), [to
Bracke](../../1875/letters/75_05_05.htm) for communication to Geib,
Auer, Bebel [[\[1\]](#1)]{.note}, and Liebknecht and subsequent return
to Marx. Since the [Halle Party
Congress](../../../../../glossary/events/h/a.htm#halle-party-congress)
has put the discussion of the Gotha Programme on the agenda of the
Party, I think I would be guilty of suppression if I any longer withheld
from publicity this important \-- perhaps the most important \--
document relevant to this discussion.

But the manuscript has yet another and more far-reaching significance.
Here for the first time Marx\'s attitude to the line adopted by Lassalle
in his agitation from the very beginning is clearly and firmly set
forth, both as regards Lassalle\'s economic principles and his tactics.

The ruthless severity with which the draft programme is dissected here,
the mercilessness with which the results obtained are enunciated and the
shortcomings of the draft laid bare \-- all this today, after fifteen
years, can no longer give offence. Specific Lassalleans now exist only
abroad as isolated ruins, and in Halle the Gotha Programme was given up
even by its creators as altogether inadequate.

Nevertheless, I have omitted a few sharp personal expressions and
judgments where these were immaterial, and replaced them by dots. Marx
himself would have done so if he had published the manuscript today. The
violence of the language in some passages was provoked by two
circumstances. In the first place, Marx and I had been more intimately
connected with the German movement than with any other; we were,
therefore, bound to be particularly perturbed by the decidedly
retrograde step manifested by this draft programme. And secondly, we
were at that time, hardly two years after the [Hague Congress of the
International](../../../../../glossary/events/h/a.htm#hague-congress),
engaged in the most violent struggle against Bakunin and his anarchists,
who made us responsible for everything that happened in the labour
movement in Germany; hence we had to expect that we would also be addled
with the secret paternity of this programme. These considerations do not
now exist and so there is no necessity for the passages in question.

For reasons arising form the Press Law, also, a few sentences have been
indicated only by dots. Where I have had to choose a milder expression
this has been enclosed in square brackets. Otherwise the text has been
reproduced word for word.

London, January 6, 1891

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[[\[1\]](#1b){#1}]{.note} Before the *Critique of the Gotha Programme*
was written, Engels wrote a [letter to August
Bebel](../../1875/letters/75_03_18.htm) expressing Marx and Engels\'
surprise at the programme, and going on to criticise it.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](ch01.htm)

[Critique of the Gotha Programme Index](index.htm)
