---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# Capitalist Property

### (June 1903)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Justice**, 13 June 1903, p.3.\
Originally published in **Droit du Peuple**.\
Translated by Hector Kirby.\
Transcribed by Tex Crawford.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Individual property can only exist in a primitive stage of human life,
because of its two attributes, it is the *product of the owner\'s
labour*, and it is *used by him*.

These two qualities, regarded is indispensable to and inseparable from
individual property, have left so strong an impression upon the human
mind that the defenders of capitalism idiotically state that property is
the reward of toil. Nevertheless, capitalist production can only exist
when individual property is stripped of the two attributes which alone
justify it.

Personal wealth is still, indeed, the result of labour, but it no longer
belongs to the workers who produce it; the means of production (land,
machinery, mines, &c.) are not owned by the wage-workers who use them,
but by the capitalist who has not made them, and who does not work them.
Capitalist property does not, consequently, possess the two attributes
of individual property.

The economists, the moralists, the philosophers, and the politicians
puzzle their brains to discover some attributes which can give it the
appearance of being justifiable. Not being able to give the capitalist
the character of a producer, they give him that of a thrifty man; his
wealth is the result of his saving, they say. But, as he does not work,
he must, then, save on the labour of others -- in other words, he robs
the workers of a part of the fruits of their labour, in order to make
himself rich. The \"thrift\" argument having been recognised as being as
silly as it is inconvenient, the leading politicians have generously
endowed the capitalist with the qualities of organiser of labour and
captain of industry, which by a genial co-operation with the labour of
the wage-workers, beget his millions. But, reply the Socialists, as
these qualities are not possessed by the capitalist, but by his managers
and foremen, they cannot justify his ownership of wealth.

Then, arriving at the end of their inventive genius, they transform the
transcendent virtues of the capitalist into a metaphysical entity. It is
chance, it is blind fortune which makes him owner of property.

The existence of joint-stock companies demolishes these arguments, so
laboriously maintained, in spite of all the evidence to the contrary.
The capitalist who possesses shares in them has not the least contact
with production; he may be ignorant of the place where it is carried on,
as of its nature; he receives his dividends, and that is all he cares
about. The joint-stock company breaks the last bonds which unite the
proprietor to his property; it has *depersonalised* property.

The shares of a joint-stock company can belong to Peter, Paul or
Nicodemus, they can change hands every day at the Stock Exchange, and
sometimes several times in one day; but the factories still go on
producing as if the property had not changed hands. The joint-stock
companies which create a kind of collectivist property possessed by
shareholders, demonstrate the absolute uselessness of capitalist
production and clearly show the parasitical nature of the capitalist
class. It is not the possessors but the non-possessors who are useful in
the field of the capitalist production; but the Social Revolution will
sweep away these parasites.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.4.2004
