Marx-Engels Correspondence 1894

# Engels to Borgius^[\[1\]](#n1)^ 

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} *Marx and Engels Correspondence*;\
[Publisher:]{.info} International Publishers (1968);\
[First Published:]{.info} *Gestamtausgabe*;\
[Translated:]{.info} Donna Torr;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} [Sally
Ryan](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/sryan.htm) in 2000;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, January 25, 1894

Here is the answer to your questions!

\(1\) What we understand by the economic conditions, which we regard as
the determining basis of the history of society, are the methods by
which human beings in a given society produce their means of subsistence
and exchange the products among themselves (in so far as division of
labour exists). Thus the *entire technique* of production and transport
is here included. According to our conception this technique also
determines the method of exchange and, further, the division of
products, and with it, after the dissolution of tribal society, the
division into classes also and hence the relations of lordship and
servitude and with them the state, politics, law, etc. Under economic
conditions are further included the geographical basis on which they
operate and those remnants of earlier stages of economic development
which have actually been transmitted and have survived -- often only
through tradition or the force of inertia; also of course the external
milieu which surrounds this form of society.

If, as you say, technique largely depends on the state of science,
science depends far more still on the *state* and the *requirements* of
technique. If society has a technical need, that helps science forward
more than ten universities. The whole of hydrostatics (Torricelli, etc.)
was called forth by the necessity for regulating the mountain streams of
Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We have only known
anything reasonable about electricity since its technical applicability
was discovered. But unfortunately it has become the custom in Germany to
write the history of the sciences as if they had fallen from the skies.

\(2\) We regard economic conditions as the factor which ultimately
determines historical development. But race is itself an economic
factor. Here, however, two points must not be overlooked:

\(a\) Political, juridical, philosophical, religious, literary,
artistic, etc., development is based on economic development. But all
these react upon one another and also upon the economic base. It is not
that the economic position is the *cause and alone active,* while
everything else only has a passive effect. There is, rather, interaction
on the basis of the economic necessity, which *ultimately* always
asserts itself. The state, for instance, exercises an influence by
tariffs, free trade, good or bad fiscal system; and even the deadly
inanition and impotence of the German petty bourgeois, arising from the
miserable economic position of Germany from 1640 to 1830 and expressing
itself at first in pietism, then in sentimentality and cringing
servility to princes and nobles, was not without economic effect. It was
one of the greatest hindrances to recovery and was not shaken until the
revolutionary and Napoleonic wars made the chronic misery an acute one.
So it is not, as people try here and there conveniently to imagine, that
the economic position produces an automatic effect. Men make their
history themselves, only in given surroundings which condition it and on
the basis of actual relations already existing, among which the economic
relations, however much they may be influenced by the other political
and ideological ones, are still ultimately the decisive ones, forming
the red thread which runs through them and alone leads to understanding.

\(b\) Men make their history themselves, but not as yet with a
collective will or according to a collective plan or even in a
definitely defined, given society. Their efforts clash, and for that
very reason all such societies are governed by *necessity,* which is
supplemented by and appears under the forms of *accident.* The necessity
which here asserts itself amidst all accident is again ultimately
economic necessity. This is where the so-called great men come in for
treatment. That such and such a man and precisely that man arises at
that particular time in that given country is of course pure accident.
But cut him out and there will be a demand for a substitute, and this
substitute will be found, good or bad, but in the long run he will be
found. That Napoleon, just that particular Corsican, should have been
the military dictator whom the French Republic, exhausted by its own
war, had rendered necessary, was an accident; but that, if a Napoleon
had been lacking, another would have filled the place, is proved by the
fact that the man has always been found as soon as he became necessary:
Caesar, Augustus, Cromwell, etc. While Marx discovered the materialist
conception of history, Thierry, Mignet, Guizot, and all the English
historians up to 1850 are the proof that it was being striven for, and
the discovery of the same conception by Morgan proves that the time was
ripe for it and that indeed it *had* to be discovered.

So with all the other accidents, and apparent accidents, of history. The
further the particular sphere which we are investigating is removed from
the economic sphere and approaches that of pure abstract ideology, the
more shall we find it exhibiting accidents in its development, the more
will its curve run in a zig-zag. So also you will find that the axis of
this curve will approach more and more nearly parallel to the axis of
the curve of economic development the longer the period considered and
the wider the field dealt with.

In Germany the greatest hindrance to correct understanding is the
irresponsible neglect by literature of economic history. It is so hard,
not only to disaccustom oneself of the ideas of history drilled into one
at school, but still more to rake up the necessary material for doing
so. Who, for instance, has read old G. von Gülich, whose dry collection
of material nevertheless contains so much stuff for the clarification of
innumerable political facts!

For the rest, the fine example which Marx has given in the *Eighteenth
Brumaire* should already, I think, provide you fairly well with
information on your questions, just because it is a practical example. I
have also, I believe, already touched on most of the points in
Anti-Dühring I, Chapters 9-11, and II, 2-4, as well as in III, I, or
Introduction, and then in the last section of *Feuerbach.*

Please do not weigh each word in the above too carefully, but keep the
connection in mind; I regret that I have not the time to work out what I
am writing to you so exactly as I should be obliged to do for
publication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1. ]{.info}]{#n1}This letter was first published without any mention
of the addressee in the journal *Der socialistische Akademiker* No 20,
1895, by its contributor H. Starkenburg. As a result Starkenburg was
wrongly identified as the addressee in all previous editions.--- from
Progress Publishers, 1968

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1894 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
