---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 1 July 1899.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Peace, blessed Peace!

The Peace Conference summoned by the Czar of Russia is now sitting at
the Hague -- and the Czar is busy using military force to suppress the
constitution of Finland.

Peace, blessed Peace! Britain prepares for war with the Transvaal in the
interests of the capitalist speculators who desire to exploit that
territory.

Peace, blessed Peace! The United States troops are busily engaged in
massacring the Filippinos; looting their towns and burning whatever they
cannot carry off.

Peace, blessed Peace! Lock out in Berlin, lock out in Paris, lock out in
Scotland, lock out in Dublin, lock out of workers by the masters,
desirous of reducing their wage slaves to subjection.

Peace, blessed Peace! The Peace Conference is sitting at the Hague --
and the Prince of Hades enjoys the joke.

When nations go to war the women and children are exempted from
molestation by the contending forces, but in the industrial struggle --
the *class war* -- it is the sufferings of the women and children upon
which the capitalist class depends to defeat and subdue us.

You see, it works out in this fashion. There is no antagonism between
the workmen and those by whom Labour is employed (eh, Mr McCarron) but
when the masters desire to provide their wives or daughters with some
fresh luxury -- a dainty diamond bracelet or a Continental trip -- then
the workers are called upon to submit to a reduction of wages --

Just to show their friendly feelings and their humble Christian spirit.

Sad to say, the workers most inconsiderately refuse. Some foolish idea
about the duty of providing the necessaries of life for their own wives
and children gets into their heads, and as a result of this little
difference of opinion there is a lock out.

A lock out! You know what that means. It means that the master class as
its weapon against the workers uses the powers of slow and maddening
*starvation*. It means that your master in order to defeat you, takes
the food from your table, the clothes from your body, the coals from
your fires, that he condemns you, as far as in him lies, to hunger and
misery, and that he calculates, with a fiendish ferocity, that you will
submit to his terms rather than see those dear to you perish for lack of
proper nourishment.

That is a lock out. During the lock out the masters want for nothing,
the workers are in want of everything. A fair fight? Hem.

At the ballot box the master would only count as one against his
workers; their force could, if properly used, ensure the triumph of
Labour as certainly as on the industrial plane the power of the master's
purse will nearly always win.

Yet it is upon the industrial field alone that the workers prefer to
fight.

In the workshop they fight the masters -- at the ballot box they elect
the master or his lackeys to rule them.

Yet it is the men elected at the ballot box who make the laws which
govern the fight in the workshop.

When will the workers learn that the political power they could wield as
an organised body is the greatest weapon in their hands, that the field
of politics is the only field upon which the workers can win
emancipation from the domination of capital?

In other words, when will the workers copy the masters who, not content
with their tremendous economic power, unceasingly strive to secure every
atom of political power in order to entrench their class in its position
of supremacy.

Let the workers organise to seize political power; let them remember
that all industrial institutions can be moulded responsive to the will
of the class wielding the governmental power, and, so remembering, let
them direct their energies toward the only object worth striving for,
viz, to wrest the private ownership and control of industry from the
hands of a robber class, and prepare the ground for the harvest of
freedom -- the Socialist Republic.

Then we shall have peace. Not the peace of imperial hypocrites, military
bullies, lying diplomats and commercial pirates, nor yet the peace of
beaten slaves, but the peace of a free people, paying tribute to no
exploiter, fully masters of their own destiny.

Peace, blessed Peace?

SPAILPÍN.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
