---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Physical Force in Irish Politics

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, July 22, 1899.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ireland occupies a position among the nations of the earth unique in a
great variety of its aspects, but in no one particular is this
singularity more marked than in the possession of what is known as a
'physical force party' -- a party, that is to say, whose members are
united upon no one point, and agree upon no single principle, except
upon the use of physical force as the sole means of settling the dispute
between the people of this country and the governing power of Great
Britain.

Other countries and other peoples have, from time to time, appealed to
what the first French Revolutionists picturesquely described as the
"sacred right of insurrection," but in so appealing they acted under the
inspiration of, and combated for, some great governing principle of
political or social life upon which they, to a man, were in absolute
agreement. The latter-day high falutin 'hillside' man, on the other
hand, exalts into a principle that which the revolutionsists of other
countries have looked upon as a weapon, and in his gatherings prohibits
all discussion of those principles which formed the main strength of his
prototypes elsewhere and made the successful use of that weapon
possible. Our people have glided at different periods of the past
century from moral force agitation, so-called, into physical force
rebellion, from constitutionalism into insurrectionism, meeting in each
the same failure and the same disaster and yet seem as far as ever from
learning the great truth that neither method is ever likely to be
successful until they first insist that a perfect agreement upon the end
to be attained should be arrived at as a starting-point of all our
efforts.

To the reader unfamiliar with Irish political history such a remark
seems to savour almost of foolishness, its truth is so apparent; but to
the reader acquainted with the inner workings of the political movements
of this country the remark is pregnant with the deepest meaning. Every
revolutionary effort in Ireland has drawn the bulk of its adherents from
the ranks of the disappointed followers of defeated constitutional
movements. After having exhausted their constitutional efforts in
striving to secure such a modicum of political power as would justify
them to their own consciences in taking a place as loyal subjects of the
British Empire, they, in despair, turned to thoughts of physical force
as a means of attaining their ends. Their conception of what constitutes
freedom was in no sense changed or revolutionised; they still believed
in the political form of freedom which had been their ideal in their
constitutional days; but no longer hoping for it from the acts of the
British Parliament, they swung over into the ranks of the 'physical
force' men as the only means of attaining it.

The so-called physical force movement of today in like manner bases its
hopes upon the disgust of the people over the failure of the Home Rule
movement; it seeks to enlist the people under its banners, not so much
by pointing out the base ideals of the constitutionalists or the total
inadequacy of their pet measures to remedy the evils under which the
people suffer, as by emphasising the greater efficacy of physical force
as a national weapon. Thus, the one test of an advanced Nationalist is,
in their opinion, one who believes in physical force. It may be the
persons so professing to believe are Republicans; it may be they are
believers in monarchy; it may be that Home Rule would satisfy them; it
may be that they despise Home Rule. No matter what their political faith
may be, if only they are prepared to express belief in the saving grace
of physical force, they are acclaimed as advanced Nationalists - worthy
descendants of 'the men of '98.' The '98 Executive, organised in the
commencement by professed believers in the physical force doctrine,
started by proclaiming its adherence to the principle of national
independence "as understood by Wolfe Tone and the United Irishmen," and
in less than twelve months from doing so, deliberately rejected a
similar resolution and elected on its governing body men notorious for
their Royalist proclivities. As the '98 Executive represents the
advanced Nationalists of Ireland, this repudiation of the Republican
faith of the United Irishmen is an interesting corroboration of the
truth of our statement that the advanced Nationalists of our day are
utterly regardless of principle and only attach importance to methods --
an instance of putting the cart before the horse, absolutely unique in
its imbecility and unparalleled in the history of the world.

It may be interesting, then, to place before our readers the Socialist
Republican conception of the functions and uses of physical force in a
popular movement. We neither exalt it into a principle nor repudiate it
as something not to be thought of. Our position towards it is that the
use or non-use of force for the realisation of the ideas of progress
always has been and always will be determined by the attitude, not of
the party of progress, but of the governing class opposed to that party.
If the time should arrive when the party of progress finds its way to
freedom barred by the stubborn greed of a possessing class entrenched
behind the barriers of law and order; if the party of progress has
indoctrinated the people at large with the new revolutionary conception
of society and is therefore representative of the will of a majority of
the nation, if it has exhausted all the peaceful means at its disposal
for the purpose of demonstrating to the people and their enemies that
the new revolutionary ideas do possess the suffrage of the majority;
then, but not till then, the party which represents the revolutionary
idea is justified in taking steps to assume the powers of government,
and in using the weapons of force to dislodge the usurping class or
government in possession, and treating its members and supporters as
usurpers and rebels against the constituted authorities always have been
created. In other words, Socialists believe that the question of force
is of very minor importance; the really important question is of the
principles upon which is based the movement that may or may not need the
use of force to realise its object.

Here, then, is the immense difference between the Socialist Republicans
and our friends the physical force men. The latter, by stifling all
discussions of principles, earn the passive and fleeting commendation of
the unthinking multitude; the former, by insisting upon a thorough
understanding of their basic principles, do not so readily attract the
multitude, but do attract and hold the more thoughtful amongst them. It
is the difference betwixt a mob in revolt and an army in preparation.
The mob who cheer a speaker referring to the hopes of a physical force
movement would, in the very hour of apparent success, be utterly
disorganised and divided by the passage through the British Legislature
of any trumpery Home Rule Bill. The army of class-conscious workers
organising under the banner of the Socialist Republican Party, strong in
their knowledge of economic truth and firmly grounded in their
revolutionary principles, would remain entirely unaffected by any such
manoeuvre and, knowing it would not change their position as a subject
class, would still press forward, resolute and undivided, with their
faces set towards their only hope of emancipation -- the complete
control by the working-class democracy of all the powers of National
Government.

Thus the policy of the Socialist Republicans is seen to be the only wise
one. "Educate that you may be free"; principles first, methods
afterwards. If the advocacy of physical force failed to achieve success
or even to effect an uprising when the majority were unenfranchised and
the secret ballot unknown, how can it be expected to succeed now that
the majority are in possession of voting power and the secret ballot
safeguards the voter?

The ballot-box was given us by our masters for their purpose; let us use
it for our own. Let us demonstrate at that ballot-box the strength and
intelligence of the revolutionary idea; let us make the hustings a
rostrum from which to promulgate our principles; let us grasp the public
powers in the interest of the disinherited class; let us emulate our
fathers and, like the 'true men of '98,' place ourselves in line with
the most advanced thought of our age and drawing inspiration and hope
from the spectacle presented by the world-wide revolt of the workers,
prepare for the coming of the day when the Socialist working-class of
Ireland will, through its elected representatives, present its demand
for freedom from the yoke of a governing master class or nation -- the
day on which the question of moral or physical force shall be finally
decided.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
