---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# 'Soldiers of the Queen'

### (1899)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 15 July 1899\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.2 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6)\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The opprobrious epithet 'hired assassins', so often applied to the Army
by Socialist propagandists, seems to many people in Ireland --
accustomed as they are to the double-dealing of the Home Rule press --
as a somewhat harsh characterisation of the military forces of the
Crown. We have been so long accustomed to see our capitalist patriots
playing fast and loose in this matter, so long been inured to seeing and
hearing the journalists and politicians who profess to hate our English
masters, devoting whole columns of space in their newspapers to
'Garrison Gossip', and other tittle tattle relative to the Army, so
often seen our Home Rule Corporations petition the British Government to
allow the permanent establishment of a military force in their towns,
are so familiarised with the strange spectacle of Irish MPs rising in
the British Parliament to demand better treatment for those British
soldiers to whom Ireland had the misfortune to give birth, that the
public mind of this country has almost lost sight of the grim and ugly
fact that the British Army in Ireland has only one reason for existence
-- that reason being the desire of the governing and oppressing classes
to possess ready for use a body of highly disciplined armed men, who, on
the first sign of an active desire on the part of the oppressed to get
rid of their governors and oppressors, can be relied upon to proceed
without asking questions to cut the throat of, or otherwise destroy,
every man so aspiring to freedom. In other words, the Army is, in plain
matter-of-fact language, what the Socialists so bluntly describe it to
be, viz., a body of hired assassins, creatures in the shape of men, who,
upon enlisting as 'soldiers of the Queen' agree in exchange for the sum
of 8d or 1/- per day to take the life of any person, be it man, woman or
child, whom our rulers desire to get rid of. Of course, unlike private
assassins who only murder under the influence of passion, the Army
performs its work under the approval of a Christian hierarchy -- bishops
bless its banners, churches pray that the army of their particular
nation may cut enough throats to secure a victory, and each battalion
carries upon its payroll a clergyman whose especial function it is to
assure the delights of Heaven to such of the gallant heroes as fall in
the course of the work of murder. We admit the presence of clergymen
amid such surroundings, although in glaring contrast to the teaching of
the Master they profess to serve -- "Thou shalt not kill" -- is not
without precedent. The brigands of the Middle Ages usually had attached
to their bands some disfrocked priest, who also, like his modern
prototype in the Army, issued absolution to the wounded members of his
band of marauders.

The soldier then is, no matter in what light we examine his position, a
'hired assassin' -- his first duty, he is told, is to 'obey'. To obey
whom? His superior officers, who in turn must obey the Government. When
the mandate goes forth, 'Kill', he must kill and dare not ask the reason
why. The government under whose orders he serves may have been elected
to power on some question of internal administration in England, Local
Option [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}, Franchise, or Disestablishment
[\[2\]](#n2){#f2}, but as soon as it is in power it has the right to
launch all the military and naval forces of the Crown into a war of
aggression in the interest of the possessing class, even if it should be
upon a people with whom the vast majority of its constituents desire to
live in peace. It has also the legal right to use its power against the
working class in its own land should they become restless under the
system of wage slavery. Whatever be the excuse for ordering out the
Army, the soldier has no option but to obey. Whether it be Egyptians
revolting against oppression, Boers defending their independence,
Indians maddened with famine, or Irishmen hungering for freedom; whether
the human being coming within his line of sight be stranger or friend,
father, mother, sister, brother or sweetheart, the soldier has no option
but to press the trigger, and send the death-dealing instrument on its
errand of murder. He is only a 'hired assassin', and must earn the wages
of his hire. What is a hired assassin, properly defined? One who engages
to take human life without having personal injury to avenge, at the
command of whoever pays him for doing so. Does not this description suit
the soldier exactly?

The demoralising effect of this occupation is further exemplified in the
life and language of the soldier himself. The moral atmosphere of a
barrack room is of the most revolting character, as is the ordinary
language of the soldier the most bestial conceivable. The Army is a
veritable moral cesspool corrupting all within its bounds, and exuding
forth a miasma of pestilence upon every spot so unfortunate as to be
cursed by its presence. The most degraded races within the
wide-spreading British Empire sink lower in the scale of humanity after
peaceful contact with the British Army; indeed it may be truthfully
averred that a desolating war would inflict upon a country less injury
than a peaceful occupation by the 'Soldiers of the Queen'. Do our Irish
mothers, who see their sons enlist in this sink of corruption without
erasing their names from the family roll, do the Irish maidens who give
themselves up to the embraces of this hireling soldiery, realise the
awful depravity hidden beneath the gaudy uniforms and dazzling trappings
of the British garrison? A standing army anywhere, in any country, is
first of all unnecessary; secondly, a tool in the hands of oppressors of
the people; thirdly, a generator of prostitution, but the British Army
is in the last particular the most odious on the face of the earth.
Witness the OFFICIAL STATISTICS, which tell us that the rate per 1,000
of admissions to hospital for venereal diseases is

  ------------------ --------------- --------
  In the             Prussian Army     26.7
  \... \...          French \...       43.8
  \... \...          Austrian \...     65.4
  And                                 
  British in India                   458.3
  ------------------ --------------- --------

or nearly every second man; ten times as many as in the French Army.

'Soldiers of the Queen'. Gallant Army, noble Queen.

Many people will, no doubt, question the propriety of our action in
dragging this unsavoury subject into the light of day in this manner,
but our action is prompted by the desire to awaken in the minds of our
Irish workers such a real and abiding hatred of this instrument of
tyranny, mingled with loathing of its character, as will serve in the
first place to destroy the prospects of recruiting in Ireland, and in
the second place to fire their brains and nerve their arms against the
day when we will wipe the foul stain of its presence from our midst.
This is our purpose, and to place within reach of our Irish girls a
knowledge of the constituent parts that go to the make-up of a British
soldier, that they might flee from his polluting embraces as from a
thing accursed.

Should we succeed in planting in the breasts of our fellow wage slaves a
tenth part of the hatred we ourselves feel for this blood be-decked tool
of our tyrants, we shall feel confident that the day is not far distant
when the long standing account between the Irish worker and his
exploiters will be paid in full.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} The right of local areas to legislate for themselves,
especially in regard to licensing laws.

[2.](#f2){#n2} Disestablishment of the Anglican Church, that is.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
