---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Wood Quay Ward, Election Address [Dublin, January 1903]{.small}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

To The Electors\
Fellow Workers,

Having been again asked to contest the Wood Quay Ward in the interests
of labour, I desire, in accepting this invitation, to lay before you a
few of the principles upon which I conducted the campaign last election,
and on which I shall fight this.

Our defeat of last year, brought about as it was by a campaign of
slander and bribery, and a wholesale and systematic debauching of the
more degraded portion of the electorate, did not in the slightest degree
affect the truth of the principles for which we contested. These
principles still remain the only principles by which the working class
can ever attain its freedom.

When the workers come into the world we find that we are outcasts in the
world. The land on which we must live is the property of a class who are
the descendants of men who stole the land from our forefathers, and we
who are workers, are, whether in town or country, compelled to pay for
permission to live on the earth; the houses, shops, factories, etc.,
which were built by the labour of our fathers at wages that simply kept
them alive are now owned by a class which never contributed an ounce of
sweat to their erecting, but whose members will continue to draw rent
and profit from them while the system lasts. As a result of this the
worker in order to live must sell himself into the service of a master
-- he must sell to that master the liberty to coin into profit the
physical and mental energies.

A shopkeeper in order to live must sell his goods for what he can get,
but a worker in order to live must sell a part of his life, nine, ten,
or twelve hours per day as the case may be. The shopkeeper, if he is
lucky, may get the value of his goods, but the worker cannot get under
the capitalist system the value of his labour; he must accept whatever
wage those who are unemployed are willing to accept at his job. This is
what I call wage-slavery, because under it the worker is a slave who
sells himself for a wage with which to buy his rations, which is the
only difference between this system and negro slavery where the master
bought the rations and fed the slave himself. There is only one remedy
for this slavery of the working class, and that remedy is the socialist
republic, a system of society in which the land and all houses,
railways, factories, canals, workshops, and everything necessary for
work shall be owned and operated as common property, much as the land of
Ireland was owned by the clans of Ireland before England introduced the
capitalist system amongst us at the point of the sword. There is only
one way to attain that end, and that way is for the working class to
establish a political party of its own; a political party which shall
set itself to elect to all public bodies in Ireland working men resolved
to use all the power of those bodies for the workers and against their
oppressors, whether those oppressors be English, Scotch or sham Irish
patriots. In claiming this we will only be following the example of our
masters. Every political party is the party of a class. The Unionists
represent the interests of the landlords and the big capitalists
generally; the United Irish League is the party of the middle class, the
agriculturists, the house jobbers, slum landlords, and drink sellers. If
an Irish landlord evicts a tenant farmer he is denounced by the Home
Rule press as an enemy to Ireland, but an Irish employer can lock out
and attempt to starve thousands of true Irishmen, as was done in the
building trade in 1896, in the tailoring trade in 1900, and in the
engineers of Inchicore in 1902; and not a member of parliament would
take up the fight for the workers, or bother himself about them. Nay,
the capitalists who thus try to crush their workers are highly honoured
by the official parliamentary party, and some, like Mr. P. White, are
members of the United Irish League Executive. If a man takes a farm from
which a tenant has been evicted, he is tightly called a traitor, but who
ever heard or read of the capitalist Home Rule press of this country
saying a hard word about the scabs who go in on a strike or lockout,
even when those scabs were imported, as was the case during the tailors'
lock-out, the saddlers' strike, or the engineers' lock-out? If the men
who were imprisoned for threatening black-legs during the engineers'
lock-out had been engaged in a dispute over farms, we would have been
told that they were "patriots suffering for their country." But as they
were only workmen fighting for their class interests, we were told by
the Home Rule newspapers that they were "misguided individuals."

What is wanted then is for the workers to organise for political action
on socialist lines. And let us take lesson by the municipal election of
last year. Let us remember how the drink-sellers of the Wood Quay Ward
combined with the slum owner and the house jobber; let us remember how
Alderman Davin, Councillor McCall, and all their fellow publicans issued
free drinks to whoever would accept, until on the day before election
and election day, the scenes of bestiality and drunkenness around their
shops were such as brought the blush of shame to every decent man and
woman who saw them. Let us remember the threats and the bribery, how Mr.
Byrne of Wood Quay told the surrounding tenants, that if "Mr. Connolly
was elected their rents would be raised;" let us remember how the spirit
of religion was prostituted to the service of the drinkseller to drive
the labourer back into his degradation; how the workers were told that
socialism and freethinking were the same thing, although the
freethinking government of France was just after shooting down socialist
workmen at Martinique for taking part in a strike procession; let us
remember how the paid canvassers of the capitalist candidate -- hired
slanderers -- gave a different account of Mr. Connolly to every section
of the electors. How they said to the Catholics that he was an
Orangeman, to the Protestants that he was a Fenian, to the Jews that he
was an anti-Semite, to others that he was a Jew, to the labourers that
he was a journalist on the make, and to the tradesmen and professional
classes that he was an ignorant labourer; that he was born in Belfast,
Derry, England, Scotland and Italy, according to the person the
canvasser was talking to. Remember that all this carnival of corruption
and dishonesty was resorted to, simply in order to prevent labour from
electing a representative who could neither be bought, terrified nor
seduced, and you will understand how important your masters conceive to
be their hold on the public bodies in this country. You will also
understand that there can never be either clean, healthy, or honest
politics in the City of Dublin, until the power of the drinksellers is
absolutely broken -- they are positively the meanest and most degraded
section that ever attempted to rule a city.

Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, you understand my position. This is socialist
republicanism, the politics of labour, of freedom from all tyrants,
foreign and native. If you are a worker your interests should compel you
to vote for me, if you are a decent citizen, whether worker or master,
you should vote for me; if you are an enemy of freedom, a tyrant, or the
tool of a tyrant, you will vote against me.

Believing that in this fight I am fighting the fight of my class, I
invite every self-respecting worker to join our committee and help the
cause.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Yours in the name of labour,\     |
|                                   | JAMES CONNOLLY.                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
