Engels 1894: The Peasant Question in France and Germany

# Preface

The bourgeois and reactionary parties greatly wonder why everywhere
among Socialists the peasant question has now suddenly been placed upon
the order of the day. What they should be wondering at, by rights, is
that this has not been done long ago. From Ireland to Sicily, from
Andalusia to Russia, and Bulgaria, the peasant is a very essential
factor of the population, production and political power. Only two
regions of Western Europe form an exception. In Great Britain proper,
big, landed estates and large-scale agriculture have totally displaced
the self-supporting peasant; in Prussia east of the Elbe, the same
process has been going on for centuries; here, too, the peasant is being
increasingly \"turned out\", or at least economically and politically
forced into the background.

The peasant has so far largely manifested himself as a factor of
political power only by his apathy, which has its roots in the isolation
of rustic life. This apathy on the part of the great mass of the
population is the strongest pillar not only of the parliamentary
corruption in Paris and Rome but also Russian despotism. Yet it is by no
means insuperable. Since the rise of the working-class movement in
Western Europe, particularly in those parts where small peasant holdings
predominate, it has not been particularly difficult for the bourgeoisie
to render the socialist workers suspicious and odious in the minds of
the peasants as *partageux*, as people who want to \"divide up\", as
lazy, greedy, city dwellers who have an eye on the property of the
peasants. The hazy socialist aspirations of the revolution of February
1848 were rapidly disposed of by the reactionary ballots of the French
peasantry; the peasant, who wanted peace of mind, dug up from his
treasured memories the legend of Napoleon, the emperor of the peasants,
and created the Second Empire. We all know what this one feat of the
peasants cost the people of France; it is still suffering from its
aftermath.

But much has changed since then. The development of the capitalist form
of production has cut the life-strings of small production in
agriculture; small production is irretrievably going to rack and ruin.
Competitors in North and South America and in India have swamped the
European market with their cheap grain, so cheap that no domestic
producer can compete with it. The big landowners and small peasants
alike can see ruin staring them in the face. And since they are both
owners of land and country folk, the big landowners assume the role of
champions of the interests of the small peasants, and the small peasants
by and large accept them as such.

Meanwhile, a powerful socialist workers\' party has sprung up and
developed in the West. The obscure presentiments and feelings dating
back to the February Revolution have become clarified and acquired the
broader and deeper scope of a programme that meets all scientific
requirements and contains definite tangible demands; and a steadily
growing number of Socialist deputies fight for these demands in the
German, French, and Belgian parliaments. The conquest of political power
this party must first go from the towns to the country, must become a
power in the countryside. This party, which has an advantage over all
others in that it possesses a clear insight into the interconnections
between economic causes and political effects and long ago descried the
wolf in the sheep\'s clothing of the big landowner, that importunate
friend of the peasant --- may this party calmly leave the doomed peasant
in the hands of his false protectors until he has been transformed from
a passive into an active opponent of the industrial workers? This brings
us right into the thick of the peasant question.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Marx Engels Archive](../../../index.htm) \| [Contents](index.htm)
