---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# To Irish Wage Workers in America

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, May 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fellow-Workers:

As all the political forces of the United States are busily engaged
to-day in lining up for the great conflict of the Presidential election
of 1908, as on every hand there is a measuring of strength, a scanning
of 'issues', and a searching of souls we desire on our part to approach
you for the purpose of obtaining your earnest consideration of our
principles before determining where to cast your support in the
campaign. Let us reason quietly together! We speak to you as fellow
workers and as fellow countrymen, and we ask where do you stand in
politics to-day? Hitherto the Irish in the United States have almost
entirely supported the Democratic Party, but the time has come when the
majority of thoughtful Irishmen are beginning to realise that as the
causes that originally led to that affiliation are no longer existent,
the affiliation itself must be reconsidered. Political parties must
thrive or fail according to the present development of the class in
society they represent, and cannot be kept alive by a mere tradition of
their attitude in past emergencies. The antagonism of the Democratic
party towards the Know Nothing movement in the past won for it the
support of the Irish Workers, but Know Nothingism is not an issue
to-day, and as the Democratic party is going down to an unhonored grave
because of its inability to grasp the problems of our own time shall we
Irish Workers suffer ourselves to be dragged to social perdition with
it?

No; fellow countrymen, political parties are the expression of economic
interests, and in the last analysis are carried to victory or defeat by
the development or retardation of economic classes. Examine the history
of America for the last decade in the light of this analysis of the
springs of political action, and the truth of that contention will be at
once apparent. The Republican Party is the political weapon of advanced
capital, of great trusts and mammoth combination of wealth. Hence as
during the last decade the whole trend of industry has been toward
greater concentration of capital we find that the Republican Party has
grown stronger and stronger and its hold upon the political institutions
of the country has proportionately tightened. To-day the governmental
machinery of the United States is completely in the hands of the
servants of capital, and Senate and Congress are but instruments for
registering the decrees of the trust magnates of the United States. On
the other hand the Democratic Party is the party of the small business
man, and of those narrow ideas upon economics and politics which
correspond to the narrow business lines and restricted economic action
of the middle class in general. Hence as the last decade has witnessed
the continual absorption by the trusts of the business of its petty
competitors so it has also witnessed the absorption by the Republican
Party of the one time adherents of the Democracy; as it has witnessed
the downfall of the middle class as a social factor so it is witnessing
the downfall of the political party of the middle class and its
elimination as a political factor. And just as the petty business man
may hang on to a meagre existence in business whilst no longer seriously
considering himself as a competitive factor in industry, so the
political party of the Democracy may hang on to a sordid existence in
local affairs by means of its control of graft whilst entirely
eliminated as a serious aspirant to national power.

We Irish Workers are then not under the necessity of considering
ourselves as bound by tradition to the Democratic Party; political
parties are not formed by traditions, but by interests. Where then do
our interests lie? Certainly not in the Republican Party -- that is the
party of our employers, and as our employers we know do not allow their
actions to be governed by our interests we are certainly not under any
moral obligation to shape our political activity to suit the interests
of our employers. Where then? To answer that question properly we must
ask ourselves why are we Irish here at all in this country, instead of
in Ireland. Certainly we have no complaint to make against our native
land, and we for the most part did not come here for pleasure. We came
here because we found that Ireland was private property, that a small
class had taken possession of its resources -- its land, its lakes, its
rivers, its mountains, its bogs, its towns and its cities, its railways,
its factories, and its fisheries. In short, that a small class owned
Ireland and that the remainder of the population were the bond slaves of
these proprietors. We came here because we found that the government of
the country was in the hands of those proprietors and their friends, and
that army and navy and police were the agents of the government in
executing the will of those proprietors, and for driving us back to our
chains whenever we rose in revolt against oppression. And as we learned
that since that government was backed and maintained by the might of a
nation other than our own, and more numerous than us, we could not hope
to overthrow that government and free our means of living from the grasp
of those proprietors, we fled from that land of ours and came to the
United States.

In the United States we find that every day the condition of matters for
the working class drifts more and more in the direction of the
conditions we left behind. Here the resources of the country are also in
the hands of a small class -- the land, the rivers, the lakes, the
forests, the fisheries, the towns, the cities, the factories, the
railroads, the entire means of life of eighty millions of people are in
the hands of a class which every day grows smaller and whose rapacity
and greed and lust for power grows as its numbers diminish. Here also we
find that government is but the weapon of the master class, that the
military and police forces of the nation are continually at the service
of the proprietors in all disputes just as in Ireland, and that the
'rifle diet' is served out to workers in America oftener than to
peasants in the old country. But here the analogy stops. In Ireland the
government was a foreign government. It was outside our control and
beyond our reach, and hence no political action of ours could completely
master the situation or achieve our freedom from the oppression of the
master class. That class sheltered behind the British Government, and
our vote for freedom was answered by a foreign army shaking thirty
thousand bayonets in our faces. But, in the United States, although the
master class -- the proprietors -- rests upon the Government, and
although that government rests upon armed forces to maintain and enforce
its will, yet all alike, being native and not foreign, are within the
reach of the political and economic action of the American workers, and
can at any moment be mastered by them. Hence the hopelessness which at
one time seized upon the popular mind in Ireland need never paralyze the
action of the wage-slaves here. Freedom lies within the grasp of the
American wage slave, he needs but the mind and knowledge to seize it.

What then is the lesson for the Irish Workers in America? We are not
trust magnates, nor little business men, and the interests which bind us
to those who work beside us and suffer with us are infinitely stronger
than the traditions which draw us towards those of our race whose
interests are those of our despoilers. Hence our duty is plain. We must
fight against in America that which plundered and hunted us in Ireland.
Here as there, and here greater than there, the enemy of our race is
private property in the means of life. In Ireland it was fundamentally
private property in land that was the original and abiding cause of all
our woes; in America it is again private property in land and in
machinery that recreates in the United States the division of classes
into slavers and enslaved. In Ireland it was private property, immature
but bloodthirsty, in America it is private property, grown mature from
the sucking of human blood. In both it is the enemy of the human race.
To quote the words of Ernest Jones, the Chartist leader of '48, friend
of Ireland and fellow worker of John Mitchel in whose defense he spent
one year in prison,

> The monopoly of land drives him (the worker) from the farm into the
> factory, and the monopoly of machinery drives him from the factory
> into the street, and thus crucified between the two thieves of land
> and capital, the Christ of Labor hangs in silent agony.

We appeal to you then, fellow countrymen, to rally around the only
banner that symbolises hope for you in America as in Ireland -- the
banner of Socialism. Cast off all your old political affiliations, and
organize and vote to reconquer society in the interests of its only
useful class -- the workers. Let your slogan be, the common ownership of
the means of life, your weapons the Industrial and Political
Organization of the Wage Slaves to conquer their own emancipation.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
