---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Industrial Unionism and Constructive Socialism

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Socialism Made Easy**, 1908.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> There is not a Socialist in the world today who can indicate with any
> degree of clearness how we can bring about the co-operative
> commonwealth except along the lines suggested by industrial
> organization of the workers.
>
> Political institutions are not adapted to the administration of
> industry. Only industrial organizations are adapted to the
> administration of a co-operative commonwealth that we are working for.
> Only the industrial form of organization offers us even a theoretical
> constructive Socialist programme. There is no constructive Socialism
> except in the industrial field.

The above extracts from the speech of Delegate Stirton, editor of the
**Wage Slave**, of Hancock, Michigan, so well embody my ideas upon this
matter that I have thought well to take them as a text for an article in
explanation of the structural form of Socialist society. In a previous
chapter I have analysed the weakness of the craft or trade union form of
organization alike as a weapon of defence against the capitalist class
in everyday conflict on the economic field, and as a generator of class
consciousness on the political field, and pointed out the greater
effectiveness for both purposes of an industrial form of organization.\
 

#### Organizing Constructively

In the present article I desire to show how they who are engaged in
building up industrial organizations for the practical purpose of today
are at the same time preparing the framework of the society of the
future. It is the realization of that feet that indeed marks the
emergence of Socialism as a revolutionary force from the critical to the
positive stage. Time was when Socialists, if asked how society would be
organized under Socialism, replied invariably, and airily, that such
things would be left to the future to decide. The fact was that they had
not considered the matter, but the development of the Trust and
Organized Capital in general, making imperative the Industrial
Organizations of Labour on similar lines, has provided us with an answer
at once more complete to ourselves and more satisfying to our
questioners.

Now to analyse briefly the logical consequences of the position embodied
in the above quotation.

> "Political institutions are not adapted to the administration of
> industry."

Here is a statement that no Socialist with a clear knowledge of the
essentials of his doctrine can dispute. The political institutions of
today are simply the coercive forces of capitalist society they have
grown up out of, and are based upon, territorial divisions of power in
the hands of the ruling class in past ages, and were carried over into
capitalist society to suit the needs of the capitalist class when that
class overthrew the dominion of its predecessors.\
 

#### The Old Order and the New

The delegation of the function of government into the hands of
representatives elected from certain districts, States or territories,
represents no real natural division suited to the requirements of modern
society, but is a survival from a time when territorial influences were
more potent in the world than industrial influences, and for that reason
is totally unsuited to the needs of the new social order, which must be
based upon industry.

The Socialist thinker, when he paints the structural form of the new
social order, does not imagine an industrial system directed or ruled by
a body of men or women elected from an indiscriminate mass of residents
within given districts, said residents working at a heterogeneous
collection of trades and industries. To give the ruling, controlling,
and directing of industry into the hands of such a body would be too
utterly foolish.

What the Socialist does realize is that under a social democratic form
of society the administration of affairs will be in the hands of
representatives of the various industries of the nation; that the
workers in the shops and factories will organize themselves into unions,
each union comprising all the workers at a given industry; that said
union will democratically control the workshop life of its own industry,
electing all foremen etc., and regulating the routine of labour in that
industry in subordination to the needs of society in general, to the
needs of its allied trades, and to the departments of industry to which
it belongs; that representatives elected from these various departments
of industry will meet and form the industrial administration or national
government of the country.\
 

#### Begin in the Workshop

In short, social democracy, as its name implies, is the application to
industry, or to the social life of the nation, of the fundamental
principles of democracy. Such application will necessarily have to begin
in the workshop, and proceed logically and consecutively upward through
all the grades of industrial organization until it reaches the
culminating point of national executive power and direction. In other
words, social democracy must proceed from the bottom upward, whereas
capitalist political society is organized from above downward.

Social democracy will be administered by a committee of experts elected
from the industries and professions of the land; capitalist society is
governed by representatives elected from districts, and is based upon
territorial division.

The local and national governing, or rather administrative, bodies of
Socialists will approach every question with impartial minds, armed with
the fullest expert knowledge born of experience; the governing bodies of
capitalist society have to call in an expensive professional expert to
instruct them on every technical question, and know that the
impartiality of said expert varies with, and depends upon, the size of
his fee.\
 

#### No 'Servile State'

It will be seen that this conception of Socialism destroys at one blow
all the fears of a bureaucratic State, ruling and ordering the lives of
every individual from above, and thus gives assurance that the social
order of the future will be an extension of the freedom of the
individual, and not the suppression of it. In short, it blends the
fullest democratic control with the most absolute expert supervision,
something unthinkable of any society built upon the political State.

To focus the idea properly in your mind you have but to realize how
industry today transcends all limitations of territory and leaps across
rivers, mountains and continents; then you can understand how impossible
it would be to apply to such far-reaching intricate enterprises the
principle of democratic control by the workers through the medium of
political territorial divisions.

Under Socialism, States, territories, or provinces will exist only as
geographical expressions, and have no existence as sources of
governmental power, though they may be seats of administrative bodies.

Now, having grasped the idea that the administrative force of the
Socialist republic of the future will function through unions
industrially organized, that the principle of democratic control will
operate through the workers correctly organized in such industrial
unions, and that the political territorial State of capitalist society
will have no place or function under Socialism, you will at once grasp
the full truth embodied in the words of this member of the Socialist
Party whom I have just quoted, that "only the industrial form of
organization offers us even a theoretical constructive Socialist
programme."\
 

#### The Political State and its Uses

To some minds constructive Socialism is embodied in the work of our
representatives on the various public bodies to which they have been
elected. The various measures against the evils of capitalist property
brought forward by, or as a result of, the agitation of Socialist
representatives on legislative bodies are figured as being of the nature
of constructive Socialism.

As we have shown, the political State of capitalism has no place under
Socialism; therefore, measures which aim to place industries in the
hands of, or under the control of, such a political State are in no
sense steps towards that ideal; they are but useful measures to restrict
the greed of capitalism and to familiarize the workers with the
conception of common ownership. This latter is, indeed, their chief
function.

But the enrolment of the workers in unions patterned closely after the
structure of modern industries, and following the organic lines of
industrial development, is par excellence the swiftest, safest, and most
peaceful form of constructive work the Socialist can engage in. It
prepares within the framework of capitalist society the working forms of
the Socialist republic, and thus, while increasing the resisting power
of the worker against present encroachments of the capitalist class, it
familiarizes him with the idea that the union he is helping to build up
is destined to supplant that class in the control of the industry in
which he is employed.\
 

#### The Union Can Build Freedom

The power of this idea to transform the dry detail work of trade union
organization into the constructive work of revolutionary Socialism, and
thus make of the unimaginative trade unionist a potent factor in the
launching of a new system of society, cannot be over-estimated. It
invests the sordid details of the daily incidents of the class struggle
with a new and beautiful meaning, and presents them in their true light
as skirmishes between the two opposing armies of light and darkness.

In the light of this principle of industrial unionism every fresh shop
or factory organized under its banner is a fort wrenched from the
control of the capitalist class and manned with the soldiers of the
revolution to be held by them for the workers.

On the day that the political and economic forces of Labour finally
break with capitalist society and proclaim the Workers' Republic, these
shops and factories so manned by industrial unionists will be taken
charge of by the workers there employed, and force and effectiveness be
thus given to that proclamation. Then and thus the new society will
spring into existence, ready equipped to perform all the useful
functions of its predecessor.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 8.8.2003
