---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Draper](../../index.htm)  \> 
[Marxism & TUs](index.htm)

 

## Hal Draper

 

# Marxism and the Trade Unions

 

### I. Marxism and Trade Unions

I've been asked, in connection with this class, what there is to read on
the subject of *Marxism and the Trade Unions*. And the answer is,
perhaps surprisingly, virtually nothing. Now the reason I mention this
is that, as Marxists like to say, that's not accidental. At least one of
the reasons for the total lack of literature on a subject which would
seem to be at the very heart of the whole theory of Marxism is that,
essentially, no Marxist group has ever carried on any systematic
revolutionary work in trade unions.

What about the Bolsheviks? Well, I think Lenin would have, but unions
were illegal in Czarist Russia. He didn't have the opportunity, and of
course he faced a different situation. Even so (and I'm not going to
deal with this here), the whole problem of the activity and relationship
of the Bolsheviks to whatever trade unions sprang up is important and
interesting. But it was an illegal and conspiratorial situation hardly
the typical one that we're concerned with.

Is there anyone else? You may have heard the rumor that the German
Socialist movement was Marxist in its early years, before the First
World War. Did they ever carry on revolutionary Marxist work in the
trade unions? In the most revolutionary days of the German socialist
movement they carried on no revolutionary work in the trade unions that
you could call such. How about Rosa Luxemburg? No, her position on this
question was absolutely monstrous and completely contrary to that of
Marx.

Here and there in the socialist movement there have been important
experiences. Eugene Debs, for example, although of course he wasn't
doing it from the point of view of an application of a revolutionary
Marxist theory to trade unions, came out of a militant and objectively
revolutionary Marxist struggle in the trade unions. There are a couple
of other examples, but nothing of any size.

We have here, then, a subject which is paradoxical. On the one hand, by
its very nature, it raises the basic questions of Marxism, the
relationship of Marxism to the labor movement. On the other hand, in a
century nothing has been written on it and revolutionary Marxist work in
trade unions could be put into a nutshell. And let me remind you of
another fact about the trade union movement and the socialist movement.
The simple idea of socialists favoring trade unions took most of a
century to sink into the socialist movement. That is, before Marx there
was a half a century of socialism -- and how many socialists do you
think there were in that period who were just in favor of trade unions?
The answer is -- none.

Now look at that for a moment. England is the home of trade unionism, is
it not? Capitalism arises there first and with it, trade unionism.
Socialism arises in England on an anti-trade union basis. Owenism was
anti-trade union. More surprisingly, the Chartist movement was
anti-trade union, and that includes also the revolutionary wing of
Chartism. By anti-trade union I mean a negative attitude towards the
trade union movement. In general, the attitude was, "the political
movement is primary and the trade unions are just a lousy reform outfit
that we're really not interested in, because we're interested in bigger
game."

In connection with that, incidentally, there's a paradoxical historical
point to be made. The Chartists were fighting for a series of political
demands which they viewed as amounting to a social revolution. In fact,
in hindsight, we know that all the planks of the charter which the
Chartist movement was fighting for were later carried out by the
bourgeoisie. The trade union movement, however, which they scorned, is
still struggling -- maybe not on the same level, but for the same
things. Their program was not carried out by the bourgeoisie -- couldn't
be, as a matter of fact. The difference, then, between being
revolutionary for one's time and being on a much lower level, flows not
from the revolutionary fervor of the people involved, but from something
else.

It is not only a question of movements before Marx's time. Right through
the 19th century you can look around anywhere and ask yourself: "Just
who's in favor of trade unions?" And the answer still is, with the
exception of the Marxist movement, almost nobody. Only Marxism as a
socialist theory was pro-trade union.

Now, the point that I'm interested in is not only that Marx was the
first socialist to favor trade unions. The point is that Marxism was and
is the only kind of socialism that establishes an integral link between
socialism and the struggle for social revolution and trade unionism.
That link does not exist for any other kind of socialism. In terms of
socialist theory, Marxism is the only one which establishes an integral
link between trade unionism and the social revolution which sees the
trade union movement as a revolutionary fact, even if and when the trade
unions themselves are not revolutionary.

Now, of course, by the end of the 19th century the trade unions had
established themselves and everybody favored them. Once the thing gets
established, it gets a lot of favor, but by that time that doesn't mean
very much. Because the trade unions fought for reforms, they were
favored by all sorts of reformist currents. But, around the turn of the
century, you get another facet of this. It's no longer true that nobody
except Marxists favors trade unions. What is still true, however, is
that everybody who considers himself a revolutionary socialist has a
negative attitude towards trade unions, with the exception of Marxists,
on more or less the same grounds as the Chartists: "We're
revolutionaries, they're a reform organization -- what have we got to do
with them?"

In every country, almost every type of would-be revolutionary -- except,
again, Marxists -- has taken a negative attitude towards trade unions.
This takes different forms. One peculiar form it took was syndicalism in
France. This was a trade union movement -- was it not? Yes and no. But
it was a form of negative attitude towards the mass trade union
movement. What I am talking about is also the basis for a long-standing
British sectarianism which has sterilized Marxism in England for a
century. That is, divided English socialism between reformist socialism
on the one hand and sterile sectarians calling themselves Marxists on
the other. And, of course, there's the American Socialist Labor Party.

There are different ways of being negative towards the trade union
movement. For example, the SLP in DeLeon's days was not against trade
unions at all. They were for revolutionary trade unions, the SLP's trade
unions, which are excellent trade unions with only one defect -- they
lack existence. In the early years of the Communist International there
was a tremendous upsurge of the point of view that Lenin polemicized
against in **Left-Wing Communism** -- which on the trade unions meant a
negative attitude towards the mass reformist trade unions.

So, outside of Marxism there has been no revolutionary socialism which
has any theoretical basis for linking its revolutionary perspective with
support for the trade union movement as it actually existed. The
question is -- why?

The answer, to begin with, is a very simple proposition, one which has
never sunk into the Marxist movement: that only Marxism can establish a
link between the trade union movement and a revolutionary socialist
perspective, because only Marxism is based on a class view of the social
struggle. What could be simpler than that? The class view of the social
struggle is the A of the ABC of Marxism. Everybody knows it and yet
nobody knows it -- it is very rarely institutionalized with regard to
the trade union movement. Until it is applied to the relationship
between Marxism and the trade union movement, it is not really being
understood. Let us see what is involved.

It has been said, quite rightly, that Marx did not invent the class
struggle theory of history. What is distinctive about Marxism is that
it, and it alone, bases its socialism on the class struggle. That, too,
is a simple proposition which has more to it than meets the eye. Sects
rival to Marxism saw socialism primarily as a set of ideas to
propagandize. Marx did not.

How do you propagandize? In order to propagandize you have to find
people to talk to. So you orient yourself in a particular direction.
Different socialist or revolutionary sects have oriented themselves in
different directions, and that is one way to differentiate between the
sects. For example, the Bakunin anarchists oriented themselves to the
declassé lumpen-elements, in theoretical theses as well as in practice.
The Russian SRs oriented to the peasants, and the Fabians toward the
middle class. Other socialist groups have oriented themselves to the
intellectuals and intelligentsia, and still others to the working class.
They oriented themselves in these directions because they believed that
these were green fields for recruitment. Now, that is one way of looking
at social sections. It is not the movement of a class itself which will
re-make society -- it is your "army." And for the purpose of recruiting
your army, you orient yourself to different sectors of society.

There is a difference between such orientations. For example, the first
socialist to decide to adopt the working-class orientation was
Saint-Simon. He was very clear in his mind -- he was addressing himself
to the working class, saying: "My ideas are right, you adopt them and
then convince your boss to do what he should do in order to carry out
the ideas of Saint-Simonism."

Lassalle very consciously oriented himself to the working class because
he believed the liberal bourgeoisie was hopeless. He oriented to the
working class to recruit the Lassallean army. Che Guevara adopted a
"class orientation" towards the Bolivian peasants; that did not mean he
thought the Bolivian peasants were going to run his movement!

Now, that whole approach is completely alien to Marxism. For Marx and
for Marx alone the significance of working class socialism was not
simply that you orient to this class because you can get the most out of
them, but that it is this class which, when it gets into motion, shakes
the foundations of capitalist society. This is a statement about the
working class which has no equivalent for these other orientations. This
characteristic conception of working class socialism for Marx is not
even of the same family as other class orientations. It is an entirely
different view of working class socialism. It follows, therefore, that
the primary aim of the Marxist movement is not the use of the working
class as a recruitment ground of alienated people.

Marx's approach is somewhat different. It starts from the point of view
that the reason why the working class, once in motion, shakes the
foundations of capitalist society is not basically psychological, but
economic. That is, that capitalism cannot, in the long run, solve the
economic problem of providing a human life for the masses.

You have heard that before, too. But put it in its place. This
proposition provides the basis for the class approach to Marxism, and
without it you have no class approach, and cannot have one. If it is not
true, there is no reason not to be a good liberal.

This is of particular relevance today because of the frequency, in
circles which consider themselves revolutionary, with which one runs
into the idea that capitalism has shown it can solve the economic
problem, and that therefore the tasks of socialism have to be viewed in
some other way. Like what? The "quality of life," alienation, etc.
Nowadays there is a label which is applied to the Marxist approach; it
is "consumerism." The term involves a very negative attitude towards
holding important such things as sending your kid to school or getting a
raise in wages, and other "bourgeois" values.

In fact, the basis of the trade union movement, as long as it is a
struggle for a more decent life for the masses of people, still remains
essentially economic. And capitalism has not solved its economic
problems. Anyone who believes it has must draw a couple of conclusions.
One of them is that you can no longer base socialism on a class point of
view. The petty-bourgeois ideologists like Marcuse and Max Nomad who
have run down the working class because it is too much interested in
getting these good things of life point with contempt at the workers.
But, you may have noticed, in the ghetto riots of 3 years ago the
blacks, in their resentment of capitalist society, did not rush to steal
Marcuse's books from the department store in order to improve their
souls. As a matter of fact, they were degenerate enough that they went
after TV sets -- "consumerism."

Looking for "The Meaning of Life" is a possible occupation only for
those sectors of society for whom, literally, the economic problem has
been solved, and who look at the problems of society from the point of
view of their sector. That is why I do not hesitate to say that this
point of view is an absolutely typical petty-bourgeois ideology.

One might ask at this point: what is the bearing of this on the
non-economic struggles that take place in the trade union movement --
around questions of the humanization of conditions in the plant? Aren't
these struggles around the "quality of life," etc.? Sure they are. That
is why I am not running them down as such. But, now, when you get to the
question of the "quality of life" for workers on the assembly line, what
are you talking about? You are talking about an economic situation where
humanizing working conditions is a pure-and-simple question of surplus
value for the capitalist. Such improvement of working conditions and its
consequences on the quality of life must be paid for out of the
capitalist pocket. The roots of these struggles are the same as those
involved with wages -- economic demands. They are called by different
names -- economic demands and non-economic demands -- but from the point
of view of the capitalist and the system, that distinction does not
exist, because it costs money to humanize working conditions.

If it is true that capitalism has solved the economic problem, then the
working class has been removed as the motor force of social change.
However, consider the role of the reformist trade union leaders, who see
labor's goals as simply "more," in the sense of Gompers. These
reformists take the class struggle at its least common denominator. For
50 or 75 years now, socialists have pointed out that Gompers' slogan was
pure reformism, but that the reformist leaders who use it really don't
believe it themselves, and have been unable to carry it out
consistently. Time and again, class collaborationist unions give up the
struggle for "more" and settle for less, in order to keep the boss in
business, or agree, as in World War II, to no-strike pledges. Only a
Marxist revolutionary can mean it consistently. The struggle for more
becomes revolutionary when it goes beyond the capabilities of the system
to provide that "more." That is the link between the Marxist fight for
reforms and the revolutionary perspective. It depends on the root idea
that the economic problems of the system cannot be solved by the system.
The class struggle depends on this "more." All that Marx claims is that
in the course of this fight for "more" out of the system, regardless of
what it does for the system, the struggle becomes, in the end, a
revolutionary struggle. In the end; but not in the beginning. In the
beginning it means a struggle for reforms and it means organizing on a
low social and political level. From the point of view of Marx, that is
what you have to do.

The class as a whole begins on a much lower level than the Marxist
program itself, but the Marxist program says that this is revolutionary
to begin with. From the beginning Marx puts the stress upon the basic
goal -- that the primary aim was to get the class as a whole moving, and
that any such movement of the class as a whole was in itself and of
itself progressive and revolutionary in its implications, because the
class was. And this is true even if that class, as it begins moving,
moves on a basis far from satisfactory to the Marxists or
revolutionaries. That is the conception of the class struggle held by
Marx and Engels in a completely thought-out and consistent way, and by
very few others.

In this country, the trade unions are the only class organizations of
the proletariat. Trade unions are class organizations par excellence
because they organize only the members of a class and they organize them
for the sole reason that they belong to that class. The class character
of an organization does not depend on its ideas; it depends on its
objective role and function in society.

For Marx, the First International was a working class movement because
it organized workers. A socialist propaganda group is not a class
organization. The problem for a socialist propaganda group, even of the
best kind, is how to establish its relations with that real movement of
the proletariat which is not yet socialist itself. Marx's definition of
"sectarian" was a mode of thought which counterposed the socialist
propaganda group to the real movement of the proletariat, because that
real movement of the proletariat was so backward.

In the U.S. in 1970 the working class is in motion only on a trade-union
basis, and on a level which doesn't satisfy us. It therefore provides a
test for the last question I want to take up: Does a class
collaborationist union carry on the class struggle?

The problem behind that question is the fundamental problem of building
a Marxist movement: the relationship of the Marxist movement and the
labor movement. Let me put it in its most extreme way. Take a lousy
union like the Teamsters Union -- scabbing on the Farmworkers Union, not
very democratic, racist, etc.; or the Plumbers Union in New York: That
union is carrying on the class struggle, from our point of view, at a
very low level. The Teamsters carry on some of the most energetic social
struggles in this country

The United States, in many respects, is the ideal country to take for
these purposes. In the U.S. you have the combination of energetic, even
violent, struggles on behalf of "more," combined with some of the most
disgusting and reactionary practices. Is a union in which the membership
has practically no democratic rights at all carrying on the class
struggle? Sure it is. You have got to get clear in your mind that there
is a difference between the objective meaning of a class struggle and
what we fight for in trade unions. They are not the same thing at all.

Time and again revolutionaries have been carried away by their hatred
and disgust of the practices of the trade union movement -- of its
leadership, its bureaucracy. So we have a situation where Rosa
Luxemburg, in **The Party, the Mass Strike and the Trade Unions**, gives
no discussion of the problems of trade union work. Her whole career as a
revolutionary socialist has no connection with trade union work
whatsoever. When she was up against the problem after 1905--6 in Poland,
where she was faced with the development of legal trade unions, Rosa
Luxemburg's party, and she herself, took the position that they were
against the organization of legal mass reformist trade unions and for
the organization only of trade unions under control of the party. As her
biographer says, this was no doubt her reaction to having come through a
decade of fighting in Germany against the Social Democratic trade union
bureaucracy, which was one of the main sources of reformism. "Why should
we organize in Poland the kind of movement which is giving us so much
trouble in Germany?" The answer to this question wraps up everything we
have been talking about. In Poland, as in Germany, those trade unions
show the working class as it is in movement. The job of a revolutionary,
therefore, is to choose between two standard approaches: that of
ultimatistically counterposing, to the real condition of that class in
movement, your revolutionary program (which is what Luxemburg did), or
taking the entirely different line, saying, "We are revolutionaries;
that is where the class is. Therefore, we go in there with our program
supporting the struggles as they are taking place underneath the layer
of the bureaucracy, in order to accomplish our ends -- which are a
series of things with regard to the trade union movement and a series of
things with regard to the recruitment of trade unionists to our
revolutionary party."

And, if it is true, as is likely, that Luxemburg was not for building
the kind of mass reformist trade unions such as she fought in Germany,
it is also true that she had no conception of organizing a struggle
inside the German trade union movement against the bureaucracy, just as
she never put forward the conception of organizing a struggle inside the
German party which she knew was getting lousier and lousier. That was
where she failed. It is the revolutionary answer, therefore, which
combines an approach to the working class where-it-is with a
revolutionary perspective, without that debilitating dissent, too common
among revolutionaries, with the state of the trade union movement.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### Discussion

\[Response to a statement on the problems of the First International:\]

The main problem with the First International, with respect to the
subject we are concerned with here, was that it was an attempt to
organize -- not just within the same International but, nationally,
within the same organizations which had to deal with each other --
working class organizations which were on entirely different levels. So
that you had trade unionists affiliating along with Proudhonist sects in
France, etc. From that point of view, the lesson of the First
International is a realization of the mistake of trying to organize,
under one organizational roof, organizations which are on such disparate
levels. That was the main problem of the First International with
respect to the relationship of trade unions.

When the Second International, which was organized on the basis of the
separation of trade unions and political organizations, was formed, the
question came up of the relationship between the two types of
organizations. And there the original sin came early. It was
precipitated by the 1905 revolution in its impact on Germany and the
question of a mass strike as raised by Luxemburg and others. When that
spectre of a mass strike was raised in the trade unions, the trade union
bureaucracy acted in a rotten manner. The problem then came up: What
relationship do you establish between the unions and the socialist
party? The solution of the party leadership -- and this was a fateful
moment for socialism -- was a deal with the trade union leadership that
the trade union structure was given a veto vote on any revolutionary
action which might be undertaken by the party. That conception, which
began the concept of neutrality in the trade unions, is a very important
one for our purpose.

The leadership adopted the view that the trade union movement is
parallel, so to speak: "The political movement is our barony. We decide
in our barony, they decide in theirs." But, of course, in actual life
things don't divide in that way. The left wing, represented by a motion
by Kitschy against the proposed deal, urged the following: that the
political party reserves to itself a free hand to direct its members
inside the trade union movement. That was the idea that was foreign.

Marx, however, never had any trouble with that. There was a honeymoon
period with the British labor leaders of the First International, which
broke up when some of them started going over to the liberals. Marx had
no hesitation in breaking with them (rather abusively as a matter of
fact).

The test comes where there is a question of politics. What happened in
the German Social Democratic Party was that, when a political gulf
developed, a break with the bureaucracy was avoided at all cost. That is
the sort of problem you run into -- breaking with the tops in the labor
movement, in order to carry on your political work below in the trade
union movement. That is the fateful question in the Marxist movement
with regard to the trade unions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[Response to a question on which side of the class line is the
Teamsters Union in Salinas, where that union is scabbing on the
Farmworkers Union:\]

**Hal:** You have to look at the situation historically if you are going
to determine class roles. If you think the Teamsters are working for the
growers, then your whole view of that situation is going to be skewed,
because they are not. They are working for the Teamsters. A
class-collaborationist union is one which works hand in hand with the
employers. But that does not settle the question of their historic
social role at all. In the case of Salinas, suppose the Teamsters won
out and took over, and let's say that 20 years from now, after our
bitter feelings have died down, when we look to Salinas we see a
union-organized area organized by the Teamsters. Time after time areas
have been organized originally under the most terrible auspices, by real
company unions which later got taken over by their membership and became
real unions. The Teamsters have organized the trucking industry, and not
simply for the trucking companies. They have serviced their members much
better than some unions that are more democratic, have gotten tough and
won benefits for their members at the same time as they have carried on
their class-collaborationist activities. So you always have to ask
yourself the question: What is my role as a revolutionist in this
situation? Whom do I fight? What do I fight for?

In all of these cases it is still true that, until the trade union
character of such organizations is completely quashed, the class
struggle goes on. And this struggle cannot be repressed by the
bureaucracy, as much as they try to fight it.

One's conception of the meaning of the trade union movement has to be a
very broad one, precisely because we're talking about the class
struggle. The trade union movement is not only the bureaucracy; in case
after case it is not even some given organizational structure of the
union. The trade union movement is a wider entity from the point of view
of a Marxist than it appears either to the bureaucracy or the rank and
file. For example, time after time trade union struggles have to emerge
from, go beyond the immediate organizational structures of the trade
unions. In the case of the no-strike pledge during World War II, class
struggle was still carried on in the form of job actions. But when they
went outside the structure of the trade unions, they didn't go outside
the trade union movement. The class struggle remained operative within
that trade union movement. The typical trade union bureaucrat during
this period had to go along with the class struggle, because, although
the bureaucracy is the transmission belt for the influence of the
bourgeoisie and the government in the labor movement, it is still the
labor movement's agency for that purpose. When push comes to shove, the
class struggle has its impact upon the labor bureaucrats.

The point I am trying to make here is the objective role that the trade
union movement is forced to play in the class struggle, regardless of
the ideas it holds about its role.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[Responses on the question of the Teamsters, etc.:\]

**Hal:** \...we get down to the question: What is the state of
consciousness as a class of the Teamsters (not the Teamster
bureaucracy)? Taking the teamsters as a sector of the working class --
where are they at? Is it the bureaucracy that is holding them back from
becoming a revolutionary union, or is it not true that if you were to
assassinate the entire bureaucracy within the next 24 hours and
institute complete democratic rights to elect a new bureaucracy, the
membership still would not elect you or me?

**Anne:** When you discuss the problem of the Teamsters in Salinas, you
are taking a very specific example. This does not negate the fact that
the Teamsters are not merely in Salinas. The main drive of the
two-million-member Teamsters Union is the thousands and thousands of job
actions that go on day after day. Every day of the year workers on the
job, in plants and offices, are engaged in class struggle in conflict
with the employers. The bulk of the Teamsters' activity is class
struggle against the employers.

\[Response to a question of borderline cases of unions: Where do you
draw the line?\]

**Hal:** In the case of unions, there are all sorts of borderline cases.
It's not just a question of undemocratic unions. There are all kinds of
undemocratic unions where the class struggle still goes on. Even when a
sweetheart contract has been negotiated\--the class struggle begins in
other fashions.

The horror story to end all horror stories is what happened when Hitler
came to power, when the leadership of the trade unions begged Hitler to
accept them as his trade union leadership. The interesting thing is that
the Nazi regime said "No." They could not accept any movement at all
which maintained a vestige of independence, and which could act as a
core for the crystallization of a real social struggle independent of
the regime. Even when the union bureaucrats crawled on their bellies
before Hitler, the state had to tell them: "No. It is not enough to
crawl. The movement itself has to be destroyed." That is the crux of it
-- the destruction of the movement.

**Question:** Granted, the leadership reflects the level of the
membership. But, doesn't the leadership itself play a role in
accelerating or retarding the movement?

**Hal:** Of course the leadership retards and accelerates, but that is
not unique to the trade union movement. It is also true of the socialist
movement. My conclusion from that is that workers should go in there to
fight inside that union. When they go in there, who is there to fight?
The bureaucracy. There is the subjective element of the social situation
in which that struggle takes place.

After you have gotten through saying all of this, what remains is the
fact that all of these monstrous atrocities are not only the result of
the prod of a bureaucracy. The bureaucracy, in its own way, is a
reflection of the pressure that is coming from the outside. Even if the
bureaucracy were removed, the outside pressures would still be there,
with all of the consequences that implies.

(October 2, 1970)

[CONTINUED](2-wclife.htm){.mia}\
\
[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 26.9.2004
