---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Party Politicians -- Noble, Ignoble and Local

### (1894)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Labour Chronicle** (Edinburgh), 1 December 1894.\
Republished in Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom (eds.), **James
Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, New York 1974.

Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Plain Talk

By R. Ascal

The Czar is dead and the elections are over. The new Czar has issued a
manifesto, and Bailie M'Donald is now Lord Provost. The peace of Europe
is still maintained, the Nihilists are plotting in silence, and
Councillor Waterston has been and gone and done it.

A Tory Lord Provost rules over Liberal Edinburgh, and Councillor Sir
James Russell sits and sighs and wishes his name was Blaikie.

Edinburgh Town Council attended Divine Service in Hope Park U.P. Church
on Sunday, 18th November, *in honour of the Lord Provost*, who is a
member of that congregation. I wonder if they meant it.

The Liberals have threatened to oppose Mr Waterston because he voted for
Provost M'Donald. Councillor Robertson declared at the Council meeting
he was in favour of the honours going round, and would have voted
against Sir James Russell had a really capable man been brought forward,
but he would not vote for M'Donald.

And yet they all went to church in honour of Lord Provost M'Donald.
Otherwise, I presume, they would not have gone at all.

This is the final outcome of the municipal elections: all the old gang
are returned to office, and the municipal life of Edinburgh in the
ensuing year will be marked by the same scrupulous regard to economy (in
wages) and efficiency (in jobbery) to which we have been so well
accustomed in the past.

The Social Democrats were defeated. On the authority of the celebrated
representative of culture, Mr Francis M'Aweeney, we are told they
received "a crushing blow", yet a more jubilant lot of men and women it
would have been impossible to find on the day after the election.

An opponent passing under the windows of their Committee Room an hour
after the result of the poll was declared, on hearing the jubilant
speeches and enthusiastic cheering of the Socialists, was constrained to
remark to a companion, that the Social Democrats receive a defeat better
than their enemies do a victory.

And he was right. Some defeats are better than victories. A defeat
endured as the result of contest conducted in a fair and honourable
manner is a thousand times more creditable to the defeated party than a
victory gained by all the mean and unscrupulous arts of the wirepullers.

The Socialists did not send any carriages for their lady supporters;
they did not have committee rooms outside the polling booth, and,
waylaying unfortunate voters, rush them in, and then escort them between
tall hats and frock coats, to record their votes in favour of the rights
of property; they did not tell Irish Catholics that Mr Connolly was a
Freethinker, who wanted to overthrow the Church, and then tell old
Scotch women of both sexes that Mr Connolly was an Irish Papist who
wanted to introduce the Scarlet Woman; they did not seek the support of
the Unionists by telling of the letter of recommendation from a leading
Edinburgh Unionist; and seek the support of the Home Rulers by calling
to their aid every quondam Home Ruler, or leader, who could be induced
to sell his name, and voice, and birthright for the ill-smelling pottage
of Liberal promises.

The Social Democrats were defeated. But last year the vote polled in
George Square Ward for the I.L.P. candidate was only one-thirteenth of
the total poll, whereas in St Giles, the vote for the avowed Social
Democrat reached one-seventh of the total poll. A great advance, truly.

The official Liberal -- backed by all the strength, reputation, and
admirable electioneering organisation of the combined Liberal and
Nationalist parties, and aided by the avowed support of the. most
influential Unionists in the ward, with a known man and a lawyer as
their candidate, were yet only able \~o obtain a majority of four to one
over a party the most revolutionary and the most recent in public life,
with no electioneering organisation, and with a candidate known to earn
his bread by following an occupation most necessary in our city life,
but nevertheless universally despised by the public opinion of
aristocratic Edinburgh.

It is to be hoped that next year the Ward will not be troubled with the
presence of another bogus Unionist candidate.

Had there been no Unionist, and had the advanced working-class voters
been left free to choose between the revolutionary Social-Democrat and
the orthodox Liberal and defender of the rights of property, there is
little doubt the result of the poll would not have brought much comfort
to the enemies of Socialism.

But hundreds of men, who would otherwise have voted Socialist, cast
their votes reluctantly for Mr Mitchell as the candidate most likely to
ensure the defeat of the Tory.

They will now have twelve months in which to meditate on the difference
between the Liberal Tweedledee and the Tory Tweedledum, and after having
so meditated they are invited to record the result of their studies at
the polling booth on the first Tuesday of November 1895, if not before.

There is great heartburning in certain Liberal circles in Edinburgh over
a matter which does not affect the working-class voter. It is an
invitation to an 'At Home', to be held in the Waterloo Rooms, Glasgow,
by Lady Helen Ferguson of Novar.

All the gentlemen whose purses are in the habit of opening for the
relief of distressed M.P.s and huckstering politicians in general,
together with a few who have remained obdurate in spite of the pathetic
appeals of Messrs Donworth and Dillon, are invited to this great social
function.

Class the first will be thanked for their splendid devotion to the cause
of Liberalism, and class the second will, it is hoped, be so overwhelmed
with the magnificent display, and so enchanted by the bright smiles of
the delegates from the Ladies' Liberal Association that they will open
their hearts and their purses also, and all will be well.

By such means are replenished the Liberal coffers, and the Liberal
working-man throws his cap in the air, and when he meets his Socialist
comrade asks -- "Where is the Tory gold?"

And his Socialist comrade, who has been stinting himself of his glass of
beer in order to pay the election expenses of *his* candidate usually
scratches his head and wonders also -- "Where is the Tory gold?"

Gold of any kind or colour is a very scarce commodity in a Socialist
committee room. *N.B.* -- Those who do not believe this should come and
join us and get a share of the plunder. Entry-money, sixpence; weekly
subscription, one penny. -- ADVT.

Any orthodox Liberal or Tory politician will tell you that one cause of
the great misery among the working-class is to be found in the alarming
prevalence of early marriages.

Yet in face of this lamentable fact, we are informed that his Grace the
Duke of Argyll, who is 71 years of age, is about to get married to his
third wife. As this step may lead to a still further increase in our
pauper population, it is to be hoped wiser counsels will prevail and
prevent the young couple taking the final disastrous step.

Ambrose Malvern, aged 68, committed suicide by jumping from a hotel
window. This young man had married a widow the previous day. So I read
in a contemporary. If some one will undertake to send this to his Grace
the Duke of Argyll he might yet pause in his headlong career, and the
nation be saved from an\~ impending calamity.

Mr William M'Ewan, M.P., gave £50,000 to assist in building a new wing
to Edinburgh University. We gave thanks. Edinburgh Town Council, having
a love for the beautiful, spent £70,000 in obtaining for the citizens a
better view of M'Ewan's £50,000. Again we gave thanks. The first act of
the newly-elected Town Council was to accept an estimate for the
proposed widening of the North Bridge and refuse to insert in it a
clause requiring the payment of the current rate of wages. The labouring
people who voted for the return of the old gang to office are still
giving thanks.

We are a great people.

I hear the Rev. Mr Jackson, at a meeting in the Albert Hall, on Sunday,
18th November, declared his Socialism was of the kind endorsed by the
Trades Union Congress at their recent meeting in Norwich. If this is
true the rev, gentleman is eligible for membership of the I.L.P. or
S.S.F., and I would advise him to enter into communication with one or
other of these bodies, and take his proper place in the communion of the
faithful.

But before admission he might, as a public character, be required to
give some practical proofs of his sincerity. Not that we would expect
him, as a follower of Him of Nazareth, to "sell all he has and give it
to the poor," as one would-be follower was required to do. Oh, no, our
latter-day Christianity is far too 'practical' to adopt such
hare-brained theories of restitution as that implied in the
aforementioned utterance of their Master.

But a certain colleague of Mr Jackson on the School Board has recently
made an effort to deprive the women cleaners employed by that body of
their wages, that is of their means of life, during sickness. Will Mr
Jackson preach a sermon on the subject, taking for his text the
injunction, "Rob not the poor because he is poor."

Or will he allow the Edinburgh Socialists the free use of his hall, or
church, for the purpose of conducting a fortnight's mission to
clergymen. Subject of mission: Instruction in the use of the Divine
command, "Love thy neighbour as thyself."

Until our reverend friend is prepared to give such practical proofs of
his Socialism will he please remember that "Faith without works is
dead."

The conduct of the Edinburgh School Board, coupled with the conduct of
the Town Council in refusing to insert the fair wages clause in a most
important contract, should help to clear the cobwebs from the eyes of
the intelligent voters and enable them to appreciate the necessity for
an infusion of new Socialistic blood into all our public bodies.

For some time to come the work of Socialists on all such bodies will not
be so much to pass new laws as to infuse into their administration the
spirit of the new life, to use all power to inaugurate the reign of
justice, to convert our industrial system from a machine for making
profit into an instrument for sustaining life, to transform our politics
from the government of men into the wise and well-ordered administration
of things, to relegate to the limbo of exploded superstitions the old
doctrine of freedom of contract between affluence and starvation, and
thus, by constantly placing our doctrines and our efforts upon the same
platform as the class interests of the workers, to create such a public
feeling in our favour as shall enable us to bridge the gulf between the
old order and the new, and lead the people from the dark Egypt of our
industrial anarchy, into the Promised Land of industrial freedom.

The return of a Socialist candidate does not then mean the immediate
realisation of even the programme of palliatives commonly set before the
electors. Nay, such programmes are in themselves a mere secondary
consideration, of little weight, indeed, apart from the spirit in which
they will be interpreted.

The election of a Socialist to any public body at present, is only
valuable in so far as it is the return of a disturber of the political
peace.

Until Socialism attains such a foothold in this country as shall enable
the Socialists to return a majority to the public bodies which rule the
country, every fresh seat captured must simply be regarded as a fresh
means of spoiling the little games of the Jabezian philanthropists,
financial jobbers, and political thimbleriggers, who thrive on their
reputations as Liberal and Tory politicians.

If only for the value of letting the light of public opinion in on the
doings of officialdom, we should never relax our efforts until every
representative body has its full quota of Socialist members.

While on this matter, it would be as well to keep in mind the fact, that
under the Local Government (Scotland) Act, which comes into force in
April of 1895, the Poor Law system of this country will be at last
placed under democratic control.

The workers will then have an opportunity of humanising this iniquitous
system, by placing upon every Parish Council a sufficient number of
Social Democrats to counteract the despotic tendencies of our Liberal
and Tory taskmasters.

The poor paupers, the war-worn veterans who have fallen in the battle of
life, who are imprisoned in those bastilles of poorhouses, may now have
the closing years of their lives lightened and brightened by the action
of an intelligent Social Democracy.

To every upholder of the present system the poorhouse inmates are a mere
burden on the rates, or an intolerable nuisance to honest folk, who are
well done for if they are fed and sheltered at all. But to the Social
Democrat they are unfortunate victims of an evil social system. They
are. our brothers and sisters, crushed beneath the wheels of a
remorseless competition. They are the effect of which the landlord and
capitalist are the cause.

We have so long been accustomed to receive without question the
teachings of the master class, that it is no wonder the poorhouse dole
and poor-relief should be regarded amongst us as degrading to the
recipient instead of to society at large. But it is on society at large,
and on its supporters and apologists, the real stigma should rest.
Indeed, it would be well for the workers as a whole if they could come
to look upon the poor- rates as their first means of relief instead of
as their last resource.

Man, as a social animal, has a claim upon the society which gave him
birth. This claim is his right to live as long as he is willing to
perform his share of the labour necessary to his own maintenance and the
maintenance of society at large. This claim involves, in the first
place, the right of free access to the means of life; in the second
place, the duty of contributing to the support of the weaker members of
the community, *i.e.*, children, the sick, infirm, and the aged.

Our Poor Law system is a grudging admission of the truth of this thesis,
granted by the classes as an alternative to a troubled social upheaval.
It has been surrounded since its inception with every form of insult and
degradation their mean and petty minds could devise, until, today, the
hideous uniform of the pauper is loathed more than the garb of the
convict.

Thus, our masters have striven to debase this institution, whose
existence in our midst they feel to be a standing reproach to the
devil-take-the-hindmost theory, with which they wish to govern society.

To rescue our Poor Law from their hands, to relieve it from the false
ideals with which its administration has been cursed, and to make its
administrators in very truth guardians of the poor, this should be the
aim of the workers. By so directing their efforts they may create, out
of the framework of our Parish Councils, a public body, who, in
solicitude for the public welfare and thoughtful provision for the
weaker members of our human family, will find the same incentive to
effort as the Liberal and Tory politicians find in the grosser pursuit
of the glittering spoils of office.

But such a body can only arise out of that higher conception of human
rights and duties which will flow from a wide and general acceptance of
the principles of enlightened Social Democracy.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
