---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Home Thrusts

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers\' Republic**, 22 October 1898\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.1 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I am a great admirer of the British Army.

Probably you have noted that trait in my character, as manifested in my
writings. I do so dote upon the gallant red-coated gentlemen who
promenade our streets at night, and enrich the vocabulary of our servant
girls with their choice expressions.

It does my old heart good to see the principal streets of our cities
lined with young buxom Irish girls, fresh up from the country, leaning
upon the arms of 'the soldiers of the Queen.' It does.

And then to see the 'bould sodger boys' on a review day, marching gaily
out in all the pomp, pride and circumstance of glorious war to the
Phoenix Park, there to learn the quickest and most scientific way of
cutting the throats of the brothers, fathers, or other relatives of the
Irish girls with whom they were cavorting around the previous evening.
Ah, it is a stirring sight.

Yes, a stirring sight. It stirs my blood, and if the majority of our
public teachers were not the double-dyed hypocrites they are, the blood
of all Irishmen and women would long ere this have been so stirred at
the sight that the Irish girl who had so far forgot her dignity as to
consort with those hired assassins would find herself ostracised as
completely as a leper.

Then people would begin to believe in our desire for freedom. But our
Home Rule leaders and journalists have so emasculated our patriotic
movements that in the minds of thoughtful men patriotism has become a
mere synonym for humbug.

We find Sir Charles Beresford [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} -- who blatantly
declared his readiness to lead the forces of Orangeism in rebellion if
Home Rule was granted -- praised as a patriotic Irishman by our **Irish
Independent**, because being hard up for recruits, he addressed a few
fulsome compliments to Irishmen as sailors.

We find Sir Herbert Kitchener, who presided over the cold-blooded
slaughter of 10,000 Arabs (including the wholesale murder of the
wounded) [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}, frantically hailed as an Irishman by the
whole Irish 'patriotic' press, because, forsooth, he was born in Kerry,
though his father was an Englishman.

Not that I believe it makes much difference where a man was born.

The one thing certain about it is that no sensible man can take a pride
in being born an Irishman. What had he to do with it that he should be
proud?

He did not carefully sketch out beforehand the location in which he
desired to be born, and then instruct his mother accordingly. Whether he
was born in Ireland or in Zululand, in the Coombe or in Whitechapel, he
most certainly was not consulted about the matter. Why then, this pride?

The location of your birthplace was a mere accident -- as much beyond
your control as the fact I was born so beautiful was beyond mine. Hem.

And you don't see me putting on airs.

Let me see, what did I start with? O, yes, the army. My opening remarks
were inspired by reading in the papers an account of the hanging of the
seven men concerned in the death of two British soldiers at Candia,
Crete.

These seven men were hanged in due process of law, and the hangman's
work was performed by *amateurs selected out of forty-nine men of the
Highland Light Infantry, who had volunteered for the purpose*.

'Hangman's Light Infantry' would describe them better.

Now then, ye Irish youths, hurry up and join the noble British Army, and
in course of time -- by strict attention to duty and obedience to your
superiors -- you may arrive at the honour and dignity of being promoted
to the post of -- hangman.

I hope the War Office will strike a medal in commemoration of this
glorious achievement.

I wonder if any of those volunteer hangmen were Irish. If they were and
somebody will kindly furnish their names I will gladly publish them. Or
make a gift of them to the Home Rule newspapers.

The names of such heroes ought not to rot in oblivion. They ought to be
emblazoned side by side with the Sirdar [\[3\]](#n3){#f3}. Joint
products of British military chivalry.

Rudyard Kipling would now be in order with a poem glorifying his soldier
hero, Tommy Atkins, in his new capacity. I would suggest the poem be
entitled:--

  ------------------------------------------------
  "Thomas Atkins, Esq., Soldier -- and Hangman."
  ------------------------------------------------

It is to be hoped this regiment will be quartered in Dublin on its
return. Surely that would cause a slump in the value of red-coats on
Brigid's night out.

The Ballinrobe baton-charges [\[4\]](#n4){#f4} suggest reflection. In
the first place it is well to remember that on the occasion of the
jubilee baton-charges in Dublin [\[5\]](#n5){#f5}, when not a dozen or
so as at Ballinrobe, but over 300 persons were treated in hospital for
bruises inflicted by the police, the **Freeman's Journal** said next
morning that:-- "The Dublin Metropolitan Police are to be heartily
congratulated on the tact and temper they displayed last night."

The same journal holds no such language over the far more trifling
affair in the West. Why? Was it because the anti-jubilee procession in
Dublin was organised by the Socialist Republicans, and the Ballinrobe
meeting was organised by the politicians?

Again when the Duke of York visited Dublin four meetings of the
Socialist Republicans were forcibly suppressed by the police, *and no
Dublin newspaper denounced this infringement of the right of public
meeting*.

Had the meetings in question been summoned by any of the Redmonds or
Dillons [\[6\]](#n6){#f6} or by shrieking patriots of the William
O'Brien [\[7\]](#n7){#f7} type the wide world would have heard of it,
but as it was only Socialists who were interfered with, the Home Rule
journalists entered into a conspiracy with the Castle to represent
Dublin as effusively welcoming the Royal Duke.

One thing I would ask our friends in the West to note. The **Weekly
Freeman** devotes a large part of its space to catering for the
Constabulary, giving Constabulary news and information on how to enter
the Constabulary. Probably among the men who broke your heads at
Ballinrobe were men who owed their position in the Constabulary to the
advice to aspirants given by the **Weekly Freeman**.

Wednesday's papers contain reports of evictions in Tyrone and Tipperary.
Union of classes, you see. Home Rule Ideal.

The only Union I see in the business is the Unions we pay rates to
support [\[8\]](#n8){#f8}, and which, unless things alter, I see waiting
at the end of life's pathway for a

SPAILPÍN.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

 

### NOTES

[1.](#f1){#n1} British naval officer and Tory politician.

[2.](#f2){#n2} At the battle of Omdurman in 1898, when resistance to
British rule in Sudan was crushed.

[3.](#f3){#n3} The commander-in-chief of the British army in the Middle
East (Kitchener) was known officially as the Sirdar.

[4.](#f4){#n4} A United Irish League meeting in Ballinrobe, Co Mayo, had
been proclaimed, and the police attempted to prevent it taking place,
but a large crowd successfully defied the ban.

[5.](#f5){#n5} Police launched an attack on those protesting against the
diamond jubilee of the British queen in 1897.

[6.](#f6){#n6} John E. Redmond and John Dillon were leaders of the Home
Rule party.

[7.](#f7){#n7} Leader of the UIL.

[8.](#f8){#n8} The Poor Law Unions.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
