---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The *Independent* and New Machinery

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 1 October 1898.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our contemporary, the **Independent** newspaper, has lately introduced
to its printing department some new machinery, which, it has loudly
informed the Irish public, is second to none in Ireland, perhaps in
Europe. We do not wish, in the smallest degree, to disparage the
enterprise or the management of the **Independent**, but we think it
right at this moment to offer to its literary staff some free
instruction in the elementary principles of capitalist development;
which free instruction, when thoroughly assimilated, will, we think,
somewhat cool their enthusiasm over this achievement.

No one denies the right of a capitalist to introduce in his business
whatever new methods or new machinery may best serve his purposes in
competition with his rivals. Indeed in the competitive field there is
recognised no other law than the survival of the fittest; ethics or
religion are at all times deliberately laid aside in the work-a-day
world, and are only taken up when the stern business of profit-making is
interrupted by the weekly Sunday holiday. Even then no preacher dare
apply ethical considerations to economic questions; or treat of the
former in any other fashion than as mere abstractions having little, if
any, bearing upon the problems of civilization.

Socialists recognise these facts while denouncing them; our enemies deny
the facts while shaping their lives in accordance therewith. This much
being made clear to the reader it will at once be perceived that our
criticism is not likely to take the form of merely railing against this
new venture should it happen to displace labour; but will be directed
towards another point -- a point probably even less understood than the
one alluded to.

Whosoever embarks in the competitive world must keep pace with his
rivals; should his industrial equipment fall beneath the standard of his
competitors he will go down in the maelstrom of competition; his
business will be drawn away from him by the rival who better succeeds in
satisfying the public desires. If, therefore, one firm introduces into
its business a machine capable of better work than its rivals, each of
those rivals must also procure a similar machine or else see their
business pass into the hands of their more enterprising competitor. They
have absolutely no alternative. The public will go to the firm which
suits them best and charges them least. Under pressure of this knowledge
each firm so menaced hastens to procure machinery which will place it
upon an equality with its rival; when this is accomplished and each firm
stands similarly equipped and equal in productive capacity, they find
that, as a result of all their anxiety and expenditure, they are exactly
at the same point as they were before any such machinery was introduced.
To use a homely simile:-- Competition is like a crowd of people in the
street striving to see some spectacle. One man gets a stool, and,
standing upon it, sees better than his fellows; but should all the rest
get stools and stand upon them, they would be at the same position for
sight-seeing as if they all stood upon the ground.

In time, however, some one of the business firms we have spoken of -- as
typical of society in general -- or some new competitor in the business,
introduces some new machinery even better than the last; and if he is a
wealthy competitor, his new machine cancels the value of all the old
ones, and reduces them to the position of mere lumber. If their owners
would save themselves from ruin they must equip themselves with
machinery as good as this new product of the inventor's brain. Once
again the weary circle must be retraced, until every firm is again
equipped with the new invention, and, as a result, finds itself
precisely at its starting point.

Each new machine invented renders nugatory the competitive value of all
former machines; compels all the rivals of its owner to become owners of
a like machine; and is generally in its turn replaced by an improvement
making again a similar demand upon the owners of industry.

The **Independent** introduces, with a flourish of trumpets, an improved
printing press. Shareholders smile in expectation of the long deferred
dividend. But should it be found that this improvement accomplishes what
it is intended to, viz., to draw advertisers away from the rivals of the
**Independent** (the **Freeman's Journal** or **Irish Times**), the
managerial departments of these journals will hasten also to introduce a
similar machine; and so after the expenditure of much cash and energy,
the competing daily papers of Dublin will find themselves again on equal
terms, and not a whit better off than if such machinery had never
crossed the sea.

Thus is the iron law of capitalism exemplified. Onward, ever onward, we
are hurried by the pressure of economic forces; the greed of the
capitalist, the competition of the market, the revolt of humane souls
aghast at the atrocities of civilization, all working together toward
the one end; and even when apparently in the fiercest antagonism
contributing equally to produce a hatred of present conditions and so
pave the way for the Socialist Republic.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
