---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Parnellism and Labour

### (1898)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Workers' Republic**, October 8, 1898.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](https://jamesconnollysociety.com/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

So long as they seek for Home Rule -- for mere changes within the
Constitution -- our Irish parties at Westminster are, and must ever be,
in the position of political hucksters seeking a good price for the
votes they offer as wares. Their 'independence' is only the fraudulent
cloak with which they strive to cover their venality and lack of spirit.

We must not omit to specify one other cause of the decay of the official
Parnellite party, viz., their unsatisfactory attitude towards labour.
When Charles Stewart Parnell was basely deserted in Committee Room 15 by
the crowd of adventurers and hack journalists out of whom he had
constructed a formidable political party; when he was attacked in
Ireland by the tenant farmers who owed much of whatever security they
possessed to his skilful leadership; when the priesthood, whom he had
elevated to power in the branches of the National League, turned to rend
the man under whose firm guidance their influence might have become a
power for freedom; when he was, in fact, deserted by the men who had
ever been most loud-mouthed in their adulation of his person, it was the
leaf and true-hearted workingmen of Ireland who sprang to his side and
fought his battles. They had never gained, but ever lost by his
agitation, but in the supreme crisis of his destinies they rose superior
to all other considerations and fought for the man battling against an
insulting form of foreign dictation. They asked no reward -- and got
none. During the early days of the split Mr. Parnell did, indeed, adopt
a programme laid before him by Dublin workingmen -- a programme
embodying nearly every measure advocated as palliative measures by the
Socialist parties, but with his untimely death disappeared every hope of
seeing that programme adhered to by any Home Rule party. Every
succeeding year has seen the Parnellite party become more and more
conservative and reactionary. Today, in direct opposition to the policy
of their great leader, we find the Parnellite chiefs seeking every
opportunity to hob-nob with the representatives of Irish landlordism;
hailing their feeblest utterances upon a financial question as the
brightest scintillations of wisdom; and not scrupling to tell at
Cambridge an audience, composed of the young fledglings of English
aristocracy, that the realisation of Ireland\'s independence was neither
possible nor desirable.

Followers of Parnell they are indeed, but they follow at such a
respectable distance they have lost sight not only of the leader but of
his principles.

Meanwhile, the manhood of Ireland, no longer dazzled by the glare of a
great personality, have had time to more closely examine their position,
social and political. As a result they turn alike from the men who sold
their leader at the bidding of an unscrupulous politician; from the
incapable gang whose only hope of existence is to live like political
cannibals upon the reputation of the dead; and from the pitiful
compromise of the National Demand which scarce even the genius of
Parnell could make appear respectable.

The working class of Ireland trusts no more the charming of the
middle-class politician, charm he never so plausibly; strong in its own
power it marches irresistibly forward to its destiny, the Socialist
Republic.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
