---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # A Socialist Candidate for Dublin Corporation                        |
|                                                                       |
| ### (22 October 1898)                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Workers' Republic**, 22 October 1898.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.15.\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Irish Socialist Republican Party have resolved to enter the
electoral field with at least one candidate of their own in the
forthcoming elections under the Local Government Act. We must,
therefore, beg leave to avail ourselves of this opportunity to place
before the Irish public our reasons for taking such a step, as well as
to indicate wherein the policy presented by such a candidate will
differ, if at all, from other parties in the field.

The Socialist Republican Party, whilst keeping steadily before its
members and sympathisers the necessity for broader and more sweeping
changes than any municipality can effect, whilst ever emphasising the
need for a thorough re-organisation of society itself on a scientific
and just basis, has yet never lost sight of the clamant needs of the
moment or ignored the immediately practical measures which might be
enforced in the interest of the workers. On the contrary, it has ever
claimed that the greatest and most irrefutable charge which can be
brought to bear against our civic rulers in the past and present is that
they, equally with the alien government of our country, have neglected
to take such steps to safeguard human life from the greed of property
owners as might have been taken, even within the limits of our
iniquitous property system. In accordance with this claim we have
consistently advocated many measures for sweetening the lot of the
toilers and for humanising the conditions under which the poor travail.
Needless to say the fact that every measure at all likely to operate in
favour of the workers embodied the principle of public or collective
ownership or control, or in other words the spirit of Socialism, has at
all times acted as a stimulus to our propaganda. We know that the lot of
the toilers and the spread of our principles are so inextricably linked
that no power can ameliorate the former without bearing witness to the
latter -- and knowing it we act accordingly. Our candidate will,
therefore, take his stand unflinchingly upon the basic principles of
Socialism, and the fact of his stand thereon will be the pledge of his
fidelity to the interests of the working class.

We have already declared our attitude toward the Labour Electoral
Association, lately formed by the Trades' bodies [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}, but
it cannot be emphasised too often that we are in thorough accord with
that movement, regarding it as rather the main body of that army of
Labour of which we are the pioneers rather than as a distinct party. We
are in the van and, believing that in the stress of conflict with our
mutual foes the main body will be forced to our side, we see no
necessity for moderating our uncompromising attitude to make the
junction easier. It is inevitable -- that is enough. Provided there be
honesty on both sides.

On one question, and on one question only, can there be said to be a
fundamental difference of opinion. The Labour Electoral Association
declares it is not a political body. We are. We are Socialist
Republicans, seeking the application of republican or democratic
principles to the industrial or social life of the community, and
therefore resolutely determined to apply those principles to public life
at every step of our advance towards the ideal. Our candidate, if
elected, will, therefore, act in the Corporation as an avowed enemy of
royalty, and of aristocratic rule in all its shapes and forms.

He will lose no opportunity for demonstrating to the world at large the
firm and unquenchable desire of Irishmen to attain their freedom,
national as well as economic, and, whilst fighting and exposing sham
nationalists and middle class Home Rulers, he will recognise that it
would be the reverse of a gain to replace them by the representatives of
a West British faction.

But at some future time our candidate will *in propria persona* propound
his views both to the electors and to the Labour Electoral Association,
whose official endorsement we intend to seek.

Meanwhile, as this candidature will now certainly be proceeded with at
all hazards, we call on all members and sympathisers to rally up and
help in the necessary work.

The Socialist Republicans of Ireland step at last from the domain of
theory into the realm of practice. The Class War enters upon its final
political expression.

Comrades: To your post. [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} After the Local Government Act 1898 gave the vote to a
large section of the working class, trade unionists throughout the
country formed associations to stand labour candidates in the elections.
Connolly welcomed this in the [editorial](../08/laborrep.htm){.mia} of
the August 27 **Workers#8217; Republic**: see **Collected Works II**
(New Books, 1988), p.227-9.

[2.](#f2){#n2} E.W. Stewart stood for the ISRP in Dublin#8217;s North
Dock Ward in January 1899, and received 448 votes, 12% of the total.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
