Frederick Engels\
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Foreword

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

In the preface to *[A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy](../../1859/critique-pol-economy/preface.htm)*, published in
Berlin, 1859, Karl Marx relates how the two of us in Brussels in the
year 1845 set about: []{#001}"to work out in common the opposition of
our view" --- the materialist conception of history which was elaborated
mainly by Marx --- to the ideological view of German philosophy, in
fact, to settle accounts with our erstwhile philosophical conscience.
The resolve was carried out in the form of a criticism of post-Hegelian
philosophy. The manuscript, two large octavo volumes, had long reached
its place of publication in Westphalia when we received the news that
altered circumstances did not allow of its being printed. We abandoned
the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the more
willingly as we had achieved our main purpose --- self-clarification!

[]{#002} Since then more than 40 years have elapsed and Marx died
without either of us having had an opportunity of returning to the
subject. We have expressed ourselves in various places regarding our
relation to Hegel, but nowhere in a comprehensive, connected account. To
Feuerbach, who after all in many respects forms an intermediate link
between Hegelian philosophy and our conception, we never returned.

[]{#003} In the meantime, the Marxist world outlook has found
representatives far beyond the boundaries of Germany and Europe and in
all the literary languages of the world. On the other hand, classical
German philosophy is experiencing a kind of rebirth abroad, especially
in England and Scandinavia, and even in Germany itself people appear to
be getting tired of the pauper's broth of eclecticism which is ladled
out in the universities there under the name of philosophy.

[]{#004} In these circumstances, a short, coherent account of our
relation to the Hegelian philosophy, of how we proceeded, as well as of
how we separated, from it, appeared to me to be required more and more.
Equally, a full acknowledgement of the influence which Feuerbach, more
than any other post-Hegelian philosopher, had upon us during our period
of storm and stress, appeared to me to be an undischarged debt of honor.
I therefore willingly seized the opportunity when the editors of *Neue
Zeit* asked me for a critical review of Starcke's book on Feuerbach. My
contribution was published in that journal in the fourth and fifth
numbers of 1886 and appears here in revised form as a separate
publication.

[]{#005}Before sending these lines to press, I have once again ferreted
out and looked over the old manuscript of 1845--46 \[*The German
Ideology*\].

The section dealing with Feuerbach is not completed. The finished
portion consists of an exposition of the materialist conception of
history which proves only how incomplete our knowledge of economic
history still was at that time. It contains no criticism of Feuerbach's
doctrine itself; for the present purposes, therefore, it was unusable.
On the other hand, in an old notebook of Marx's I have found the 11
[Theses on Feuerbach](../../1845/theses/theses.htm), printed here as an
appendix.

These are notes hurriedly scribbled down for later elaboration,
absolutely not intended for publication, but invaluable as the first
document in which is deposited the brilliant germ of the new world
outlook.

[]{#006}Frederick Engels\
London\
February 21, 1888

 

Part 1: [Hegel](ch01.htm)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents: [Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy](index.htm)
