---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Wages and Prices

### (26 October 1907)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

James Connolly, *Wages and Prices*, **The Industrial Union Bulletin**,
26 October 1907, p. 1.\
Transcribed by Robert Bills on behalf of the Socialist Labor Party of
America.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Fellow-Workers Baer and Reed are to be congratulated upon their
action in calling in question the position of Fellow-worker Thompson on
the question of *Wages and Prices*. Not that I agree with their
contention -- I entirely disagree with it, but because the great
importance of the point made by Thompson might have been overlooked had
it not been so quickly challenged. This challenge and the letters
resultant therefrom have, I trust, compelled the readers of our Bulletin
to give to this very important question the study it deserves. Few
economic questions are of such great practical importance to the labor
movement as this one, and it is quite conceivable how a wrong upon this
point might easily eliminate from us large numbers of our fellow-workers
whose sympathetic adhesion had been gained by our agitation. Some years
ago I brought up this question before the notice of the ST&LA as I was
then convinced that some of the speeches of that body were at sea upon
the matter, with the result that they were fast reducing their
organization to a negligible quantity as an economic force. But my words
then only evoked ridicule, and the less the writer knew about economics
the stronger and the more vitriolic was their ridicule. That the IWW
might not fall into the same pitfall, might not make the mistake of
confounding revolutionary phraseology with true revolutionary teaching,
I desire to say a few words in amplification of the contention of my
fellow-organizer, Thompson.

The question can be correctly stated thus: Can the capitalist recover
from the working class by a rise in prices that which he has lost by an
increase in wages? Observe, the question is not, can the capitalist
recover his losses by some means, but the question essentially is, can
he recover them from the working class by means of a rise in prices. In
all arguments upon this point the source from which he is to recover and
the means he must employ are the very points in debate. I would not deny
for a moment that he can recover his losses eventually by speeding up,
by new machinery, by improved methods, by the leveling process of
economic crises, reducing wages again below the former level, and by
many other means. But all this is not the question. The question is, and
the tendency to observe the question is so pronounced that it is
necessary to continually reiterate it, the question is can the
capitalist recover from the workers by a rise in prices? But the answer
is emphatically NO! There are more lines than one on which that answer
can be cleverly demonstrated as correct, but for the present I will
confine myself to one only.

The fellow-workers who take up the position of Baer and Reed argue
systematically as if the workers produced nothing they did not purchase
and consume; produced nothing in short but the barest necessities of
life of which they are the retail purchasers. If a body of workers are
engaged in producing articles of food, coal, clothing or furniture, then
the argument has a seeming plausibility. In the increased prices they
would pay for those articles they would lose some of the value of their
increased wages, but the overwhelming majority of wage workers in this
country are not so employed, and when the workers do not purchase the
products of their labor, an increase in prices does not affect them. But
the line of reasoning of Reed, Baer et al., and all those who in the
present or in the past champion such ideas, leaves out of account all
those workers engaged in the production of commodities by which the
workers are not purchasers or consumers, and all those the prices of
whose products are fixed by law or custom. It leaves out of account all
the metaliferous miners, all the machinists and metal workers or every
description, all the steel and iron workers, all the street railroad
men, and the whole of the printing trade, all the shipping industry, all
municipal and government employees, all lumber men, all quarry men of
every kind of stone -- in fact, an enumeration of all the industries it
leaves out of account would look like a census of the occupations of the
working class, lacking only the food, clothing and coal industries to
make it complete. But be it noted that those trades whose products are,
as workers, do purchase and consume are the lowest paid in the country
and the most sweated, proving conclusively that the wages paid are not
the determining factor in causing the high prices. The one important
industry I have omitted is the building industry. I have left it to the
last because the high wages paid in the building trades are often quoted
by ill-informed speakers as the cause of the high rents, and therefore
as bearing out the theory I am opposing. On this point there are two
facts to be noted: First. A very large proportion of the results of the
labor of the building trades consists of artifices which the working
class neither purchases nor rents. Therefore, high prices do not affect
them -- the workers. Second. High rents are primarily the result of
capitalist concentration in large cities, increasing the value of space.
That they are not caused by high wages is evidenced by the fact that
vacant lots on which not a brick has been laid has also been soaring in
price. It is simply a case of a section of the working class cutting
into the profits of the capitalist speculator. Capitalist concentration
in large cities would produce high rents if the workers in the building
trades were only receiving a dollar a day.

Be it noted that in admitting that the theory I have opposed has some
application in the food, clothing and coal trades, I must not be
considered as admitting it in any but a very limited sense and degree.
We have to remember that any increase in prices in such commodities hits
every class. The lady of the capitalist class will spend more on one
dress than the clothes of many a working woman will cost for a lifetime.
In his double capacity as private individual and employer the capitalist
consumes more coal than a hundred laborers, a fact conveniently
forgotten by all the superficial thinkers who fly to the coal trade as
the classical illustration of their topsy-turvy economic theory. Finally
on the question as it affects these necessities of life, let me remind
our readers of one fact that nothing but absolute blindness to
industrial conditions can ignore, viz., that prices invariably go up
first, and wages slowly climb after them. This fact of our common
everyday experience is in striking confirmation of the theory of Marx,
as you will find it stated, for instance, in **Value, Price and
Profit**, viz., that the market prices of labor (wages) is determined by
the value (price) of the necessaries of life. On the other hand, the
contention of our opponents on this mater -- the conception that a rise
in wages is offset by a rise in prices, is best crystallized in the
formula that wages determine prices, a theory that Marx at the beginning
of the fifth chapter of the book in question calls "antiquated and
exploded," and in the end of the same chapter of the same book an "old,
popular, and worn-out fallacy."

Thus economic science, based upon and in alliance with the facts of
life, emphatically refutes the contentions of the writers of Marx's day
as well as those of the charlatans of our day who revamp the same
arguments to prove the same point.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Yours fraternally,\               |
|                                   | JAMES CONNOLLY\                   |
|                                   | Newark, N.J.                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 \
[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 15 January 2017
