---
layout: default
title: 
---
MN Roy

# The Awakening of the East

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} *The Call*, July 15, 1920, p. 5 (772 words)\
[Transcription: ]{.info}Ted Crawford\
[HTML Markup: ]{.info} Brian Reid\
[Public Domain:]{.info} Marxists Internet Archive (2007). You may freely
copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make
derivative and commercial works. Please credit "Marxists Internet
Archive" as your source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

The world revolution, in order to accomplish its great mission must
cross the borders of the so called Western Countries where capitalism
has reached its climax. Until very recently this truth was almost
entirely unknown among the revolutionaries of Europe and America, who
hardly gave a moment's thought to the social and economic conditions of
the Asiatic generally. It was generally maintained that, owing to their
industrial backwardness, the hundred's of millions of the masses in the
East would not count for anything in the great struggle between the
exploiter, and the exploited. Consequently the "World" of the world
revolution was limited to Europe and America,

But revolution is the result of objective, conditions; it breaks out in
the least suspected place if the dynamic forces are there. The
inevitable result of oppression as that sooner or later the oppressed
rebel. This is happening to-day in the Eastern countries, where the
myriads of toilers, have been groaning under the same exploitation
against which their more fortunate and less, downtrodden comrades of the
Occident have been carrying on an heroic fight. The East is awakening:
and who knows if the formidable tide, that will sweep away the
capitalist structure of Western Europe, may not come from there. This is
not idle fancy, nor is it mere sentimental brooding. That the final
success of the Social Revolution in Europe will depend greatly, if not
entirely, on a simultaneous upheaval of the labouring masses of the
Orient, can be proved scientifically.

The theory of over-production is very well known; it is equally well
known and accepted by all exponents of the Proletarian Revolution that
the highly centralised capitalist organisation will crumble under the
insupportable weight of over-production. But all the European countries,
where the system of large scale production has reached the highest
perfection, have been for a considerably long time the home of
overproduction. Nevertheless, these countries are still the strongest
citadels of Capitalism. The easy solution of the problem of
over-production they found in Imperialist extension---in carrying their
standard of exploitation to the lands inhabited by peoples less
politically conscious than their European fellows. These imperial
possessions, rich in natural resources and replete with human labour,
have furnished the European capitalists, since more than a quarter of a
century ago, a tremendous super-profit in return for the over-production
at home. Or in other words, colonial expansion has proved to/be a very
powerful remedy (though only preventive) against the epidemic of
over-production in which, Marx predicted, capitalism will perish.

As the rise of bourgeois democracy was destined to triumph over
feudalism on Europe, so the exploited masses must eventually overthrow
Capitalism. It dominates today over the whole human race, and wherever
it went and thrived, it carried within its own organism the latent
causes of its destruction in due time. It went to the far-off colonies
and imperial possessions to escape the disaster of over-production. Even
its bitterest enemies, for a long time, failed to understand the
imperativeness of counteracting this strategic move. During almost a
century World Capitalism kept on invigorating itself by sucking the
blood of the colonial toilers. But along with the bloody sword of
organised exploitation, it carried in its womb the incipient forces that
were destined to rise against it and build the new society upon its
ruins. To-day these forces are manifesting themselves in the growing
revolutionary fermentation among the Eastern peoples, who were
considered till the other day negligible factors in the World
Revolution. This awakening of the East must open a new vision before the
revolutionary leaders of Europe. If ought to show them the way through
which the retreat of the cunning enemy can be cut. A formidable upheaval
of the colonial and "protected" peoples will take away from under the
feet of Imperialist Capitalism, the rock of super-profit which has
helped so far, hi; offset the effects of overproduction. If the greatest
prophet of human history is not to be proved false---if over-production
is to be the grave of capitalist society, then the World Revolution must
assume world-wide character. And, behold, it is rapidly pushing its way
into the confines of the Asiatic countries inhabited by industrially
backward peoples, because therein lies the most vulnerable spot of the
enemy line. The disruption of Empire is the only thing that will
complete the bankruptcy of European capitalism; and the revolutionary
upheavals hi the Asiatic countries are destined to bring about the
crumbling of the proud imperial structure of capitalism. So, the
awakening of the East is perhaps the fifth act of the World Revolution.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### [MN Roy Archive](../../index.htm)  \|  [Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in India](../../../../subject/india/index.htm) [The Call Index](../../../../history/international/social-democracy/call/index.htm)

 
