---
layout: default
title: 
---
# WITH MARX FOR TEXT

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
June 29 1907

*"Only the economic organization is capable of setting on foot a true
political party of Labor, and thus raise a bulwark against the power of
Capital."* --- Marx

It happens with Marx as with Shakespeare---their sentences are weighted
with meaning. As it does not suffice to "read" Shakespeare, neither does
it suffice to "read" Marx. Their utterances must be STUDIED. There is
hardly a sentence-utterance of Marx that does not contain, compressed,
half a dozen separate thoughts which, combined, present a simple looking
sentence enough, heavy, however, with meaning.

The sentence used for text at the head of this article is typically
Marxian. It compresses fully six distinct subjects, running along
parallel lines. It condenses the essence of fully six sociologic topics,
which woven together, constitute a mighty thought.

The sentence is a flashlight upon the nature and mission of the economic
organization, upon the nature and mission of political action, upon the
relation there is between the two, and, by inference, upon the theories
of "Neutrality towards Unions," of the "Transitoriness of the Union,"
and of "Physical Force."

The first sentence of the Marxian text declares: "Only the economic
organization is capable of setting on foot a true political party of
Labor"---in other words:

First. A political party of Labor is a necessity. It could not be a
"true political party of Labor" if not useful and necessary.
Incidentally, it follows from this, as the reverse of the thought, that
a bogus party of Labor must, in some way, be the product or reflex of
some bogus economic organization.

Second. A political party of Labor can not ignore the trunk from which
it is a shoot. "Neutrality" by the shoot towards its trunk is
inconceivable."Incidentally there follow from this, as reverses of the
thought, first, that a true political party of Labor is bound to carry
into the political arena the sound principles of the revolutionary
economic organization which it reflects, and feel bold to proclaim the
fact; secondly, that a bogus party of Labor is likewise driven to carry
into the political arena the false principles of the bogus economic
organization, and be prompted by the cowardly feeling of striving to
deny its parentage. There is a third conclusion, and one of no little
importance to the practical understanding of the subject only the
political reflex of the bogus organization of Labor can set up the
theory of "Neutrality in Unionism" a theory known by the said political
reflex to be at odds with the law of its own existence and the facts
that dominate it.

The closing, or second sentence of the Marxian text, "and thus raise a
bulwark against the power of Capital," defines the mission of the "true
political party of Labor." That mission is to "raise a bulwark against
the power of Capital,""in other words:

First. It is not the part of "political action" to "take and hold" the
nation's productive powers; consequently, that the revolutionary ACT of
"taking and holding" is independent of political action.

Second. The part of "political action" being the transitory, though
necessary, function of "raising a bulwark" against Capital, it follows
as incidental to the thought, first, that the revolutionary act of
achieving the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of Socialism
is the function reserved to the economics organization; secondly, that
the "Physical Force" called for by the revolutionary act, lies inherent
in the economic organization; thirdly, as a corollary of the second
conclusion, that the element of "Force\" consists, not in military or
other organization implying violence, but in the STRUCTURE of the
economic organization, a structure of such nature that it parries
violence against itself, shatters it, and thereby renders the exercise
of violence in return unnecessary, at least secondary, or only
incidental; finally, that the economic organization is not "transitory,"
but is the present embryo of the future Government of the Republic of
Labor.

Marxian sentences are like thick racemes of grapes. They yield grape
after grape. Digested, they make the digestor to see as on a map the
border lines of the contiguous territories of the American Federation of
Labor and the Socialist Party, and of the Industrial Union and the
Socialist Labor Party. They allow an insight into the theories regarding
"Neutrality," the "Transitoriness of the Union," and "Physical Force" in
the sense of organized violence. They explain the appearance, on the
political arena, in the shape of resolutions on "inferior races," then
on "backward races," then in the shape of a string of words intended to
concede the same thought"of the Craft Union principle of
Anti-Immigration, Race and Craft Conflicts.

Marx has uttered many pregnant sentences. None more so than the text
that heads this article.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
