---
layout: default
title: 
---
# LIBELING THEIR ANCESTRY

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
July 3, 1907\

T he representatives of the mailed fist of the world who have been
rioting at the Hague in windy phrases about peace did not seem satisfied
with playing a comedy: they had to go so far as to libel their ancestry.

They placed the demand for the arbitration of international disputes
upon the ground of "modern civilization." In other words, their ancestry
were not civilized; not being civilized, they knew nothing about
arbitration"which is just so much nonsense.

No less a worthy than Edward I of England bowed reverently (hand on
sword hilt) before "arbitration\"; "arbitration" was more than once
exalted in the rough-and-tumble days of the German robber barons; it was
at the shrine of "arbitration" that the turbulent feudal lords of France
quite often meekly prayed (in war panoply) before they were curbed by
Louis the XII. And now that the hitherto sealed book of Japanese history
is being unsealed, and is becoming popular, "arbitration" is found to
have been no unknown humbug to the samurai and their leige lords.
"Arbitration" may take its place on the long list of things cited as
evidence of there being nothing new under the sun.

But why the comedy, why the libel? It is a safe conclusion that where
false pretense has been resorted to in the upholding of noble principle,
then the nobility of the purpose is mere affectation. The nobility of
the language in favor of peace was declamation, a comedy necessary to
conceal facts; the libel of ancestry was also necessary for stage
effect.

It remains an undeniable socialist principle that external peace cannot
be stable where internal war is the social principle. Capitalist society
is built upon internal war"war between capitalist and capitalist, war
between capitalists on the one hand and the working class on the other.

It remains an undeniable socialist principle that the affinity between
capitalists of several countries spreads over the capitalist world the
state of war that prevails in each separate country among its own
capitalists.

As capitalists are in one another's hair at home, they are at one
another's throats internationally.

There being, at home, the organized physical force, established by
themselves, to keep them from physically disemboweling one another,
their conflicts preserve their original character of a purely economic
battle"a battle, however, that often costs life through ruin; a battle,
moreover, that off and on breaks out into actual civil war. There being
no such international force to keep the capitalist conflict exclusively
upon the economic field, and no such international physical force
organization being, in the very nature of things, possible, the
consequence is inevitable"inevitable war.

No amount of comedy, no amount of libeling their ancestry, can change
the sociologic fact. "Arbitration" on the lips of the capitalist class
is a humbug handed down from generation to generation, from ruling class
to ruling class.

The day when arbitration will not be a humbug, that day it will no
longer be needed.

That day will see the international flag of socialism waving over the
ruins of capitalism, and binding humanity with the bonds of cooperation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
