---
layout: default
title: 
---
![deleon](../thepeople.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VOL. VIII., NO. 13 NEW YORK, SUNDAY, JUNE 26, 1898. PRICE 2 CENTS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Daniel De Leon

# Throwing Washington Overboard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} *The People* , June 28, 1898.\
[Provided by:]{.info} The Socialist Labor Party of America's Daniel De
Leon Library.\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [Robert
Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org) of the [The Socialist Labor Party of
America](http://slp.org), Editor of *The People* & [David
Walters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm)\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive (DDLIA)
presents this work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of
America. For more information on reproducing these works, please contact
the [SLP](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T]{.cap}he present war days are furnishing an opportunity to study the
spirit of capitalism at close range. Much that we have said about the
inner make-up of the capitalist system must have seemed "theoretic"; the
historic facts upon which we based our arguments not having fallen
within the personal observation of the masses, our conclusions were
disregarded. Now, however, the facts are at hand; all can see, hear,
feel, smell them.

Capitalism, threatened from behind by the Social Revolution, turns
around to the uprising Proletariat, and with a sanctimonious scowl
invokes the past as a sacred thing, to be worshipped and bowed down
before. What?! Does the Socialist Movement want to break with the
"time-honored" habits of the land? What?! Shall the principles of
Americanism, consecrated by the Revolutionary Fathers, be done away
with? What?! In horror the Pillars of Society throw up their arms, and
the conviction leaps from their eyes that, as the Socialists have no
reverence for the past, they must be wiped out.

Nevertheless, we have again and again maintained that there is nothing
more infidel than Capitalism; all its gods, its idols, its principles
are readily sacrificed whenever it can thereby turn its sacred things
into money. It came into the world decapitating everything in sight and
out of sight; uprooting churches, overturning altars, kicking down
idols, and it ever is ready to do the same over again.

This war proves it.

Among the most venerated figures in the land, Washington holds very
generally a leading place; to him our capitalist politicians, professors
and parsons have ever turned; his words have again and again been
quoted; and among the bad things imputed to the bad Socialists more than
once has an intention to "repudiate Washington" been mentioned. And yet,
what do we see now?

In Congress, in the press, in the pulpit, the Washingtonian warning
against entangling alliances, conquests, etc., now frequently uttered
against the plan to keep the Philippines, take Hawaii, etc., etc., is
met with, what? With nothing short of a sneer at Washington, a
declaration amounting to pronouncing him a "back number", in short, by
throwing him overboard.

Washington, these same recent devotees of the past now say, could not
have foreseen the changed conditions in which we now live; Washington,
they tell us, wrote and spoke and thought in other and for other times;
Washington, in short, is not now of any account.

Of the many symptoms of the times, this capitalist breaking loose with
their own gods is the most certain symptom of impending revolution. The
capitalist ship is cutting loose from its moorings. Set adrift, what
will become of that water-logged craft?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
