---
layout: default
title: 
---
![title](../thepeople.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VOL. VIII, NO. 5       NEW YORK, SUNDAY, MAY 1, 1898       PRICE 2 CENTS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Daniel De Leon

# A Word to the Proletariat of Spain

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source:]{.info} The People, May 1, 1898.\
[Provided by:]{.info} [Socialist Labor Party of
America.](http://slp.org)\
[Transcription and Editing:]{.info} Robert Bills, National Secretary of
the Socialist Labor Party of America and Editor of [The
People.](http://www.slp.org/tp.htm)\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} [David
Walters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm) of the
Marxists Internet Archive.\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive presents this
work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of America. All
rights reserved. For more information on reproducing this article,
please contact [Robert Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[F]{.cap}ellow Workingmen---The respective Committees, called
Governments, of the ruling class in our two countries have ordered us to
fly at each other's throats. The decree is issued.

The attitude in which you and we are placed toward each other
exemplifies the deep inhumanity, the monstrous absurdity of the social
system in which we live.

What quarrel have you with us or we with you? None. Say that the soil of
Cuba be the issue. Has its ownership by the class that rules you in the
slightest benefited you? Has the wealth, the increasing wealth, drawn
from Cuba's soil flown into your hands in any perceptible amount? Is the
"Pearl of the Antilles" a gem that glistens on your brow? The question
almost seems cruel. Not only did the wealth drawn from Cuba never fall
to you, but constantly, at some periods less, at others more so, you
have been forced to mingle the blood of your own veins with the sweat of
the brow of Cuba's working class, to secure your common exploiters the
enjoyment of Cuba's fertility. The "Pearl of Antilles" has ever been but
an heirloom of your tyrants and to you an additional scourge. So much as
to you.

And as to us, we know full well that, whether Cuba pass over to "us" or
is made "free," our fate or the fate of Cuba's toilers will not be
improved. Same cause, same effect. The social system under which we both
live remains the same. The issue, accordingly, is not one that concerns
us. Whom does it concern?

Apart from the general and conflicting capitalist interests in both our
countries, the immediate and representative interests concerned are
those of our two Governments. Our Republican Government seeks by a war
to perpetuate itself; the Government of your Queen-Regent seeks to
prevent its own downfall, which would surely follow as a result of its
abandoning Cuba. Back of each of these are grouped kindred interests.

Theory, based upon a long line of facts, has long established the
principle that peace and civilization can never be so long as nations
are overlorded by the brigand class that now holds the reins of power.
Together with this follows the principle that the working class of all
nations has but one enemy---the capitalist class of all nations, its own
nation's at the head of the list.

The war which has broken out between our two nations furnishes the
freshest illustration of that. Blinded by lack of class-consciousness,
many of our own class, on both sides of the waters, may allow themselves
to be absorbed and carried away by their exploiters. Nevertheless, the
hope is justified that this may be one of the last experiences that they
are to make; and that, rising to the full elevation of their class, they
may soon take that stand that alone will insure the peace of the world.

In the meantime, across the smoke of belching cannons, and the floods of
human gore that this war will cause to flow, we, the class-conscious
proletariat of America, reach you the hand of brotherhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back to the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../../index.htm)
