---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # To the Linen Slaves of Belfast                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ### Manifesto of Irish T                                              |
| extile Workers' Union {#manifesto-of-irish-textile-workers-union .cr} |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fellow-workers,

Your condition, and the condition of the sweated women of all classes of
labour in Belfast, has recently become the subject of discussion on all
the political platforms of England, and of long articles in all the most
widely read newspapers and magazines of both countries. Almost
unanimously they agree in condemning the conditions under which you
work, your miserable wages, the abominable system of fining which
prevails, and the slaughtering speed at which you are driven. It is
pointed out that the conditions of your toil are unnecessarily hard,
that your low wages do not enable you to procure sufficiently nourishing
food for yourselves or your children, and that as a result of your hard
work, combined with low wages, you are the easy victims of disease, and
that your children never get a decent chance in life, but are
handicapped in the race of life before they are born.

All this is today admitted by every right-thinking man and woman in
these Islands. Many Belfast Mills are slaughterhouses for the women and
penitentiaries for the children. But while all the world is deploring
your conditions, they also unite in deploring your slavish and servile
nature in submitting to them; they unite in wondering of what material
these Belfast women are made, who refuse to unite together and fight to
better their conditions.

Irish men have proven themselves to be heroes in fighting to abolish the
tyranny of landlordism. Irish women fought heroically in the same cause.
Are the Irish working women of Belfast not of the same race? Can they
not unite to fight the slavery of capitalism as courageously as their
sisters on the farms of Ireland united to fight the slavery of Irish
landlordism? Public opinion in these islands is anxious to help you, but
public opinion cannot help you unless you are ready to help yourselves.

Especially do we appeal to the spinners, piecers, layers, and doffers.
The slavery of the Spinningroom is the worst and least excusable of all.
Spinning is a skilled trade, requiring a long apprenticeship, alert
brains, and nimble fingers. Yet for all this skill, for all those weary
years of learning, for all this toil in a super-heated atmosphere, with
clothes drenched with water, and hands torn and lacerated as a
consequence of the speeding up of the machinery, a qualified spinner in
Belfast receives a wage less than some of our pious millowners would
spend weekly upon a dog. And yet the Spinning-room is the key to the
whole industry. A general stoppage in the Spinning-rooms of Belfast
would stop all the linen industry, factories and warerooms alike,
Reelers and spinners united control the situation. Disorganised as they
are today, they are the helpless slaves of soulless employers. United as
they might be, as they ought to be, as we are determined they shall be,
they could lift themselves into the enjoyment of prosperity and
well-paid healthful labour. As a first step to that end, we wish to
propose a programme of industrial reform to be realised in the near
future, and we invite all our toiling sisters to enroll in our Society
-- the Irish Textile Workers' Union -- whose Belfast headquarters is at
50, York Street, in order that we may unitedly, and at a given moment,
fight for its success.

We demand that the entire Linen Industry be put under the Sweated
Industries Act, which gives power to a Trades Board, on which employees
and employers are represented, to fix the minimum wages for the whole.

Under that Act the wages of women in the Clothing Operatives Trade has
been already fixed at a minimum wage of 3d. per hour. Until the
extension to the Linen Industry of that Act, we demand and pledge
ourselves as a Union to fight for a minimum wage of 3d. per hour for all
qualified spinners, proportionate increases for all lower grades in the
Spinning-room, and increases in the piece rates for the Reelingroom and
all departments in piece work; abolition of fines for lost time; all
stoppages to be at the same rates as the daily pay per hour.

We also demand from Government the appointment of a competent Woman
Inspector for the Belfast District exclusively, in order that the
inspection of our mills, factories, and warerooms may be a constant
reality, instead of the occasional farce it is today.

United action can secure every point on this modest programme within
less than a year. It depends upon you, the working women of Belfast. If
you have courage enough, faith enough in yourselves and in each other,
you can win. Most of this programme can be won by direct industrial
action, by a General Strike for it if need be; the rest will be conceded
by Government as soon as you show yourselves in earnest in your demands
for it.

To make easy the work of organising, we are prepared to establish an
office or Women's Club-room in each district, if the request for the
same is made by a sufficient number of members. Take advantage of this
offer, give in your name to us at this office, or to any of your
collectors, and we will welcome you as sisters, and enroll you as
comrades in the coming battle for juster conditions.

Should this manifesto come into the hand of any not themselves
sufferers, but willing to help in the coming battle, if they communicate
with us we shall be prepared to enroll them as auxiliaries, and welcome
their help.

Sisters and Fellow-workers, talk this matter over, do not be frightened
by the timid counsels and fears of weaklings. Be brave. Have confidence
in yourselves. Talk about success, and you will achieve success \...

(This Manifesto, drafted by Connolly, was issued from 50 York Street,
Belfast in 1913 over the names of Winifred Carney, Secretary, Ellen
Gordon, Delegate, and James Connolly, Organiser. Connolly's activities
among the dockers and mill workers of the North had been intense and
fruitful since June 1911 when he was appointed as Secretary Belfast
Branch, and Ulster District Organiser of the Irish Transport and General
Workers' Union. The Irish Textile Workers' Union was attached to the
Textile Section of the Irish Women Workers' Union with Headquarters at
Liberty Hall, Dublin.)

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 20.8.2003
