---
layout: default
title: 
---
Paul Lafargue 1885

### A Visit to Louise Michel

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: *Le Socialiste*, September 26, 1885;\
[Translated]{.info}: for marxists.org by [Mitch
Abidor](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/mabidor.htm);\
[CopyLeft]{.info}: [Creative
Commons](../../../../admin/legal/cc/by-sa.htm) (Attribute & ShareAlike)
marxists.org 2005.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- But what's wrong with you? You look all upset, as if the sight of a
prison troubles you, Louise Michel smilingly said to me as I entered

-- Citizen, it's painful for us to know you\'re imprisoned. But I didn't
expect to see you behind a grill. I had hoped to talk with you in a
room, to hold your hands.

-- My dear Lafargue, she answered, there is no other parlor in this
hotel where the bourgeois lodge me gratis. I\'m not complaining. To tell
you the truth, I\'ve had to put up with worse. I 've found a happiness
in prison that I never knew when I was free; I have time to study and I
take advantage of it. When I was free I had my classes: 150 students or
more. It wasn't enough for me to live on, since two thirds of them
didn't pay me. I had to give lessons in music, grammar, history, a
little bit of everything, until ten or eleven o\'clock in the evening,
and when I went home I went to sleep exhausted, unable to do anything.
At the time I would have given years of my life in order to have time to
give over to study.

Here in St Lazare I have time for myself, a lot of time, and I\'m happy
about this: I read, I study. I\'ve learned several languages. A friend,
G\..., gave me Russian lessons and I can already read it and even write
it a little. You know that I have an excellent memory, the main thing
needed for the study of language. I learned English all on my own\...In
order to undertake what I want to do when I get out of prison I have to
know several languages.

While waiting to re-conquer my freedom of action, my freedom to
propagandize, I write. I wrote some children's books. I teach them to
think like citizens, like revolutionaries, while at the same time
amusing them. In novels I realistically paint the miseries of life, and
I try to breathe the love of the revolution into the hearts of men.

We spoke for an hour and a half, forgetting about the place we were in,
talking about everything, touching on all possible topics of current
affairs, elections, realist literature, new novels, voyages.

-- Don't feel sorry for me, I\'m more free than many of those who walk
about under the open skies. Their minds are imprisoned, they are
enchained by their property, by their monetary interests, the sad
necessities of their lives. They are so absorbed that they can't live
like living, thinking beings. As for me, I live the life of the world. I
follow with enthusiasm the revolutionary movements of Russia, Germany,
and France, everywhere. Yes, I am a fanatic and, like all martyrs, my
body doesn't feel pain when my thoughts transport me to the world of the
revolution.

Imprisoned behind these thick walls I see again my beautiful voyage to
New Caledonia. My being was never so strongly moved by the spectacle of
nature as when I sailed on the somber immensity of the ocean, than when
on the South Pole I witnessed a snow storm and saw the air white with
snow and the black sea devouring the flakes that fell on its surface;
while in my heart lived the bloody days of the defeat and the sublime
explosion of March 18.

I people my solitude with thousands of memories. And my beloved
*Canaques*! How barbarian the civilized are! I learned their language,
their music, their songs. I lived among them and they loved me as if I
belonged to their tribe. I founded a school, and in no time I had taught
these little savages to read and to count, but I have to say that I
invented a special method for their usage\...

Louise Michel elaborated at length on the pedagogical question that so
interests her.

-- I received a letter from the mayor of Noumea. He asks that I go there
to found schools, and I will.

It was moving to hear this heroic woman speak.

-- Oh, citizen, how we miss you!

-- Don't talk to me about a pardon. I don't want a pardon; never, at any
price.

-- It wouldn't be a pardon that the government would give you in
returning to you the freedom it deprives you of by force. A
revolutionary, and this is my carefully thought out opinion, should not
recognize the bourgeoisie's right to condemn him. He cedes before the
enormous force that crushes him, but doesn't abandon any of his rights
and if, after having locked him up, the bourgeois government opens the
prison gates, it isn't pardoning him, it is restoring the freedom it
robbed him of. It even owes him reparations for the months of prison
they made him suffer. I just finished eight months of prison and I count
on receiving damages the day of the revolution. Think then, citizen, of
the services you would render the revolutionary cause if you were free.

-- No, I don't want a pardon. I will only leave prison if I\'m given an
amnesty. Let those who love me never speak of a pardon: this would
dishonor me.

-- No pardon will ever dishonor Louise Michel, who, the day after she
leaves, will begin again her campaign of revolutionary struggle.

-- Stop, I don't want to hear any talk about a pardon. Don't forget to
bring me your anthropology books and Darwin's *The Descent of Man*;
reading it will fortify my English. Tell my friends that I\'m doing
well. *Adieu et au revoir.*

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Paul Lafargue Archive](../../index.htm)
