---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Industrialism and the Trade Unions                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1910)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **International Socialist Review**, February 1910.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, July 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the second part of my book **Socialism Made Easy**, I have
endeavoured to establish two principles in the minds of my readers as
being vitally necessary to the upbuilding of a strong revolutionary
Socialist movement. Those two principles are: First, that the working
class as a class cannot become permeated with a belief in the unity of
their class interests unless they have first been trained to a
realization of the need of industrial unity; second, that the
revolutionary act -- the act of taking over the means of production and
establishing a social order based upon the principles of the working
class (labour) -- cannot be achieved by a disorganized, defeated and
humiliated working class, but must be the work of that class after it
has attained to a commanding position on the field of economic struggle.
It has been a pleasure to me to note the progress of Socialist thought
towards acceptance of these principles, and to believe that the
publication of that little work helped to a not inconsiderable degree in
shaping that Socialist thought and in accelerating its progress. In the
following article I wish to present one side of the discussion which
inevitably arises in our Socialist party branches upon the mooting of
this question. But as a preliminary to this presentation I would like to
decry, and ask my comrades to decry and dissociate themselves from, the
somewhat acrid and intolerant manner in which this discussion is often
carried on. Believing that the Socialist Party is part and parcel of the
labour movement of the United States, and that in the growth of that
movement to true revolutionary clearness and consciousness it, the
Socialist Party, is bound to attract to itself and become mentor and
teacher of elements most unclear and lacking in class consciousness, we
should recognize that it is as much our duty to be patient and tolerant
with the erring brother or sister within our ranks as with the rank
heathen -- outside the fold. No good purpose can be served by wildly
declaiming against 'intellectuals', nor yet by intriguing against and
misrepresenting 'impossibilists'. The comrades who think that the
Socialist Party is run by 'compromisers' should not jump out of the
organization and leave the revolutionists in a still more helpless
minority; and the comrades who pride themselves upon being practical
Socialist politicians should not too readily accuse those who differ
with them of being potential disrupters. Viewing the situation from the
standpoint of an industrialist I am convinced that both the
industrialist and those estimable comrades who pander to the old style
trade unions to such a marked degree as to leave themselves open to the
suspicion of coquetting with the idea of a 'labour' party, both, I say,
have the one belief, both have arrived at the one conclusion from such
different angles that they appear as opposing instead of aiding,
auxiliary forces. That belief which both share in common is that the
triumph of Socialism is impossible without the aid of labour organized
upon the economic field. It is their common possession of this one great
principle of action which impels me to say that there is a greater
identity of purpose and faith between those two opposing (?) wings of
the Socialist Party than either can have with any of the intervening
schools of thought. Both realize that the Socialist Party must rest upon
the economic struggle and the forces of labour engaged therein, and that
the Socialism which is not an outgrowth and expression of that economic
struggle is not worth a moment's serious consideration.

There, then, we have found something upon which we agree, a ground
common to both, the first desideratum of any serious discussion. The
point upon which we disagree is: Can the present form of American trade
unions provide the Socialist movement with the economic force upon which
to rest, or can the American Federation of Labour develop towards
industrialism sufficiently for our needs? It is the same problem stated
in different ways. I propose to state here my reasons for taking the
negative side in that discussion.

Let it be remembered that we are not, as some good comrades imagine,
debating whether it is possible for a member of the American Federation
of Labour to become an industrialist, or for all its members, but we are
to debate whether the organization of the American Federation of Labour
is such as to permit of a modification of its structural formation to
keep pace with the progress of industrialist ideas amongst its members.
Whether the conversion of the membership of the American Federation of
Labour to industrialism would mean the disruption of the Federation and
the throwing of it aside as the up-to-date capitalist throws aside a
machine, be it ever so costly, when a more perfectly functioning machine
has been devised.

At this point it is necessary for the complete understanding of our
subject that we step aside for a moment to consider the genesis and
organization of the American Federation of Labour and the trade unions
patterned after it, and this involves a glance at the history of the
labour movement in America. Perhaps of all the subjects properly
pertaining to Socialist activity this subject has been the most
neglected, the least analysed. And yet it is the most vital. Studies of
Marx and popularizing (sic) of Marx, studies of science and popularizing
of science, studies of religion and application of same with Socialist
interpretations, all these we have without limit. But of attempts to
apply the methods of Marx and of science to an analysis of the laws of
growth and incidents of development of the organizations of labour upon
the economic field the literature of the movement is almost, if not
quite, absolutely barren. Our Socialist writers seem in some strange
and, to me, incomprehensible manner to have detached themselves from the
everyday struggles of the toilers and to imagine they are doing their
whole duty as interpreters of Socialist thought when they bless the
economic organization with one corner of their mouth and insist upon the
absolute hopelessness of it with the other. They imagine, of course,
that this is the astutest diplomacy, but the net result of it has been
that the organized working class has never looked upon the Socialist
Party as a part of the labour movement, and the enrolled Socialist Party
member has never found in American Socialist literature anything that
helped him in strengthening his economic organization or leading it to
victory.

Perhaps some day there will arise in America a Socialist writer who in
his writing will live up to the spirit of the Communist Manifesto that
the Socialists are not apart from the labour movement, are not a sect,
but are simply that part of the working class which pushes on all
others, which most clearly understands the line of march. Awaiting the
advent of that writer permit me to remind our readers that the Knights
of Labour preceded the American Federation of Labour, that the
structural formation of the Knights was that of a mass organization,
that they aimed to organize all toilers into one union and made no
distinction of craft, nor of industry, and that they cherished
revolutionary aims. When the American Federation of Labour was organized
it was organized as a dual organization, and although at first it
professed a desire to organize none but those then unorganized, it soon
developed opposition to the Knights and proceeded to organize wherever
it could find members, and particularly to seek after the enrolment of
those who were already in the Knights of Labour. In this it was assisted
by the good will of the master class, who naturally preferred its
profession of conservatism and identity of interest between capital and
labour to the revolutionary aims and methods of the Knights. But even
this assistance on the part of the master class would not have assured
its victory were it not for the fact that its method of organization,
into separate crafts, recognized a certain need of the industrial
development of the time which the Knights of Labour had failed up to
that moment to appraise at its proper significance.

The Knights of Labour, as I have pointed out, organized all workers into
one union, an excellent idea for teaching the toilers their ultimate
class interests, but with the defect that it made no provision for the
treating of special immediate craft interests by men and women with the
requisite technical knowledge. The scheme was the scheme of an idealist,
too large-hearted and noble-minded himself to appreciate the hold small
interests can have upon men and women. It gave rise to jealousies. The
printer grumbled at the jurisdiction of a body comprising tailors and
shoemakers over his shop struggles, and the tailors and shoemakers
fretted at the attempts of carpenters and bricklayers to understand the
technicalities of their disputes with the bosses.

To save the Knights of Labour and to save the American working class a
pilgrimage in the desert of reaction, it but required the advent of some
practical student of industry to propose that, instead of massing all
workers together irrespective of occupation, they should, keeping the
organization intact and remaining bound in obedience to one supreme
head, for administrative purposes only, group all workers together
according to their industries, and subdivide their industries again
according to crafts. That the allied crafts should select the ruling
body for the industry to which they belonged, and that the allied
industries again should elect the ruling body for the whole
organization. This could have been done without the slightest jar to the
framework of the organization; it would have recognized all technical
differences and specialization of function in actual industry; it would
have kept the organization of labour in line with the actual progress of
industrial development; and would still have kept intact the idea of the
unity of the working class by its common bond of brotherhood, a
universal membership card, and universal obligation to recognize that an
injury to one was an injury to all.

Tentative steps in such a direction were already being taken when the
American Federation of Labour came upon the scene. The promoters of this
organization, seizing upon this one plank in the Knights of Labour
organization, specialized its work along that line, and, instead of
hastening to save the unity of the working class on the lines above
indicated, they made the growing realization of the need of
representation of craft differences the entering wedge for disrupting
and destroying the earlier organization of that class.

Each craft was organized as a distinct body having no obligation to
strike or fight beside any other craft, and making its own contracts
with the bosses heedless of what was happening between these bosses and
their fellow-labourers of another craft in the same industry, building,
shop or room. The craft was organized on a national basis, to be
governed by the vote of its members throughout the nation, and with a
membership card good only in that craft and of no use to a member who
desired to leave one craft in order to follow another. The fiction of
national unity was and is still paid homage to, as vice always pays
homage to virtue, by annual congresses in which many resolutions are
gravely debated, to be forgotten as soon as congress adjourns. But the
unifying (?) qualities of this form of organization are best revealed by
the fact that the main function of the congress seems to be to provide
the cynical master class with the, to them, pleasing spectacle of allied
organizations fiercely fighting over questions of jurisdiction.

This policy of the American Federation of Labour coupled with the
unfortunate bomb incident of Chicago, for which the Knights of Labour
received much of the blame, completed the ruin of the latter
organization and destroyed the growing unity of the working class for
the time being. The industrial union, as typified today in the
Industrial Workers of the World, could have, as I have shown, developed
out of the Knights of Labour as logically and perfectly as the adult
develops from the child. No new organization would have been necessary,
and hence we may conclude that the Industrial Workers of the World is
the legitimate heir of the native American labour movement, the
inheritor of its principles, and the ripened fruit of its experiences.
On the other hand the American Federation of Labour may truly be
regarded as a usurper on the throne of labour, a usurper who occupies
the throne by virtue of having strangled its predecessor, and now, like
all usurpers, raises the cry of "treason" against the rightful heir when
it seeks to win its own again. It is obvious that the sway of the
American Federation of Labour in the American labour movement is but a
brief interregnum between the passing of the old revolutionary
organization and the ascension into power of the new.

But, I fancy I hear some one say, granting that all that is true, may we
not condemn the methods by which the American Federation of Labour
destroyed, or helped to destroy, the Knights of Labour, and still
believe that out of the American Federation of Labour we may now build
up an industrial organization such as we need, such as the Industrial
Workers of the World aims to be?

This we can only answer by clearly focusing in our mind the American
Federation of Labour system of organization in actual practice. A
carpenter is at work in a city. He has a dispute with the bosses, or all
his fellow-carpenters have. They will hold meetings to discuss the
question of a strike, and finding the problem too big for them they will
pass it on to the headquarters, and the headquarters pass it on to the
general membership. The general membership, from San Francisco to Rhode
Island, and from Podunk to Kalamazoo, will have a vote and say upon the
question of the terms upon which the Chicago carpenters work, and if
said carpenters are called out they will expect all these widely
scattered carpenters to support them by financial and moral help. But
while they are soliciting and receiving the support of their
fellow-carpenters they are precluded from calling out in sympathy with
them the painters who follow them in their work, the plumbers whose
pipes they cover up, the steamfitters who work at their elbows, or the
plasterer who precedes them. Yet the co-operation of these workers with
them in their strikes is a thousandfold more important than the voting
of strike funds which would keep them out on strike -- until the
building season is over and the winter sets in. In many cities today
there is a Building Trades' Council which is looked upon by many as a
beginning of industrialism within the American Federation of Labour. It
is not only the beginning but it is as far as industrialism can go
within that body, and its sole function is to secure united action in
remedying petty grievances and enforcing the observance of contracts,
but it does not take part in the really important work of determining
hours or wages. It cannot for the simple reason that each of the
thirty-three unions in the building industry are international
organizations with international officers, and necessitating
international referendums before any strikes, looking to the fixing of
hours or wages, are permissible. Hence, although all the building trade
branches in a given district may be satisfied that the time is ripe for
obtaining better conditions, they cannot act before they obtain the
consent of the membership throughout the entire country, and before that
is obtained the moment for action is passed. The bond that is supposed
to unite the carpenter in New York with the carpenter in Kokomo,
Indiana, is converted into a wall of isolation which prevents him
uniting, except in the most perfunctory fashion, with the men of other
crafts who work beside him. The industrial union and the craft union are
mutually exclusive terms. Suppose all the building trades branches of
Chicago resolved to unite industrially to form an industrial union.
Every branch which became an integral part of said union, pledged to
obey its call to action, would by so doing forfeit its charter in the
craft union and in the American Federation of Labour, and outside
Chicago its members would be considered as scabs. The Brewers Union has
been fighting for years to obtain the right to organize all brewery
employees. It is hindered from doing so, not only by the rules of the
American Federation of Labour, but by the form of organization of that
body. Breweries, for instance, employ plumbers. Now if a plumber, so
employed, would join the Brewers Union and obey its call to strike he
would be expelled from his craft union, and if he ever lost his job in
the brewery would be considered as a scab if he went to work where union
plumbers were employed. A craft union cannot recognize the right of
another association to call its members out on a strike. A machinist
works today in a machine shop; a few months from now he may be employed
in a clothing factory attending to the repairs of sewing machines. If
the clothing industry resolves itself into an industrial union and he
joins them, as he needs must if he believes in industrialism, he loses
his membership in the International Association of Machinists. And if
ever he loses his factory job and seeks to return to the machine shop he
must either do so as a non-union man or pay a heavy fine if he is
permitted to re-enter the International Association of Machinists. A
stationary engineer works today at the construction of a new building,
three months from now he is in a shipyard, six months from now he is at
the mouth of a coal mine. Three different industries, requiring three
different industrial unions.

The craft card is good today in all of them, but if any of them chose to
form industrial unions, and called upon him to join, he could only do so
on penalty of losing his craft card and his right to strike benefits
from his old organization. And if he did join, his card of membership in
the one he joined would be of no value when he drifted to any of the
others. How can the American Federation of Labour avoid this dilemma?
Industrialism requires that all the workers in a given industry be
subject to the call of the governing body, or of the vote of the workers
in that industry. But if these workers are organized in the American
Federation of Labour they must be subject only to the call of their
national or international craft body; and if at any time they obey the
call of the industry in preference to the craft they are ordered
peremptorily back to scab upon their brothers.

If in addition to this organic difficulty, and it is the most
insuperable, we take into consideration the system of making contracts
or trade agreements on a craft basis pursued by old style unions we will
see that our unfortunate brothers in the American Federation of Labour
are tied hand and foot, handcuffed and hobbled, to prevent their advance
into industrialism. During the regent shirt-waist makers' strike in New
York when the question was mooted of a similar strike in Philadelphia
our comrade Rose Pastor Stokes, according to our Socialist press, was
continually urging upon the shirt-waist makers of Philadelphia the
wisdom of striking before Christmas, and during the busy season. No more
sensible advice could have been given. It was of the very essence of
industrialist philosophy. Industrialism is more than a method of
organization -- it is a science of fighting. It says to the worker:
fight only at the time you select, never when the boss wants a fight.
Fight at the height of the busy season, and in the slack season when the
workers are in thousands upon the sidewalk absolutely refuse to be drawn
into battle. Even if the boss insults and vilifies your union and
refuses to recognize it, take it lying down in the slack season but mark
it up in your little note book. And when work is again rushing and
master capitalist is pressed for orders squeeze him, and squeeze him
till the most sensitive portion of his anatomy, his pocket-book, yells
with pain. That is the industrialist idea of the present phase of the
class war as organized labour should conduct it. But, whatever may have
been the case with the shirt-waist makers, that policy so ably
enunciated by comrade Rose Pastor Stokes is utterly opposed to the whole
philosophy and practice of the American Federation of Labour. Contracts
almost always expire when there is little demand for labour. For
instance the United Mine Workers' contract with the bosses expires in
the early summer when they have before them a long hot season with a
minimum demand for coal. Hence the expiration of the contract generally
finds the coal operators spoiling for a fight, and the union secretly
dreading it. Most building trade contracts with the bosses expire in the
winter. For example, the Brotherhood of Carpenters in New York, their
contract expires in January. A nice time for a fight, in the middle of a
northern winter, when all work in their vicinity is suspended owing to
the rigours of the climate!

The foregoing will, I hope, give the reader some food for consideration
upon the problem under review. That problem is intimately allied with
the future of the Socialist Party in America. Our party must become the
political expression of the fight in the workshop, and draw its
inspiration therefrom. Everything which tends to strengthen and
discipline the hosts of labour tends irresistibly to swell the ranks of
the revolutionary movement, and everything which tends to divide and
disorganize the hosts of labour tends also to strengthen the forces of
capitalism. The most dispersive and isolating force at work in the
labour movement today is craft unionism, the most cohesive and unifying
force, industrial unionism. In view of that fact all objections which my
comrades make to industrial unionism on the grounds of the supposedly,
or truly, anti-political bias of many members of the Industrial Workers
of the World is quite beside the mark. That question at the present
stage of the game is purely doctrinaire. The use or non-use of political
action will not be settled by the doctrinaires who may make it their
hobby today, but will be settled by the workers who use the Industrial
Workers of the World in their workshop struggles. And if at any time the
conditions of a struggle in shop, factory, railroad or mine necessitate
the employment of political action those workers so organized will use
it, all theories and theorists to the contrary notwithstanding. In their
march to freedom the workers will use every weapon they find necessary.

As the economic struggle is the preparatory school and training ground
for Socialists it is our duty to help guide along right lines the effort
of the workers to choose the correct kind of organization to fight their
battles in that conflict. According as they choose aright or wrongly, so
will the development of class consciousness in their minds be hastened
or retarded by their everyday experience in class struggles.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
