---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Labour and Politics in Ireland                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1910)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Harp**, April, 1910.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, July 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have not any knowledge of any country in which the working class more
readily rallies to an appeal to its class feeling than in Ireland.
Whilst the knowledge of theoretical socialism is but meagrely
distributed amongst the workers, that feeling or knowledge which the
socialists call class consciousness is deep-seated, wide-spread and
potent in its influence. A striking manifestation of this fact was
evinced in the action of the trade unions during the first elections
under the Local Government Act of 1898. Previous to the passing of this
Act the Irish workers had no vote in municipal elections, with the
necessary result that local municipal government was completely in the
hands of the Irish capitalist class, who kept our Irish cities
pest-holes of disease and slovenliness, and made our Irish slums a
horror and a byword among the cities of Europe. But in that year the
aforementioned Act placed the municipal suffrage upon the same basis as
the parliamentary. Immediately there sprang into existence all
throughout Ireland organisations of workers aiming at wresting the
municipal government from the hands of the capitalist class, and placing
it in the hands of the working class. Those organisations were formed
under the authority of the various Trade Councils and Land and Labour
Associations, and were termed Labour Electoral Associations. They
selected the constituencies, wards, to be fought solely according to the
working class character of these wards, and without regard to the
supposed political views of the other candidates. Loyalist and Home
Ruler were equal to them; their standard was the standard of labour and
under that standard the workers rallied.

To those of us who were privileged to be in the fight in Ireland in
those days the manner in which the Irish working class responded to the
appeal made to them in 1899 was a promise and a guarantee for the future
which no subsequent happenings can ever efface from the memory. All over
the island the candidates of the working class swept to victory -- in
Dublin, in Cork, in Limerick, down to the smallest agricultural
districts, practically every bona-fide labour man showed up well in the
ballotting, sweeping the old political parties into confusion. Mr. John
Redmond, M.P., begged the Irish workers to show their moderation by
electing landlords to the various bodies in Ireland in order to show
those gentry that they had nothing to fear from Home Rule. The Irish
workers laughed to scorn the whining counsel of this "half-emancipated
slave" and stood by the men of their own class, thus ending for ever the
jobbing and grafting of the landed gentry at the expense of the rural
population. The upheaval of the Irish workers was magnificent.

But with victory came demoralisation. We have said that the Irish worker
was thoroughly true to his own class, but lacking in socialist
knowledge. This alone offers an explanation of the subsequent setback to
the labour cause in Ireland. The men elected all over Ireland had been
elected on an independent platform, and all during the election most of
them had steadily refused to merge their cause in any other, and had
kept their independence intact and unsullied. The splendid vote they
received was the emphatic endorsement by the Irish workers of this
political independence of labour. But as soon as they were elected they
forgot, or seemed not to realise, this fact, and instead of forming a
distinct and independent party of their own in the various councils,
they allied themselves to one or other of the factions of the capitalist
parties, and became labour tails of the capitalist political kites.

As soon as the shrewd old party politicians saw this they realised
immediately that they could regain their lost supremacy. The honest
Irish working man -- honest himself and inclined to believe in the
honesty of others -- was no match for the political tricksters of the
capitalist parties. When he found himself flattered and courted, invited
to dinners and private gatherings of the Home Rule councillors, plied
with drink by his associates and asked to favour them by seconding the
resolutions affirming their position on certain debatable matters to
come up in the council next day, etc., he did not realise that his
genial hosts were destroying his independence, and digging the ground
from under him.

Yet so it was. The labour party was a party only in name; it came to
signify only certain men who could be trusted to draw working class
support to the side of certain capitalist factions. Unfortunately, the
only candidate run by the Irish Socialist Republican Party in that year,
Mr. E.W. Stewart, the only candidate in the interest of labour who
really understood the political trickery of the capitalists, and the
manner in which that trickery would manifest itself, and who by his
knowledge and pugnacity might have saved the situation, was defeated by
a very small majority.

In the years immediately following that first result of the Irish
workers on the field of local government the hopeless incapacity to
uphold the principle of independent political action in which they had
been elected, had its natural result in the overwhelming defeat of every
candidate who professed to stand on a labour platform. The Irish
capitalists had learned of the real weakness of the labour movement
which had at first so terrified their guilty consciences, and the Irish
workers had become disgusted at the poor results shown by the men they
had elected. Though they were perhaps not able to frame it in so many
words the Irish workers realised that a working man member of a
capitalist party is not necessarily any better than a capitalist member
of the same party, perhaps not so good; but that a working man who
wishes to safeguard the interests of his class must withdraw from all
capitalist political affiliation. *And in deciding how he should vote in
any great question should consult, not with the capitalist members of
the Corporation, but with the committee of the organisations which
secured his election.*

Now we propose to the toilers of Ireland that it is time to make an
effort to retrieve the situation, and once more to raise the banner of a
militant Irish labour movement upon the political field. The victories
once achieved can be more than duplicated, the mistakes once made will
serve as beacons of warning for the guidance of our future activities.
What were the factors at work in 1899? They were: First, a Labour
Electoral Association representing an aroused working class in hot
rebellion against its social and political outlawry, but ignorant of the
real causes of its subjection; second, a small Socialist Republican
Party, not much more than two years old, but militant, enthusiastic and
with a thorough knowledge of the causes of social and national slavery.
These two factors operated independently -- the socialists at all times
supporting the labour men, the labour men not always supporting the
socialists.

In the nature of things this could not well have been otherwise at that
time. But what are the elements in the labour movement in Ireland today?
They are a strong socialist movement, representing some of the best
intellects in Ireland, an independent socialist feeling and education on
socialist thought in every city of industrial activity in Ireland, and a
general feeling of comradeship and sympathy between the trade unions and
the socialists

The times are ripe for a forward move! We suggest, then, the formation
of a political party in Ireland which shall be composed of all bodies
organised upon the basis of the principle of labour; that in order to
form such a party the Trade and Labour Council of Dublin shall be
invited by the socialists to take the lead in calling a conference of
labour and socialist organisations of the capital city, that it be set
forth in such call that the purpose is to form a party which shall act
and be distinct from all others, and entirely guided by the interests of
labour. And in order to secure and maintain the integrity of such party
we also suggest that no one should be eligible for office in this party,
or eligible to be considered as one of its candidates for any ward or
constituency, unless he or she is a member of an affiliated labour
union. When this has been perfected in Dublin then calls should be sent
to other Irish cities and towns for the purpose of forming similar
bodies; and when a sufficient number have been formed, then a national
conference should be called in order to formulate a common programme and
concerted action. The Irish trade unions, the land and labour
associations and the socialist party of Ireland could easily find a
common ground of action which would leave each free to pursue its
ordinary propaganda, to maintain its own separate existence and to serve
itself whilst serving others.

Our own hope is to see all Irish economic organisations welded into one
great body directing the whole force of labour in Ireland upon any given
point at once. But the initiation of our political union need not wait
upon the realisation of our economic or industrial union. It can begin
now. *Who will achieve the honour of first moving in that direction? Who
will bring this dream of so many minds, this hope of so many souls, to
the concrete point of a resolution to test the feelings of the bodies
interested?* We have suggested Dublin first, but it is only a
suggestion. It is open to any man anywhere who realises that the field
of our hopes and destinies in Ireland is lying crying for the hand of
the sower to nerve himself to the task.

*"England,"* said the flamboyant orator of Irish capitalism, *"has sown
dragon's teeth and they have sprung up armed men."* Shall we not say
that as capitalism has sown poverty, disease and oppression among our
Irish race so it will see spring up a crop of working class
revolutionists armed with a holy hatred of all its institutions.

If we were asked what would be the attitude of such a party towards Sinn
Fein, Home Rule, Parliamentary Parties, etc., we would reply that the
attitude of such organisations towards the party would determine its
attitude towards them. Such a party, resting upon the working class --
which is the only class capable of embracing the whole human race --
must necessarily make of itself and its class a touchstone by which all
other bodies must be tested. It must grow to the dignity of affirming
that labour is not on trial; it is civilisation that is on trial -- and
all the elements of civilisation in Ireland, as elsewhere, must stand or
fall as they are true or not to the cause of labour.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
