---
layout: default
title: 
---
# A TEST POINT

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
*The People*, Aug. 11, 1895\

L ast Sunday, Senator William Alfred Peffer delivered a lecture at
Prohibition park, Staten Island, in the course of which he stated:

"It would be unjust to take away any property from people who own it.\"

Much turns on the seemingly simple question here involved. It may even
be considered a test point that reveals both the fiber of both mind and
body, or the total absence thereof, in him who dares to approach the
social question.

In the hands of two sorts of holders, and of no other, can property be
found; either:

1.  In the hands of those with just title; or
2.  In the hands of those with none.

Taking the first, and leaving here aside all inquiry into what
constitutes "just title," but assuming that certain property is found in
hands justly entitled thereto, the justice or injustice of taking it
away is a practical one; no abstract theories need here be applied.

Men gather and organize themselves into social bodies for their
well-being. A practical purpose, redounding to the ultimate well-being
of all, lies at the bottom and is the aim of all "government" or social
systems.

This principle is no longer open to discussion; in granite letters it is
engraven in the words: "Governments are instituted among Men" to secure
"Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness\"; and "whenever any Form
of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the
People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government,
laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in
such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and
Happiness."

Upon this practical principle, even before it was so strikingly worded,
have men ever proceeded in their organization of society, and their
conception of what was "just" or "unjust" was ever controlled by that
which their experience of facts pointed out. If, in their opinion, the
doing of a certain thing would not redound to their happiness, it was
undone; if, in their opinion, it would redound to their happiness, it
was done. Facts, material conditions, experience, in short, has ever
lighted the path of justice.

Whether property, held by good title, should or should not be taken
away---in other words, whether the social system of ownership should or
should not be changed---is, accordingly, to be determined solely by the
experience gathered upon the happiness or the unhappiness that flows
from its continuance in private hands.

If its continuance brings on misery, it ceases to be just to leave it
where it is; it becomes justice to take it away.

This undeniable principle firmly kept in sight, there can be no doubt
that the system of private holdings of what is needed for production has
become injustice, and that justice now demands the taking it away.

This fact experience had pointed out as early as 1829, when the great
New Yorker Thomas Skidmore uttered the pregnant maxim:

"Inasmuch as great wealth is an instrument which is uniformly used to
extort from others their property, it ought to be taken away from its
possessor, on the same principle that a sword or a pistol may be wrested
from a robber, who shall undertake to accomplish the same effect in a
different manner.\"

Thus stands the case even with regard to property held in private hands
with just title. Can there be any question to stolen property? None
whatsoever. Now, then, the property found today in the private hands of
the capitalist class is none other than stolen property.

Labor alone produces all wealth. The capitalist class does no manner of
useful work, directly or indirectly. He is a sponge on the body social.

The original wealth that his class turned into a pistol, wherewith to
increase its hoard by robbing others, was itself stolen, by child of
some fraud or other, some fire, some failure. perchance some blacker
crime. And from that starting point, the pistol used as capital has been
enlarged, improved and perfected to do its criminal work on larger and
larger scales.

To take away the property of the capitalist class is to restore their
own to the working class, to the overwhelming majority, and thereby
reorganize society in such a form as may promote the happiness of its
members. This course has become unquestionable justice.

Neither do the abstract principles that underlie the law of property
stand in the claim that the property now held by the capitalist class,
and needed to produce the necessities of life with, should be
transferred from its present to other holders. On this subject, the keen
intellect of Benjamin Franklin shed valuable light, nor did his robust
manliness recoil before the truth. He said:

"Private property is a creature of society, and is subject to the calls
of that society, wherever its necessities shall require it, even to its
last farthing.\"

When the Populist Senator William Alfred Peffer sweepingly pronounces
unjust the taking of "any property from those who own it," he reflects
the mental and physical fiberlessness of both himself and of the
movement of which he is so ridiculous a secretion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
