---
layout: default
title: 
---
# INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM

## by Daniel DeLeon

*The Daily People*\
Jan. 20, 1913\

I n these days, when the term "Industrial Unionism\" is being played
with fast and loose;

\-- when, in some quarters, partly out of conviction, partly for
revenue, "striking at the ballot box with an axe," theft, even murder,
"sabotage," in short, is preached in its name;

\-- when, at the National Councils of the A. F. of L., lip-service is
rendered to it as a cloak under which to justify its practical denial by
the advocacy and justification of scabbery, as was done at Rochester,
this very year, by the Socialist Party man and International
Typographical delegate Max Hayes;

\-- when notoriety seekers strut in and thereby bedraggle its fair
feathers;

\-- when the bourgeois press, partly succumbing to the yellow streak
that not a member thereof is wholly free from, partly in the interest of
that confusion in which capitalist intellectuality sees the ultimate
sheet-anchor of class rule, promotes, with lurid reports, "essays" and
editorials, a popular misconception of the term;

\-- at this season it is timely that the Socialist Labor Party, the
organization which, more than any other, contributed in raising and
finally planting, in 1905, the principle and structure of Industrialism,
reassert what Industrial Unionism is, restate the problem and its
import.

Capitalism is the last expression of class rule. The economic foundation
of class rule is the private ownership of the necessaries for
production. The social structure, or garb, of class rule is the
political State"that social structure in which government is an organ
separate and apart from production, with no vital function other than
the maintenance of the supremacy of the ruling class.

The overthrow of class rule means the overthrow of the political State,
and its substitution with the Industrial Social Order, under which the
necessaries for production are collectively owned and operated by and
for the people.

Goals determine methods. The goal of social evolution being the final
overthrow of class rule, its methods must fit the goal.

As in nature, where optical illusions abound, and stand in the way of
progress until cleared, so in society.

The fact of economic despotism by the ruling class raises, with some,
the illusion that the economic organization and activity of the
despotized working class is all-sufficient to remove the ills complained
of.

The fact of political despotism by the ruling class raises, with others,
the illusion that the political organization and activity of the
despotized working class is all-sufficient to bring about redress.

The one-legged conclusion regarding economic organization and activity
fatedly abuts, in the end, in pure and simple bombism, as exemplified in
the A. F. of L., despite its Civic Federation and Militia of Christ
affiliations, as well as by the anarcho-syndicalist so-called Chicago
I.W.W.,"the Bakouninism, in short, against which the genius of Marx
struggled and warned.

The one-legged conclusion regarding political organization and activity
as fatedly abuts, in the end, in pure and simple ballotism, as already
numerously and lamentably exemplified in the Socialist Party, \--
likewise struggled and warned against by Marx as "parliamentary idiocy."

Industrial Unionism, free from optical illusions, is clear upon the goal
the substitution of the political State with the Industrial Government.
Clearness of vision renders Industrial Unionism immune both to the
Anarch self-deceit of the "No government!" slogan, together with all the
mischief that flows therefrom, and to the politician's "parliamentary
idiocy" of looking to legislation for the overthrow of class rule.

The Industrial Union grasps the principle: "No government, no
organization; no organization, no co-operative labor; no co-operative
labor, no abundance for all without arduous toil, hence, no freedom.\"
\-- Hence, the Industrial Union aims at a democratically centralized
government, accompanied by the democratically requisite "local
self-rule."

The Industrial Union grasps the principle of the political State \--
central and local authorities disconnected from productive activity; and
it grasps the requirement of the government of freedom"the central and
local administrative authorities of the productive capabilities of the
people.

The Industrial Union hearkens to the command of social evolution to cast
the nation, and, with the nation, its government, in a mold different
from the mold in which class rule casts nations and existing
governments. While class rule casts the nation, and, with the nation,
its government, in the mold of territory, Industrial Unionism casts the
nation in the mold of useful occupations, and transforms the nation's
government into the representations from these. Accordingly, Industrial
Unionism organizes the useful occupations of the land into
constituencies of future society.

In performing this all-embracing function, Industrial Unionism, the
legitimate offspring of civilization, comes equipped with all the
experience of the age.

Without indulging in the delusion that its progress will be a "dress
parade\"; and, knowing that its program carries in its fold that acute
stage of all evolutionary processes known as revolution, the Industrial
Union connects with the achievements of the revolutionary fathers of the
country, the first to frame a constitution that denies the perpetuity of
their own social system, and that, by its amendment clause, legalizes
revolution. Connecting with that great achievement of the American
revolution, fully aware that the revolution, which it is big with, being
one that concerns the masses and that needs the masses for its
execution, excludes the bare idea of conspiracy, and imperatively
commands an open and above board agitational, educational and organizing
activity; finally, its path lighted by the beacon tenet of Marx that
none but the bona fide Union can set on foot the true political party of
labor; Industrial Unionism bends its efforts to unite the working class
upon the political as well as the industrial field,"on the industrial
field because, without the integrally organized union of the working
class, the revolutionary act is impossible; on the political field,
because on none other can be proclaimed the revolutionary purpose,
without consciousness of which the Union is a rope of sand.

Industrial Unionism is the Socialist Republic in the making; and the
goal once reached, the Industrial Union is the Socialist Republic in
operation.

Accordingly, the Industrial Union is at once the battering ram with
which to pound down the fortress of Capitalism, and the successor of the
capitalist social structure itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)\
[Back the Marxists Internet Archive](../../../index.htm)
