---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Harp Strings

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, January 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the **Harp**.

I am one of the favored few privileged to play upon the strings of the
**Harp**.

Sometimes my notes will be gay, sometimes they will be sad; sometimes
they will be lively, sometimes severe. As in Ireland the sun shines
through the heaviest rainstorms, and the Irishman in the midst of his
deepest woe will broaden out in a smile at a good joke, so the writer of
these first columns of our paper will ever attune the strings of his
harp to the music of the worldwide struggle between the oppressor and
the oppressed.

And that struggle has its humorous aspects as well as its tragic. A
grave demeanor does not always betoken a serious purpose, and a man
offering up his life in martyrdom for a principle may yet march to the
scaffold with a joke upon his lips.

Sir Thomas More, scholar and philosopher, executed by Henry VIII of
England for refusing to admit the supremacy of that libertine king in
religious matters, as he laid his head upon the headsman's block asked
leave to brush his long-flowing beard out of the way of the
executioner's axe. "For," he said, "my beard at least has committed no
treason."

Yes, we are indeed fearfully and wonderfully constructed, as the
near-sighted old gentleman said when he gazed at the skeleton of a
donkey in the anatomical museum. Therefore let us laugh while we may,
though there be bitterness in our laughter; let us laugh while we may,
for capitalism has tears enough in store for all of us.

Fearfully constructed, indeed, and perhaps no race on earth more so, or
has absorbed more heterogeneous elements into itself and at the same
time given out more of the best of its blood to the upbuilding of
foreign and alien races than the Irish.

All races are mixed more or less; a pure race does not exist. In all the
world there cannot be found a territory of any size still inhabited
exclusively by the autochthonous or original inhabitants, a territory
whose records do not tell of a conquest and a settlement by alien
invading hosts.

In Europe it is generally accepted that the Basques and the Finns are
the only people of whose advent into their present location neither
history nor tradition has aught to record, who are therefore possibly an
autochthonous people.

But the Irish, to whom our capitalist politicians are forever preaching
an aggressive insularity (as if a man could not love his own without
hating his neighbor), can count as cousins and blood brothers
practically all the nations of Europe. We have received and we have
given the best and the worst.

The modern Irish race is a composite blending -- on the original Celtic
stock have been grafted shoots from all the adventurous races of the
continent.

Let us glance for a moment at the tally of the races that have mingled
and merged upon our island.

First in order we have the Celts, or Scots, or Milesians. Coming as
invaders, they found a people of whose coming or origin no record
exists. Settling in Ireland, the Celts colonized Scotland, Wales and the
Isle of Man. Between those places and Ireland for hundreds of years
there continued the closest friendly intercourse, commercial and social,
marriage and intermarriage. And down to our day the migration of the
inhabitants of these places continues almost uninterruptedly, the sole
distinction being that now it is the migrations of individuals as such
and not of clans or communities.

Next we had the Danish, or, more properly speaking, the Scandinavian,
invasion. For hundreds of years Norway, Sweden and Denmark poured their
best fighting men into Ireland, established cities and towns all around
our coast -- Dublin being their chief settlement -- took our women and
gave their own in marriage.

All around Dublin and the eastern coast the fair-haired Irish you meet
are lineal descendants of the Vikings of the north who settled and
married in Ireland, just as the dark-haired Scandinavians we often see
in America are without a doubt the sons or daughters of the Irish
maidens whom the northern pirates brought home from Ireland as the
prizes of war to their homes in Scandinavia.

Then we had the Norman invasion -- the fruitful source of all our evils
to the present day. It also brought its mixture of foreign elements.
Half Norsemen, half French, each in a generation or two becoming imbued
with the spirit of the island.

All during the centuries of struggle against England there have been
continual eruptions into Ireland on one side or the other in the
conflict of foreign soldiery, some of whom found their graves, some of
whom found wives, most of whom settled in one way or another.

After the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in France, Ireland was the
refuge ground of thousands of French Protestant families, who
established trades, founded new quarters of the cities and in a
generation or two supplied the most determined recruits to the Irish
struggle for liberty against the oppression of England.

In the Williamite war after the deposition of King James in England,
King William invaded Ireland at the head of an army composed of the
adventurers of Europe, most of whom settled in the country when the war
was over. Some became proprietors of the lands they had stolen from the
Irish; most became tenants on the lands their swords had won for their
leaders.

The common soldiers had helped to make serfs of the Irish, and in the
course of only one generation their own descendants found the yoke of
social and political serfdom upon their necks also.

Add to this record of the immigrations into Ireland, the fact that for
hundreds of years the genial English Saxon had turned an honest penny by
selling his womankind into slavery in Ireland -- an old Gaelic writer
calls them "tall, fair-haired Saxon slaves, fit to weave wool in the
mansions of a king" -- and the further fact that hundreds of English
Quakers at a more recent date fled from persecution in England to take
refuge in Ireland, where their descendants multiplied exceedingly and
waxed fat and prosperous, and you have a picture of a race dominated
indeed by the Celtic, but as composite and varied in its make-up as any
nation upon earth.

That is one side of the picture -- the inflow upon our Irish shore, the
record of the successive hosts of foreigners who came amongst us and,
finding Ireland a green and pleasant land, chose to abide there and
become bone of our bone and blood of our blood.

But there is another side, viz, the going forth of the Irish. Study the
history of Ireland and you will find that, whether the compelling cause
was love of adventure or stern necessity, this going forth of the Gael
has been ever an abiding characteristic of the race.

"The chiefs of the Gael," wails an old Gaelic poet, "always went forth,
but they never returned."

Examine our earliest chronicles and you read of Irish settlements in
Scotland, Man and Mona, and all the British Isles. When Scandinavian
hosts first conquered Iceland they found Irish books and evidence of
Irish learning and Irish settlement; as the power of Rome declined Irish
fleets and armies harried her legions retreating from the western
seaboard, and an Irish king led a marauding army through France and
Switzerland (Gaul and Helvetia) until at the head of his forces he was
killed by an avalanche in the passes of the Alps.

When on the field of Bannockburn Robert the Bruce of Scotland overthrew
the power of England, one of his chief supports was an Irish auxiliary
legion of the O'Neills. The district of Kincardine O'Neill, in
Aberdeenshire, granted as a reward for their services, still perpetuates
in its name the memory of the exploit.

Irish exiles served as soldiers in the armies of every sovereign in
Europe for hundreds of years, lived and loved and married and left
children speaking all the tongues of Europe. These soldiers, generally
the best and bravest of their generation, left to Ireland nothing but
their memory; to other countries they left the fruit of their loins and
the heirs of their spirit and manhood.

In another column you will find some authentic figures of one Irish
dispersion -- the Cromwellian. Here you find that in one generation
alone no less than 34,000 soldiers in the prime of life went from
Ireland to foreign countries. Irish soldiers, or Irishmen as a whole,
have never been famous as celibates or as averse to the joys of
matrimony, and there is no reason to believe that those in question were
any exception to the rule. In all probability the greater number married
in the countries to which they went, as the leisurely wars of the period
gave them plenty of time to do, and left a numerous progeny behind them.

Consider, oh, my compatriots, what this implies! That Polack, whose
advent into the workshop you are taught to view with such disfavor, if
you could trace his ancestry back a few hundreds of years perhaps you
would find for him an Irish ancestor who charged by the side of Hugh
O'Neill on that fateful day when the English flag went down in disaster
at the Yellow Ford. That Dago, whose excited gestures win your
disapproval so much; perhaps he has an Irish ancestor whose arms
defended the colors of Queen Gráinne O'Malley when her ships swept the
English pirates from our western coasts. And those Frenchmen -- heavens,
how many scores of thousands of the best of our race have gone to build
up and recruit the armies and population of France!

But, you ask me, why this thusness? What has all this to do with
Socialism? My dear friend, this is a lecture on Internationalism. Didn't
you notice it before? It is a lecture written in characters of blood and
fire in Irish history; a lecture on the mingling and merging and
therefore on the oneness and unity of all the races of mankind.

Let no Irishman throw a stone at the foreigner; he may hit his own
clansman. Let no foreigner revile the Irish; he may be vilifying his own
stock.

Talking of France. What do you think of the comments upon the recent
proceedings of the International Socialist Congress at Stuttgart,
especially upon the militarist resolution? I mean the resolution of the
French delegate, Hervé, calling upon the soldiers to mutiny or desert in
case of war in order to prevent the capitalist class from again
uselessly shedding the blood of the workers in murderous wars.

The comments of some American Socialists upon it have been, to say the
least, more interesting than instructive. I read the other day where one
leading American Socialist said that the militarist question was one of
those which we considered settled in America, and could not come up for
discussion in our locals though it was a live question still in Europe,
the inference being that we were so much ahead of Europe on that
question. But are we?

Almost all the speakers and writers of the same party as he whom I have
quoted agree with the Hervé resolution, or think they do. I think they
only think they do. For I do not recall that when the United States and
Spain went to war that any organized body of Socialists in America
called upon the United States soldiers to mutiny or desert. The most
they did was to pass academic resolutions on the causes of the war;
resolutions such as the most reformist body of Socialists in Europe
would have passed without a dissenting voice.

And I am quite sure that if the United States and Japan were to go to
war next year there would not be the smallest possibility of getting the
National Conventions of either the SP or SLP to pass a resolution in
favor of an active campaign to induce the United States soldiers to
mutiny or desert.

Why, then, talk of this as a settled question in America, and
inferentially condemn those who objected to the wording of the Hervé
resolution? If that resolution was put not as a general proposition, but
as a concrete one in the sense I have just spoken of (a war between the
United States and Japan), we would soon find out whether it was or not a
settled question.

The conflict between the French delegate and the Germans was not a
conflict between revolution and reaction. The Germans, all criticisms to
the contrary notwithstanding, are not reactionary. It was a conflict
between the French method of doing things and the German method.

The German is cool, cautious, patient, given to analyze all the results
of his words before uttering them, is determined and never recedes from
a vantage ground once gained. And the German Socialist is the
incarnation of the German spirit. He does not shrink from the idea of a
fight, but he is resolved to fight in his own manner and, above all, in
his own time. Hence he will adopt no resolution that might allow his
enemies to fix the time and condition of the final struggle.

The French, on the other hand, are ardent, enthusiastic, optimistic,
ready to sacrifice their all for a principle, recking little of
consequences when a truth is at stake, and willing at all times to face
a world in arms for a righteous cause.

As the Irish poet finely says:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Like the tigress of the Deluge as she heard the waters seethe,\       |
| And sprang onto the topmost peak, her cubs between her teeth;\        |
| So stood Red France, so stands Red France, her head bared to the      |
| sleet,\                                                               |
| With Paris girdled to her heart and Freedom at her feet.              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

I consider that both French and German are earnestly and determinedly
revolutionary. But they do things different ways. And one is needed as a
check upon the other.

And American Socialists do not help the matter by adopting the
Pharasaical attitude of thanking God we are not as these people.

Spailpín.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
