---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Coming Revolt in India

### Its Political and Social Causes {#its-political-and-social-causes .cr}

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, January 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, (ed.
Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom), New York 1974.

Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

> "The educated classes of India may find fault with their exclusion
> from full political rights \... But it was by force that India was
> won, and it is for force India must be governed." -- London **Times**,
> Feb. 1, 1886.

The appearance at the International Socialist Congress at Stuttgart of
an Indian delegate, voicing the aspirations of the people of India for
freedom, and the news items continually appearing in the capitalist
press of sporadic acts of revolt in that country -- harbingers of the
greater revolt now fermenting throughout that vast empire -- justify us
in placing before our readers the following brief résumé of conditions
in that country in order that it might be more possible for them to
intelligently follow events as they develop.

British rule in India, like British rule in Ireland, is a political and
social system established and maintained by the conquerors in the
interest of the conquered. So runs the legend. But there are not wanting
men and women who, strangely enough, maintain that British rule, whether
in India or Ireland, is one of the heaviest curses ever inflicted upon
an unfortunate people; that its fruits are famine, oppression and
pestilence, and that it has but one animating principle wherever found,
viz., to extract the utmost possible tribute from the labor of its
unfortunate subjects. With that aspect of British rule peculiar to
Ireland we are all in a position to be thoroughly acquainted, but there
are, unfortunately, many reasons why a like acquaintance with the
history and facts of British rule in India is impossible of attainment
to the vast majority of our fellow countrymen. Therefore the writer,
having had for some time exceptional opportunities of learning the real
position of affairs in that country, feels he is doing a service to the
cause of freedom and humanity in laying before the readers of the
**Harp** a short sketch of the predisposing causes which had led up to
the devastating famine which at present holds and the incipient
rebellion which threatens the Indian Peninsula. The first point to note
is that the reader must in discussing Indian affairs at once rid himself
of all the extravagant ideas about the 'wealth of India' with which the
reading public have been familiarized through the writings of ignorant
English romancers, avaricious English adventurers or unscrupulous
English statesmen. India is, in reality, one of the poorest, if not the
poorest, of all the countries in the world. Her immense population live
from generation to generation in a state of such chronic misery that
death from actual hunger excites no comment whatever except when, as in
the present famine, their numbers swell so that it is feared even the
patient Hindoo may refuse to bear it longer. Thus when we read that the
tribute extracted from India by the imperial government in payment of
home charges, pensions to retired officials, remittances, contributions
to imperial expenditure, etc., reaches an annual total of from 20 to 27
million pounds sterling, the sum, though large in itself, does not at
first appear so exorbitant when levied on a population of two hundred
million people. It is only when we are aware of the average daily income
of the people upon whose labor this tax is levied that we begin to
understand how it is that the 'inestimable benefits of British rule' (?)
have been so potent a factor in working out the destruction of this
people that the failure of a single harvest is enough to bring upon them
all the horrors of famine.

The wages of the agricultural laborers of India -- where 70 per cent of
the population derive their sole subsistence directly from the
cultivation of the soil -- are not such as to induce any very
extravagant mode of living or to fire the imagination of a glutton. In
Bihar, the northwest provinces, the greater portion of the Deccan and
Oudh, the average remuneration of the laborer is certainly not more than
one anna, six pie, or one and one-half pence (three cents) per day. In
some portions of East Bengal the wage sometimes rises to three pence
(six cents), or four pence (eight cents) per day -- an almost princely
remuneration. It should also be remembered that the entire native
population is excluded from all share in the government of their
country, except in the most menial positions, and that on the other hand
the Indian Civil Service is entirely manned by Englishmen, whose
salaries are the highest in the world for such services. Thus the
poorest people under the sun are taxed to support the wealthiest (and
most insolent) official class. It might be interesting, in order to
bring the matter more vividly before the reader, to give a few instances
of the disparity of means between official England in India and the
unfortunate people upon whom it is quartered. The late Professor
Fawcett, in an article upon a proposed loan to India, called attention
to a few items illustrating the extravagant expenditure of Anglo-Indians
when the cost of such extravagance can be saddled upon the Indian
people. Two of these items, viz., £1,200 for outfit and passage of a
member of the Governor-General's Council, and £2,450 for outfit and
passage of the Bishops of Calcutta and Bombay, convey their own lesson
so well that no words of mine could possibly add point to their
eloquence. Ten million pounds have been spent by the imperial government
in erecting for their military garrisons regimental quarters so
luxuriously equipped that one Anglo-Indian writer, General Strachey,
enthusiastically declared "our soldiers' barracks are now beyond
comparison the finest in the world," whilst Florence Nightingale, a
thoroughly impartial witness, wrote: "We do not care for the people of
India; the saddest sight in the East, nay, probably in the world, is the
peasant our Indian empire." "We suppose," says a young Indian writer,
"it is inseparable from an alien rule that the living of an English
soldier should be of primary importance." And again, "ten million pounds
wrung from the hard earnings of semi-starved dwellers in mud hovels for
the rearing of 'palatial' barracks. Surely we should pause before we
congratulate ourselves on this." We are constantly informed by all
Anglo-Indian writers that the English in India have been mighty
instruments of Divine Providence for winning the land from anarchy and
oppression, bringing it within the area of civilization and order; and,
finally, of introducing its people to all the inestimable benefits of
modern civilization.

We Irish are, of course, well enough acquainted with the ways of English
officialdom to be able to discount to a certain extent the brightly
colored reports of progress emanating from such sources, and they
constitute the sole medium by which Indian news is allowed to filter
through to the reading public. But it would, nevertheless, be a mistake
to suppose that the present writer denies that progress has been made in
India under British rule. The only question is, in what degree is that
progress due to British rule, and in what degree is it that progress
which, under any circumstances, would have been made by an intellectual
people with a continuity of literary and philosophic activity stretching
back for two thousand years and more? We are told that the English
rulers of India were the first to abolish the hideous custom of suttee,
by which the Hindoo widow was forced to sacrifice herself on the funeral
pyre of her deceased husband.

But an educated Hindoo, Ram Mohun Roy, greatly venerated by his
countrymen, had begun a crusade against the custom ten years before the
edict was first formulated in 1829. It is more than probable that the
exertions of this Indian patriot would eventually have been successful
even without English intervention, which at the most perhaps, hastened
the desired consummation.

The vast irrigation works established throughout India are also often
alluded to as specimens of the advance of civilization in the East,
largely resultant from the paternal efforts of the English government on
behalf of its Indian subjects.

Here again the reader is apt to draw erroneous conclusions and picture
to himself the government of England laboriously instructing the
ignorant Indian natives in the functions and uses, theory and practice
of irrigation works. But the remorseless hand of history rudely shatters
all belief in the fidelity to truth of any such picture. So far from
such irrigation works bejng the product of English enterprise or genius
they are, as a matter of fact, only feeble and halting imitations of the
magnificent works and public enterprise of the former Mohammedan rulers
whom the English have supplanted. Dr. Spry, writing in 1837, on **Modern
India**, declared:

> It is in the territory of the independent native chiefs and princes
> that great and useful works are found and maintained.
>
> In our territories the canals, bridges and reservoirs, wells, groves,
> etc., the works of our predecessors from revenues expressly
> appropriated to such undertakings, are going fast to decay.

It is noteworthy also that while the former rulers of India neither
expected nor accepted any return for the money they voluntarily expended
in their irrigation and other public works, the English government could
only be induced to embark on such enterprises by the hopes of reaping
enormous profits therefrom- hopes which have never been realized. Lord
Lawrence in a letter to Lord Cranborne stated that the general opinion
held that these works would yield an average profit of 25, 50 or even
100 per cent. To the no small chagrin of the ruling classes of India
these high expectations were doomed to disappointment, the full measure
of which is revealed in the words of Lord Salisbury, valuable as a no
doubt unwilling tribute to British official incompetence and to the
superior engineering genius of their predecessors.

> "The irrigation works that have been carried out," he said, "if they
> had for their basis the former works of native rulers, have in many
> instances been a financial success. But \... when we have begun the
> projects of irrigation for ourselves we have not, I believe, in any
> instance the desired result of a clean balance sheet."

Will the reader please contrast this confession of bungling
incompetence, allied to a greed io pay dividends, with the conduct of
Runjeet Singh, the 'Lion of the Punjab', whom the English have always
vilified as a barbarian and a tyrant, but of whom Marshman tells us that
"he always advanced money free of interest to his peasantry for the
purposes of irrigation." That he was no exception to the rule is amply
borne out by the following significant statement in Arnold's
**Dalhousie**: "The Musselman rulers were bold engineers in this
respect; not only did they cover India with fine roads, shaded with
trees in places which are now tiger walks, but they remembered the
Arabic proverb that 'water is the earth's wealth.' The irrigation works
were so benevolently attended to that the fees for wells and artificial
reservoirs were always deducted from the produce of every village before
the government claim was paid." [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} In almost every detail
of Indian administration the same tale remains to be told.

 

### Connolly's Footnote

[1.](#f1){#n1} Sir Edwin Arnold, **The Marquis of Dalhousie's
Administration of British India** (Saunders, Otley & Co., London, 1862).

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 29.7.2007
