---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# A Political Party of the Workers

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, January 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the advent of an Irish Socialist paper in the labor movement of
America will come of necessity a host of questions and questioners upon
the attitude of the proprietors of that paper toward the political
parties at present in the field for Socialism. Such questions are
unavoidable, and it is therefore best that they be faced at once at the
outset without delay or equivocation.

Let it be noted therefore that the **Harp** is the official organ of the
Irish Socialist Federation in America, and that that body was founded
with the intention, expressed and desired, of spreading the light of
Socialism amongst the working class Irish in this country, and that,
recognizing that the existence of two political parties of Socialism has
had in the past and has now a confusing effect upon the minds of the
American working class, the founders of the Federation recognized that
it would be worse than folly to make allegiance to one or the other of
these political divisions a test of membership in the newly founded camp
of Irish Socialists in America. The Federation is not founded for
political action, it is founded for propaganda; it is not in existence
to fashion a political machine, it is in existence to present Socialism
as a historical development from capitalism and as the only remedy for
the wage slavery of the workers. The task of presenting the Socialist
side as against the side of the capitalists, with all their powerful
allies and weapons, is a big enough job for us without also taking part
in the campaigns of slander which form the stock in trade of the
American Socialists when they condescend to refer to each other. In
their mutual recriminations many wrong things have been said, many right
things have been wrongly said, and we are convinced that if American
Socialists in general had been more solicitous in finding and
emphasizing the points they had in common, and less eager to stretch the
importance of the points on which they differed, a great party -- great
in unity in essentials, great in numbers -- might long ere this have
been built up in America. And until that party does appear the ISF will
confine its work to the making of Socialists; let its recruits when made
choose their own political affiliations.

But, it may be said, since the Irish comrades deplore the existing
division, have they no suggestion to offer whereby it may be ended? Is
it not certain that as you make recruits to Socialism, and those
recruits choose their own political affiliations, that in course of time
their differing choices will result in bringing into the Federation the
disputes which divide Socialists outside? That is true, and therefore it
is to our interest as well as in conformity with our desires to find
some common ground upon which in our opinion earnest revolutionary
Socialists could meet to combine their forces in battle with the common
enemy.

The common ground of action we favor is one for which a strong sentiment
already exists in the rank and file of both existing parties. It has
been adopted and endorsed by practically all the non-English using
federations of Socialists in America, and has therefore strong organized
forces already behind it, and it would, as a magnet, draw unto itself
all the true proletarian Socialists and weld them into an irresistible
force. A common ground of action to be effectual for its purpose cannot
emanate from either SP or SLP; it cannot be furnished by unity
conferences, no matter how earnest the conferees are; the ghost of all
the hatreds and jealousies aroused by the past years of strife will
perpetually rise between the most united unity conference and the
realization of its hopes, and, finally, it cannot be realized by an
amalgamation of the existing parties. There are too many leaders, save
the mark! Too many 'saviors of the working class' whose reputations have
been built upon disunion; too many petty personal ambitions which might
be endangered did the rank and file have an opportunity to know and
understand one another; and too much fear that a general reunion might
mean a general housecleaning, and the consequent dumping upon the
garbage heap of many great lights whose personal predominance is dearer
to them than the power of the movement. Some men in the Socialist
movement on both sides would rather have a party of ten men who
unquestioningly accepted their dictum and called their blind faith
'democracy' than a party of half a million whose component elements
dared to think and act for themselves. Unquestionably the realization of
unity must have as its necessary concomitant the acceptance of the fact
that the interests of the movement are greater than and superior to the
prejudices or rivalries of its leaders.

What and where, then, is this common ground we have spoken of? As we
have already stated, the ISF is pledged to no political party, but this
neutrality on the political field is not extended to the economic.
There, we believe, an assumption of neutrality would be a crime on our
part. Between, on the one hand, the new economic organization, the
Industrial Workers of the World, which prepares and organizes the
administrative framework of society in the future, and at the same time
furnishes the only effective method of resistance against present-day
encroachments of the master class, and on the other hand the old-style
pure and simple trade unionism of the AF of L with its system of
dividing the working class and its professed belief in the identity of
interests between Capital and Labor, between these two economic
organizations our choice is as plain and unmistakable as between
Socialism and Capitalism; indeed, it is the same proposition presented
in different terms. And as we believe that all working class Socialists
must realize that their place is in the only real economic organization
truly worthy of the name of union, the IWW, so we believe that the same
body has it in its power to solve the problem of Socialist unity. On the
day that the IWW launches its own political party it will put an end to
all excuse for two Socialist parties and open the way for a real and
effective unification of the revolutionary forces. To it will flock all
the real proletarians, all the loyal-hearted working class whom distrust
and suspicion have so long kept divided: it will be the real Political
Party of the Workers -- the weapon by which the working class will
register the decrees which its economic army must and shall enforce.

We do not say this will end forever all fear of the existence of two
parties calling themselves Socialists, but it will end all possibilty of
two revolutionary Socialist parties claiming the allegiance of the
working class at the same moment. Compromisers and schemers will still
erect parties to serve their personal ends and satiate their lust for
being worshipped; intellectual mannikins will still perch themselves
upon the shoulders of the workers and imagining their high altitude is
the result of transcendent ability on their part will call the world to
witness how great they are; but they will be deprived of their power to
delude the real revolutionist by the simple fact of the existence of a
political party of Socialists dominated by and resting upon the economic
movement of the working class.

This is our hope, our proposed solution of the problem of divided
forces, and on the day that that hope is consummated if anyone looks
around for the class-conscious Irish workers he will, we believe, find
them alert and determined at the head of the fighters.

Ollamh Fódhla.

 

PS -- We invite correspondence on this point. All letters must be
limited to one column. -- Editor.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
