---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Political Action

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Harp**, July 1908.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, (ed.
Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom), New York 1974.

Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In our editorial of last month we dealt with the subject of Industrial
Unionism, and pointed out that that method of organizing the Working
Class provided the only really effective constructive work by which the
daily and hourly conflict between the capitalist and the worker could be
utilised to generate the steam necessary to carry the Social Revolution
through, as well as to provide the forms of administration for the new
Industrial Republic. In this issue we propose to say a few words about
the structure and functions of Socialist political parties, as such. And
as we have not seen anywhere a calm analysis of the different
conceptions of political revolutionary action, such as we intend to
present, we hope that our readers will extend to us in this instance
also the patience and courtesy due and befitting among men and women
devoting their lives to the work of emancipation.

The various Socialist parties, the sight of whom contending and
attacking each other is so often a source of joy to the capitalist
philistine, although they possess a common ideal, and a common concrete
object to be worked for do not always possess a common belief in the
means by which a political party to attain their end can be created. In
this divergence of belief on the question of how to build a
revolutionary political party is to be found the real reason for the
warring political organisations of Socialism rather than in any
divergence of belief in fundamentals. Of course as a rule neither set
will admit this; each, with all the zealotry of partisans will rather
ascribe the existence of another party to the wicked designs of their
opponents; if not to the machinations of the capitalist class. But such
wildly reckless statements may be safely brushed aside. Whatever unclean
or compromising elements may creep into a movement after it becomes
popular it is fair to assume that Socialist parties are at their
inception not very likely to attract any but the idea list or genuine
revolutionist.

There are two distinct and opposing ideas as to how best to build a
political party to do the political work of Socialism, and an
understanding of these two ideas will serve to enable the reader to
grasp the political situation better than listening to any amount of
heated debate on the subject by the partisans of either. These two ideas
may be briefly stated thus:

I. That the work of the Social Revolution can only be accomplished by
men and women with a clear understanding of the economics of capitalism,
that therefore a clear and definite program is the first essential, and
in the interest of maintaining that definite program of the party it is
imperative to expel out of the said party all speakers, writers, or even
members who are not in the strictest harmony with its 'clean cut'
principles, and

II\. That the work of the Social Revolution depends in the last analysis
upon the growth of class-consciousness amongst the working class, that
therefore the chief task of a Socialist political party is to educate
and direct that class consciousness along correct lines, that in order
to do so allowance must continually be made for the gradual nature of
its development, and for the stages thereof, that therefore it must be
made possible for all who have accepted the central principles of common
ownership to become members of the party irrespective of their knowledge
or lack of knowledge of economics, and that the development of the
political struggle of the Socialist movement must be depended upon to
clear the minds of the members rather than any process of weeding out.

We think that we are right in outlining these two conceptions of the
process of upbuilding a political party as the fundamental, underlying
ideas which in practice have produced in the past warring parties of
Socialism where harmony was looked for and demanded by the working
class. The thoughtful unprejudiced reader wile perceive that here is a
more fundamental and at the same time more creditable source of disunity
than is to be found in the usual allegations of 'dictation and
despotism' on the one side, or 'compromise and confusion', as freely
alleged on the other. On the other hand it must be pointed out that, as
was almost inevitable human nature being as it is, each of those parties
tended to develop traits which seemed to verify the accusations of their
opponents.

Dictation and despotism, interfering with the opinions of members on
mere matters of party administration very soon followed upon the heels
of the attempts of the first party to purify its ranks by expulsion, and
compromise for the sake of getting votes at times treads closely in the
wake of toleration and broadminded treatment of unfledged recruits.

In Europe the solution of this problem of uniting the political parties
of Socialism has been sought in a unity which embraces both schools of
thought and while not concealing their utter divergence provides in
press and platform a means for discussion, as members, of the things
that divide them, and insists that all must recognize the voice of the
majority of the party as supreme. To some this may seem as a virtual
surrender of its position by the first party, since it abandons -- its
insistence upon the duty of a Socialist party to expel all those who are
not 'clear' upon tactics, or are not orthodox.

Thus the S.L.P. when its officers declared for unity, virtually went on
record in favor of submitting all differences between Socialists to a
majority vote, and admitted that there was no longer any reason for its
existence as a party.

In a sense that is true. It is no doubt a vindication of the policy of
toleration advocated by the second party. But this is in many cases
traceable to other causes also. It is traceable to the fact that within
recent years there has grown up in the Socialist movement a change of
opinion relative to the functions of a political party. That change was
indicated in our editorial in the June issue. Among many of the
adherents of the clear cut policy the conviction has gained ground that
the political party which exists for the fight at the ballot box is
primarily and essentially an agitational and destructive force, and that
the real constructive work of the Social Revolution must come from an
economic industrial organization. From this conviction two currents of
thought have developed. One, that since the economic organization was
the constructive one, political action was unnecessary; another, that
since the political party was not to accomplish the revolution but only
to lead the attack upon the political citadel of capitalism, there no
longer existed the same danger in the unclearness of its membership, nor
compelling necessity for insisting upon its purification. In other words
that Socialism at the ballot box is the dress parade of the army of
Labor, Industrial Unionism is the same army with its service clothes on,
ready for work.

From all this it is our belief there will evolve, if there has not in
principle already evolved, as the fighting army of the workers of this
country:

> One Socialist party embracing all shades and conceptions of Socialist
> political thought.
>
> One Socialist Industrial organization drilling the working class for
> the supreme mission of their class -- the establishment of the
> Worker's Republic.

Between these two organizations -- the advance guard and the main army
of labor -- there should be no war, and no endorsement. As travellers to
a common goal they should not quarrel, and the dear bought experience of
the past has taught us that when political organizations endorse
economic, tacitly or otherwise, they always exact a heavy price for
their action, just as when economic organizations have endorsed
political, it always cost the former their soul and their integrity.

Finally, we give it as our opinion that until the economic organisation
of the workers has attained a power in control of the workshop and
therefore in the nation, equal to that attained by the capitalist class
before they raised the revolutionary standard in England, America and
France, working class politics are but preliminary skirmishing, and that
therefore the broadest, most tolerant political party of Socialism may
be made useful as a teacher as long as it is kept distinct from the
industrial organization and therefore unable to hamper the movements of
the latter when, as the regular army of organised labor, it forms its
line of battle for the final attack.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 11.8.2003
