---
layout: default
title: 
---
Karl Korsch 1946

### A Non-Dogmatic Approach to Marxism

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[First Published]{.info}: in *Politics* magazine (New York, May 1946);\
[Source]{.info}: [Bureau of Public
Secrets](http://www.bopsecrets.org/);\
[Transcribed]{.info}: by [Andy
Blunden](../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/ablunden.htm), for
marxists.org 2003.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The documents here assembled are not meant as a contribution to the
discussion for or against Marxism that has been conducted in this
magazine for so many months. There is no use in discussing controversial
points in any social theory (not even in that social theory which is
commonly described as religion) unless such discussion is part of an
existing social struggle. There must be several possibilities of action
for the party, group, or class to which the social theory in question
refers. The difference may concern social aims, tactics, forms of
organization, or the definition of the enemy, of allies, neutrals, or
the master plan (if any) to be based on one or another way of judging a
given social situation or development. Yet the result of any such
materialist discussion must in all cases "make a difference" in respect
to the actual behavior not of an individual nor of a small group of
people, but of a veritable collectivity, a social mass. In this
materialist sense, it is not even sure that the particular social theory
called Marxism has ever been the subject of a discussion in this
country.

Various people have been asked from time to time why they are, or why
they are not, Marxists, just as they might have been asked why they
believe, or do not believe, in God, in science, or morality; in race,
class, democracy, victory, peace, or the impending destruction of all
civilization by the atom bomb. There has also been some philological and
interpretative effort spent on settling the question of "what Marx
really meant." Last but not least, there has been far too much of that
most senseless of all discussions which aimed at deciding which
particular shade of the theories of Marx, Engels and the several
generations of their disciples up to Lenin, Stalin, or, let us say,
Leontov, represents the most orthodox version of the Marxist doctrine.
Or, one step higher, which of the various methods used at different
times by Hegel, Marx, and the Marxists truly deserves to be called the
genuine "dialectical" method.

As against that altogether dogmatic approach which had already
sterilized the revolutionary Marxist theory in all but a few phases of
its century-long development in Europe, and by which the attempted
extension of Marxism to the US has been blighted from the very
beginning, it is here proposed to revindicate the critical, pragmatic,
and activistic element which for all this has never been entirely
eliminated from the social theory of Marx and which during the few short
phases of its predominance has made that theory a most efficient weapon
of the proletarian class struggle.

The documents reprinted below result in part from an earlier attempt at
reemphasizing just this element of the Marxist theory -- an attempt that
was made by the present writer and a group of associates in Germany in
the early thirties and which was then temporarily interrupted by the
anti-Marxist violence of the Hitler government. Of the four documents
two date still farther back to similar attempts that had been made in
1894 and 1902 by such non-dogmatic Marxists as Lenin and Georges Sorel.
They were used as models and as points of departure by the group of 1931
when it started on its new attempt at de-dogmatizing and reactivating
the Marxian theory.

The Lenin piece of 1894 (*Document III*) was directed against a book in
which the economic and sociological theories of the famous Narodniki
theorist, Mikhailovski, had been critically attacked by the then
"Marxist" (later, bourgeois) writer, Peter Struve. Of this important
work of Lenin, unfortunately only a small part has appeared in English
(*Selected Works of Lenin,* vol. I) and that part does not include the
chapter from which we have taken the piece printed below. The particular
interest of our document lies in the fact that just on that occasion
Lenin, himself a materialist critic of the idealist "subjectivism" of
the Narodniki, found himself in a position in which he had to extend his
materialist criticism, with equal fervor, to the abstract and lifeless
"objectivism" of Struve. In order to make Lenin's argument fully
understandable, we quote the sentence of Struve which aroused Lenin's
ire. Struve had found fault with Mikhailovski's opinion that there are
"no unsurmountable historical tendencies which serve as starting points
as well as obligatory limits to the purposive activity of the individual
and the social groups." Lenin is quick in discovering the
non-revolutionary implications of this Struvean comment on Mikhailovski.
"This," says Lenin, "is the language of an objectivist, and not that of
a Marxist (materialist)." And from this point of departure, Lenin
embarks on his demonstration of the important differences which separate
the principles of the "Objectivists" on the one hand, from those of the
"Marxists" (Materialists) on the other hand.

*Document IV* tries to bring out more distinctly the non-dogmatic
character of Lenin's antithesis to Struve's objectivistic version of the
traditional Marxist doctrine. For this purpose and for a series of
further experiments in loosening up and de-dogmatizing certain parts of
the Marxist theory, the group of 1931 made use of the similar experiment
made by Sorel in 1902. According to Sorel, the six theses reproduced in
*Document II* below result from a process of "extracting the strictly
scientific elements of history from the theory of historical
materialism." In this critical reformulation of historical materialism
by one of the most scientific and most pragmatically minded interpreters
of Marxism in modern times, the least important point is, in the view of
the writer, Sorel's special emphasis on the role of legal concepts and
the legal profession. What really matters is the attempt to clarify the
various concatenations that exist between the general terms of the
materialist theory and of which the law and its professional exploiters
seem to be only one of a number of possible illustrations. Most
important, however, is the form in which Sorel has changed into a
positive inspiration for unfettered scientific research what till then
must have seemed to many historians a somewhat authoritarian laying down
of the rules of writing history. (A different impression might have been
derived, perhaps, from a closer acquaintance with the remarkably free
application that had been made of the new "critical and materialist
method" by Marx himself. Yet the new weapon of the revolutionary class
struggle had already lost much of its critical edge in the hands of the
first generation of the Marxist scholars at the time of Sorel's writing.
And it is no secret that since then revolutionary Marxism has lost out
completely against the "stabilizing" influences that were expressed
theoretically in the growth of the old and the new Marx orthodoxy --
from Kautsky to Stalin. So the Sorelian operation has to be performed
once more.)

Finally, we have added a document which is meant to do for the famous
"dialectical method" what Sorel and Lenin did for historical
materialism. The "Theses on Hegel and Revolution" translated in
*Document I* were first written in German for the centenary of Hegel's
death, in 1931. As will be seen, they approach from a totally opposite
direction the whole tangle of difficulties which beset the problem of
the Hegelian dialectic and its (modified or unmodified) use by Marx and
Engels. Dialectics is here considered not as a kind of super-logic, that
is, not as a set of rules to be applied by individual thinkers in the
process of thinking -- just like ordinary logic, and distinguished from
the latter only in the sense in which so-called "higher" mathematics is
distinguished from those simpler and, in fact, long outdated rules which
are taught as "elementary mathematics" in our schools today. It is
treated rather as a number of characteristic phenomena that can be
observed from without in the sequence and development of thoughts in a
given historical period.

The first "non-dogmatic" result of this changed approach is that a man
does not become a revolutionary by studying dialectics but, on the
contrary, the revolutionary change in human society affects among other
things also the way in which the people of a particular period tend to
produce and to exchange their thoughts. Materialist dialectics, then, is
the historical investigation of the manner in which in a given
revolutionary period, and during the different phases of that period,
particular social classes, groups, individuals form and accept new words
and ideas. It deals with the often unusual and remarkable forms in which
they connect their own and other people's thoughts and cooperate in
disintegrating the existing closed systems of knowledge and in replacing
them by other and more flexible systems or, in the most favorable case,
by no system at all but by a new and completely unfettered movement of
free thought passing rapidly through the changing phases of a more or
less continuous or discontinuous development.

Secondly, it appears by implication (from theses II and III) that there
is no reason to boast of the fact that both Marx and Lenin, after a
first violent criticism and repudiation of the old Hegelian "dialectic,"
have returned at a later stage, in a mood of disenchantment and partial
frustration, to a very little qualified acceptance of that same
philosophical method that, at its best, had reflected the bourgeois
revolution of an earlier period. Here as in many other respects, the
unfettered development of the Marxian theory does not point backwards to
old bourgeois philosophies and ideas, but forward to a non-dogmatic and
non-authoritarian, scientific and activistic use of the Marxian as well
as all other theoretical formulations of the collective experience of
the working class.

#### DOCUMENT I

[]{#1931}

### Theses on Hegel and Revolution

Karl Korsch, 1931

I. The Hegelian philosophy and its dialectical method cannot be
understood without taking into account its relationship to revolution.

1\) It originated historically from a revolutionary movement.

2\) It fulfilled the task of giving to that movement its conceptual
expression.

3\) Dialectical thought is revolutionary even in its form:

a\) turning away from the immediately given -- radical break with the
hitherto existing -- "standing on the head" -- new beginning;\
b) principle of contradiction and negation;\
c) principle of permanent change and development -- of the "qualitative
leap."

4\) Once the revolutionary task is out of the way and the new society
fully established, the revolutionary dialectical method inevitably
disappears from its philosophy and science.

II\. The Hegelian philosophy and its dialectical method cannot be
criticized without taking into account its relationship to the
particular historical conditions of the revolutionary movement of the
time.

1\) It is a philosophy not of revolution in general, but of the
bourgeois revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries.

2\) Even as a philosophy of the bourgeois revolution, it does not
reflect the entire process of that revolution, but only its concluding
phase. It is thus a philosophy not of the revolution, but of the
restoration.

3\) This twofold historical nature of the Hegelian dialectic appears
formally in a twofold limitation of its revolutionary character.

a\) The Hegelian dialectic though dissolving all pre-existing fixations,
results in the end in a new fixation: it becomes an absolute itself and,
at the same time, "absolutizes" the whole dogmatic content of the
Hegelian philosophical system that had been based on it.\
b) The revolutionary point of the dialectical approach is ultimately
bent back to the "circle," that is, to a conceptual reinstatement of the
immediately given reality, to a reconciliation with that reality, and to
a glorification of existing conditions.

III\. The attempt made by the founders of scientific socialism to
salvage the high art of dialectical thinking by transplanting it from
the German idealist philosophy to the materialist conception of nature
and history, from the bourgeois to the proletarian theory of revolution,
appears, both historically and theoretically, as a transitory step only.
What has been achieved is a theory not of the proletarian revolution
developing on its own basis, but of a proletarian revolution that has
just emerged from the bourgeois revolution; a theory which therefore in
every respect, in content and in method, is still tainted with the
birthmarks of Jacobinism, that is, of the revolutionary theory of the
bourgeoisie.

#### DOCUMENT II

[]{#1902}

### Theses on the Materialistic Conception of History

Submitted to the 1902 Convention of the Société Française de
Philosophie,\
by Georges Sorel

1\) For investigating a period (of history) it is of great advantage to
find out how society is divided in classes; the latter are distinguished
by the essential legal concepts connected with the way in which incomes
are formed in each group.

2\) It is advisable to dismiss all atomistic explanations; it is not
worthwhile to inquire how the links between individual psychologies are
formed. What can be observed directly are those links themselves, that
which refers to the masses. The thoughts and activities of individuals
are fully understandable only by their connection with the movements of
the masses.

3\) Much light is thrown on history if one is able to clarify the
concatenation between the system of productive forces, the organization
of labor, and the social relations that rule production.

4\) Religious and philosophical doctrines have traditional sources; yet
in spite of their tendency to organize themselves in systems totally
closed to all outside influences, they are usually somehow connected
with the social conditions of the period. From this viewpoint, they
appear as mental reflections of the conditions of life and often as
attempts to explain history by a doctrine of faith.

5\) The history of a doctrine will be fully clarified only when it can
be connected with the history of a social group that makes it its task
to develop and apply that particular doctrine (influence of the legal
profession).

6\) Assuming that revolutions do not have the effect to make possible a
greater extension of the productive forces that are obstructed in their
development by an outdated legislation, it is still of the greatest
importance to examine a social transformation from this point of view
and to investigate how the legal ideas are transformed under the
pressure of a universally felt need for economic emancipation.

#### DOCUMENT III

[]{#1894}

### Materialism Versus Objectivism

Lenin, 1894

The objectivist speaks of the necessity of the given historical process;
the materialist (Marxist) determines exactly the given economic form of
society and the antagonistic relations arising from it. The objectivist,
in proving the necessity of a given series of facts, always runs the
risk to get into the position of an apologist of those facts; the
materialist reveals the antagonisms of classes and thereby determines
his own position. The objectivist speaks of "unsurmountable historical
tendencies"; the materialist speaks of the class which "directs" the
given economic order and thus, at the same time, brings forth one form
or another of resistance by the other classes. Thus, the materialist is,
on the one hand, more consistent than the objectivist and reaches a more
thorough and more comprehensive objectivism. He is not satisfied with
pointing to the necessity of the process, but clearly states the
economic form of society underlying the content of just that process,
and the particular class determining just that necessity. In our case,
for example, the materialist would not content himself with referring to
"unsurmountable historical tendencies"; he would point to the existence
of certain classes which determine the content of the given order and
exclude any possibility of a solution but by the action of the producers
themselves. On the other hand, the materialist principle implies, as it
were, the element of party, by committing itself, in the evaluation of
any event, to a direct and open acceptance of the position of a
particular social group.

#### DOCUMENT IV

[]{#1931a}

### On an Activistic Form of Materialism and on the Class and Partisan Character of Science

Karl Korsch, 1931

1\) There is little use in confronting the subjectivist doctrine of the
decisive role of the individual in the historical process with another
and equally abstract doctrine that speaks of the necessity of a given
historical process. It is more useful to explore, as precisely as
possible, the antagonistic relations that arise from the material
conditions of production of a given economic form of society for the
social groups participating in it.

2\) Much light is thrown on history by countering every alleged
necessity of a historical process with the following questions: a)
necessary by the action of which classes? b) which modifications will be
necessary in the action of the classes faced by the alleged historical
necessity?

3\) In the investigation of the antagonistic relations existing between
the various classes and class fractions of an economic form of society,
it is advisable to consider not only the material but also the
ideological forms in which such antagonistic relations occur within the
given economic form of society.

4\) The content of a doctrine (theoretical system, any set of sentences
and operational rules used for the statement and application of a theory
or belief) cannot be clarified so long as it is not connected with the
content of a given economic form of society and with the material
interests of definite classes of that society.

5\) There is no need to assume that the objectivity of a doctrine will
be impaired by its methodical connection with the material interests and
practical activities of definite classes.

6\) Whenever a doctrine is not connected with the material interests of
a definite class by its own proponents, one will often be justified in
assuming that the proponents of such doctrine aim at defending by it the
interests of the ruling classes of the society in question. In these
cases the theoretical uncovering of the class function of a given
doctrine is equivalent to a practical adoption of the cause of the
classes oppressed in that society.

7\) From this state of affairs, and from its theoretical recognition,
springs the objective and subjective partisan nature of science.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Karl Korsch Archive](../index.htm)
