---
layout: default
title: 
---
#### No. 12. ISSUED BY THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE OF REPUBLICANS AND INDEPENDENTS, NO. 35 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK. GEO. WALTON GREEN, Secretary.   GEO. WM. CULPER, President.

# To Business Men

A SPECIMEN OF MR. BLAINE'S DIPLOMACY---IS HE A SAFE MAN TO TRUST AS
PRESIDENT?

BY D. DE LEON, ESQ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} Summer 1884\
[Brovided by:]{.info} The Socialist Labor Party of America's Daniel De
Leon Library, first published in pamphlet form by the National Committee
of Republicans and Independents (Mugwumps), New York, September of 1884\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [Robert
Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org) of the [The Socialist Labor Party of
America](http://slp.org), Editor of *The People* & [David
Walters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm)\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive (DDLIA)
presents this work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of
America. For more information on reproducing these works, please contact
the [SLP](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The powers conferred by the Constitution upon the Executive enable him
to shape the foreign policy of this nation almost independent of the
Legislature. A scheming and unscrupulous President can involve the
country in serious complications, commit it to an unwise policy, or at
least render its foreign diplomacy ridiculous before Congress may have
an opportunity to check him.

Of all the questions that our Department of State had to deal with in
the year 1881, during the Secretaryship of Mr. Blaine, the most weighty
for our country and continent were those growing out of the war in which
Chili, Peru and Bolivia were then engaged; and all those questions
centered around the important point of the recognition of the government
of Dr. Francisco Garcia Calderon, whom a small assemblage of residents
at Lima and Callao attempted to put up as President of Peru after
Piérola, the Dictator, and the only recognized government of Peru, had
left the Capital upon the approach of the Chilian forces.

In May of that year Mr. Blaine sent the following dispatch to Mr.
Christiancy, the United States Minister at Lima:

No. 143 Department of State,

Washington,

May 9, 1881

Sir---In your last dispatch, No. -, you informed this Department that
the Chilian Government refused absolutely to recognize General Piérola
as representing the civil authority in Peru, and that Señor Calderon was
at the head of a provisional government.

If the Calderon Government is supported by the character and
intelligence of Peru and is really endeavoring to restore constitutional
government with a view both to order within and negotiation with Chili
for peace, you may recognize it as the existing provisional government,
and render what aid you can by advice and good offices to that end.

Mr. Elmore has been received by me as the confidential agent of such
provisional government.

I am, etc.,

James G. Blaine.

As Mr. Blaine's reception of Mr. Elmore, as the agent of Calderon left
Mr. Christiancy no choice but to recognize Calderon; as the recognition
of Calderon by the United States was a step of transcendent importance
to the future of the three belligerents, as it brought the United States
on the verge of a foreign war, and as Mr. Blaine leaves in blank the No.
of the last dispatch in which he says Mr. Christiancy informed the
Department that Se.or Calderon was at the head of a provisional
government, it is of interest to look back over Mr. Christiancy's
correspondence from the time Calderon appeared upon the political stage
and ascertain which in fact were the views communicated to the
Department by Mr. Christiancy regarding the status of the Calderon
government down to May 9, 1881, when Mr. Blaine authorized his
recognition.

On February 25, 1881, dispatch No. 245, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

\* \* \* "I have the honor to inform you that since then the Chilian
authorities here have definitely determined not to treat with Piérola,
at present the only recognized government of Peru, recognized by all the
other governments who have representatives here, and by Chili herself by
treating with him at Arica.

"A movement has therefore been initiated among some of the leading
citizens of Lima and Callao, and encouraged by the Chilian authorities,
to establish a new government in opposition to that of Piérola (who is
still at Tarma or Jauja). And at a meeting of 110 of those citizens, Mr.
Francisco Garcia Calderon was, by a fair majority of that meeting,
declared to constitute, to use their own language, the 'unipersonal
government'of Peru.

"At a superficial glance this would seem to be an attempt to get rid of
one dictatorship clearly adopted by the people of the whole Peruvian
Republic, and recognized by foreign governments, including Chili, for a
new dictatorship, adopted by the majority of a self-constituted meeting
of 110 men of Lima and Callao, and recognized as yet by nobody else
except Chili. In this aspect merely, it would of course, be simply
ludicrous.

"But the intention, as professed by this new 'unipersonal government,'
and by the Chilian newspaper here \* \* \* is that this movement for the
establishment of a new government shall be submitted in some form to the
people of Peru; that an appeal shall be made to the people, who shall be
invited to sanction this government until a Congress can be called
together to ratify it or to establish another in some form. And, of
course, if the people of Peru choose to ratify or concur in this or any
other form of government, it must then be considered legitimate and
acknowledged as such. But Chili does not intend to accept any treaty as
final without its ratification by a Peruvian Congress, though she may in
the meantime agree upon a provisional treaty with this merely
provisional government, only to be submitted to and ratified by a
congress.

\* \* \* "If the appeal to the people succeeds in securing the popular
support, peace (upon such terms as Chili may choose to dictate) will
probably be the result.

"But if, as I fear may happen, the people of only a part of Peru may
approve, and those of any considerable portion should still adhere to
Piérola, the result would be likely to prove calamitous indeed to Peru,
producing a civil war in addition to the war with Chili. \* \* \*

\* \* \* "In the proposed appeal to the people by the new provisional or
proposed provisional government, I think it probable that the portion of
Peru west of the Andes will ratify the movement." \* \* \*

On March 9, 1881, dispatch No. 254, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"The attempt to form a new Peruvian government here in opposition to
that of Piérola, described in my dispatch No. 245, seems from present
appearances to have utterly failed. Mr. F.G. Calderon found great
difficulty in getting proper ministers to hold office under him; but
when he finally thought he had got this arranged, he, for the first
time, as it would seem, began to inquire how far his Chilian friends
meant to allow his government to govern.

"He requested that the Chilian army should be withdrawn from the city of
Lima, that he should be allowed to occupy the government palace and
raise over it the Peruvian flag, and that he should be allowed to
control the Custom-house and the collection of duties, etc., all of
which was refused; whereupon, as I understand, his proposed ministers
refused to act, and he himself was disposed to decline the task of
forming a government. It is now again reported that he has not finally
given up the attempt, but as yet nothing definite has resulted."

On March 16, 1881, dispatch No. 257, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"Referring to my dispatch No. 254, in reference to the attempt to form a
new government of Peru, under the auspices of the Chilian authorities, I
have the honor now further to inform you that the attempt, though for a
time apparently abandoned, has since been persisted in, and on the 12th
instant that new government was installed in the small hamlet (too small
to be called a village) of Magdalena, about three miles from Lima, which
has been declared neutral territory."\* \* \*

"As Piérola still claims to be the government of Peru, the great
question for me and other ministers here to decide is that of
recognition, all having heretofore recognized Piérola. My own view is
that I cannot recognize this new professional {provisional} government
until it shall appear to be a government of Peru, instead of Lima and
Calloa."

On March 23, 1881, dispatch No. 264, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"I have the honor to inform you that Se.or Manuel M. Galvez, the
Secretary of Foreign Relations under the new government, set up or
attempted to be set up for Peru, called to see me yesterday \* \* \*

"He then inquired what I thought of the policy of sending a special
envoy to the United States. I frankly told him that I saw but one
objection to this, and that this might be but temporary, viz., that as
yet it did not sufficiently appear that this new government was the
government of Peru, and that until this should appear, the United States
might not be willing to recognize it as such; that inasmuch as our
government, with all the other governments represented here, had
recognized the government of Piérola, I should myself, in the absence of
instructions to the contrary, be compelled to wait until it should
appear by vote or acquiescence of the people of Peru that the majority
approved or acquiesced in the new government, and that I was inclined to
think my government would be likely to take the same view of the
question; and that, as yet, I had seen no sufficient evidence of this
approval or acquiescence, but that the very moment I should have such
evidence I should recognize the new government without waiting for
instructions, and that all our government wished to know was *what* is
the government of Peru, when they would at once recognize it; but they
could not make themselves parties in a contest between two governments,
both claiming to be the government of Peru, until the people of Peru had
decided that question for themselves, etc."

On March 31, 1881, dispatch No. 273, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to my dispatch No. 264, I have now to inform you that,
from all present appearances, the new Peruvian government, of which Mr.
Garcia Calderon is the head, does not seem likely to be recognized by
the people of Peru; and so far as any manifestations of the popular will
have come to my knowledge, the mass of the people seems likely to
continue its adherence to the Dictator Piérola. Circumstances yet to
occur may change all this; but as yet, from the best information I can
get, the very localities on whose concurrence the new government
counted, still adhere to Piérola, and even here in Lima, the municipal
Government, at a meeting held yesterday, unanimously decided not to
recognize it; and when the Alcalde (Mayor) went to consult the Chilian
Secretary of War at the palace, he was informed that the Chilian
government did not yet recognize the new government (waiting, doubtless,
to see that it should first be recognized by the people of Peru). And
when the Alcalde asked what the municipal government should do in case
the new pretended government should demand the building of the
municipality and seek to turn them out, the Secretary of War replied, in
substance, that he did not know, but that if any disturbance of the
peace should take place in a quarrel between the new government and the
municipal authorities, he should send them all alike to prison."

On April 4, 1881, dispatch No. 277, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to my dispatches Nos. 257, 264 and 273, in reference to
the question, What is the government of Peru? I have now the honor
further to inform you that since my dispatch No. 273, the Alcalde (Mayor
of the old municipality under the Piérola government) refused to carry
out the unanimous resolution of the municipal Council, and allowed the
Council of 1879 to come in and take possession, in accordance with the
decree of the provisional government of Garcia Calderon. I will further
say that this is the only indication, since the above dispatches, of the
acceptance of the provisional government of Peru.

"Even the northern provinces, upon which it counted (and where, I
supposed, the terror of the Chilian arms would have secured the
adherence of the people), seem to be overwhelmingly opposed to the
provisional government of Calderon and to adhere to Piérola. This is
also the case in the South. \* \* \* \* At present all the indications
are that nearly all the inhabitants east of the Andes still adhere to
Piérola, and that the same is the fact with the majority between the
mountains and the coast.

"Each of the governments (so-called) has called a Congress."

On April 13, 1881, dispatch No. 283, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to my dispatch No. 277, upon the question, What
constitutes the government of Peru? I have the honor to inform you that
nothing has since occurred which contributes to change the aspect of the
question. \* \* \* \* The evidence, as yet, is quite clear that the
overwhelming majority of the people of Peru are opposed to the
provisional government, and still adhere to Piérola, and at present, if
the Chilian army should leave to-morrow, the only safety of the members
of the provisional government would be to leave with them."

These were the letters received at the Department up to and before May
9, when Mr. Blaine authorized Mr. Christiancy to recognize Calderon.
From none of these dispatches, and especially not from the last one,
does it appear that Mr. Christiancy authorized the inferences upon which
Mr. Blaine's dispatch seems to be founded.

Nor did Mr. Christiancy's opinion as to the status of Calderon suffer
any change since his last dispatch, No. 283, of April 13. After that
dispatch his correspondence continues in the same strain, showing on the
one hand the popularity of Piérola's government, and on the other the
impotence of that of Calderon, and the discredit into which it had
fallen.

On April 17, 1881, dispatch No. 285, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

\* \* \* "Piérola, at last accounts, remained at Jauja, with a small
force of about 200 men, but he still claims to be the government of
Peru, issues his decrees as such, being as yet apparently sustained by
the large majority of the people of Peru."

On May 9, 1881, dispatch No. 296, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

\* \* \* "Colonel Lagos, the commander of the Chilian forces here, had
made an arrangement with the provisional government of Francisco Garcia
Calderon, to allow his government the control of the Custom-house in the
northern part of Peru, to enable him to support his government, and the
right to send some 500 or 600 soldiers to the northern towns to enforce
his authority to this end.

"But some four or five days since the Assistant Secretary of War of
Chili arrived here, and the above arrangement was at once disapproved
and revoked, and Se.or Calderon's soldiers were not allowed to embark.

"They (the Chilians) encouraged the setting up of the provisional
government of Calderon, and from time to time encouraged that government
in its efforts, to some extent, but soon began to treat it with
contempt, and to cut off from it one privilege after another, still
allowing it to appeal to the people of Peru for their adhesion, and to
call Congress together."\* \* \*

 

On May 17, 1881, dispatch No. 301, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---I have the honor to inform you that on the 14th instant the
following appeared in *El Orden,* of Lima, the paper which is the organ
of the provisional government of Calderon, viz.:

(English-Official Cablegram.)

PARIS, May 12, VALPARAISO, 13, at 1.50 P.M. President CALDERON, Lima:

Elmore telegraphs from Washington, saying that the Calderon government
has been recognized by the American government.

"If I could confidently rely upon the authenticity of this, I should, of
course, at once recognize the provisional government, though no other
ministry has yet done so. \* \* \* I must therefore wait for direct
official information from my government before taking any step
officially for recognition until I should see satisfactory evidence that
Peru had acquiesced in the provisional government, the evidence of which
I had not yet seen, though for the last week that government *seems* to
have made some progress in that direction." \* \* \*

On May 27, 1881, dispatch No. 310, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---I have the honor to inform you that on the 1st instant I, with
every other member of the diplomatic corps here, received a
circular-letter, dated April 30, from M.M. Galvez, claiming to be
Secretary of Foreign Relations of Peru, under the provisional government
of Dr. Francisco Garcia Calderon, stating the installation of that
government, and the names of the Cabinet officers; this being evidently
written to invite recognition by the diplomatic corps, a meeting of that
corps was called a day or two after to consider the propriety of
answering. The whole corps agreed that there was yet no sufficient
evidence that this provisional government had become the government
*defacto* of Peru, and all concurred in the resolution not as yet to
make any reply. Another meeting of the corps was held yesterday, upon
the same subject, and while all (with the possible exception of one)
agreed that there was yet no sufficient ground for recognition, yet
several, of whom I was one, thought it would be proper to acknowledge
the receipt of the letter, but in a manner which could not be construed
as a recognition. Some two or three seemed to object to answering,
because they thought they could not do so without implying a
recognition. \* \* \*

"Since my dispatch, No. 302, the provisional government have been
allowed to send 225 more men, making about 300 in all, into the province
of Junin, for the purpose, as I suppose, of allowing the Congressmen
from that region to come to Lima. But this force is too small to prevent
Piérola's congress from meeting at Ayacucho on the 6th of June, as it is
reported and believed here that Piérola will bring there from the south
at least 1,000 men.

"Such is the position at present. There is no difference of opinion in
the diplomatic corps as to the principles of recognition." \* \* \*

Such was the uniform tenor of Mr. Christiancy's dispatches to the
Department regarding Calderon from the time the coterie of one hundred
and ten citizens of Lima and Callao set him up, or as Mr. Christiancy
put it, attempted to set him up as President of Peru, down to the day
when he received Mr. Blaine's dispatch of May 9, authorizing
recognition. Immediately upon receipt of this dispatch, Mr. Christiancy
answered it on June 16, dispatch No. 319, as follows:

"SIR---In reply to your dispatch No. 143 \[Mr. Blaine's letter of May 9,
18811, 1 have the honor to say that that dispatch places upon me the
grave responsibility of determining as matters of fact three distinct
propositions, upon none of which have I been able to obtain any very
satisfactory evidence.

"1st. Whether the provisional government of Se.or Calderon is supported
by the character and influence of Peru;

"2d. Whether it is really endeavoring to restore constitutional
government; and

"3d. If so, whether it is with a view of order within and negotiation
with Chili for peace.

"The first question under present circumstances is a very difficult one
to decide just now. If mere money or financial 'influence' be referred
to this is to be found along the coast, which is completely controlled
by the Chilians, and consists of the wealthy owners of sugar plantations
and the mercantile class, who seek for peace at any price and upon any
terms. But if by 'influence' or the weight of influence upon political
or government matters (which I conclude must be your meaning), then
there is great room for doubt, and I am much inclined to think it may
turn out to be against the provisional government. It is a very
embarrassing question to decide.

"Upon the other two questions I have no ground, except the professions
of the provisional government, upon which to decide them; but I am
inclined to believe they should be decided in the affirmative. \* \* \*

"But I yesterday had a conference with Admiral Lynch, commander of the
Chilian forces here, and with Se.or Godoy, the representative of Chili
in political matters here, and I found at once that they do not want the
provisional government of Peru recognized yet, both saying to me that
they had not recognized it on the part of Chili, and that they did not
wish it recognized by other nations until they had recognized it. \* \*
\*

"This provisional government is not, even as such, a government
*defacto* in any part of Peru, except in a little hamlet of Magdalena."

June 21, 1881, five days later on, dispatch No. 320, Mr. Christiancy
wrote to the Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to my dispatch No. 319, I have the honor to inform you
of the result of the diplomatic meeting therein referred to. I found it
to be the opinion of the corps, 1st, that the provisional government
(so-called) is supported by the weight of character and political
influence of Peru; 2d, that the purpose of that government is to restore
constitutional government to Peru; 3d, that it seeks to restore
international order; 4th, that it wishes to make peace with Chile; but,
5th, that the provisional government (so-called) cannot, under present
circumstances, be considered a government *de facto,* so as to warrant
its recognition on that ground.

"I am inclined to concur with the corps in all the above points, though
I still have some doubts upon the first, and am not without some
suspicions as to the 2d, 3d, and 4th.

"This might seem, at first view, to bring the case within the principles
of your dispatch No. 143, and to authorize (though it does not instruct)
me to recognize what is called the Calderon or provisional government.
But your dispatch, when carefully considered, may, and perhaps must be
construed as having been written with the understanding that the
Calderon government was a government *defacto, of at least a large part
of Peru.*

"The fact is that it is not a government *de facto,* or in the exercise
of the functions of government anywhere except so far as the Chilian
authorities choose to allow it to exercise any powers of the kind, and
these are confined within very narrow limits. It has been allowed to
exercise, thus far, full powers only in the little hamlet of Magdalena.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

"Now, on looking carefully at your dispatch No. 143, I see clearly that
one of your objects in recognizing the Calderon government is to bring
about peace with Chili. \* \* \* \* But I am now fully satisfied that
Chili does not intend to make peace with Peru unless driven to do so by
outside pressure. \* \* \* On Saturday last (19th instant), Mr. Godoy,
the political representative of Chili here called upon me at the
legation and we had a free and general conversation upon the whole
situation. \* \* \* I could readily see that they (the Chilians) did not
want any encouragement or prestige to be given to the Calderon
government except what they might choose to give it. \* \* \* It will
readily be seen that a literal compliance with the permission given in
your dispatch to recognize the Calderon government would be likely to
violate its spirit and interest; and before departing from the safe and
generally approved rule of recognizing a new government, that it should
appear to be a government *de facto,* I think I ought to wait, at least
until the arrival of another mail, \* \* \* as in the meantime you will
have received other dispatches from me which may enable you to give
instructions more applicable to the present state of facts. \* \* \* \*

"No other foreign minister here is willing yet to recognize this
Calderon government, and I think I see an anxiety on the part of some of
them to see the United States depart from the generally received
doctrine of recognizing a new government only when they have become
governments *defacto.* "Whatever support the \'Calderon government' may
appear to have, it is the settled and unanimous opinion of all
intelligent men here, that it would not last a day after the Chilian
forces should leave the country. And my own opinion is, that if the
United States should recognize it to-day, the Chilian authorities would
take good care that any prestige it might gain from such recognition
should be more than counterbalanced by the more stringent limitations it
would impose upon any exercise of governmental powers."

After receiving two other mails from Washington and on June 28, 1881,
dispatch No. 322, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to my dispatch, No. 320, I have now the honor further
to say that I have been carefully considering the question of the
recognition of the provisional government therein referred to, and
having received nothing by the last mail in any way modifying your
dispatch No. 143, and knowing that I had kept you fully informed of all
the facts necessary to a decision, and seeing that the question whether
the Calderon government was a government *defacto* was not expressly
made a condition, and that the fact of your having already received Mr.
Elmore as the confidential agent of that government, which I take to be
a clear indication that you would expect me to recognize that government
if I found the facts you had stated as hypothetical to be true, but more
especially hearing a rumor here as having come from the United States
that my successor would not come here until peace was settled, and,
therefore, fearing that my neglect to make the requisition might be
construed as a design on my part to delay his coming, I finally
concluded, on the 26th instant, to recognize the provisional government
as such. \* \* \*

"I must confess, that if left to act entirely upon my own judgment, I
should not have recognized this provisional government until it should
have become a government *defacto,* or until it should have succeeded in
assembling a quorum of Congress, nor until we could have seen whether
this Congress or that of Piérola (national assembly) at Ayacucho should
represent the most of the people of Peru. But I claim no right to set up
my own judgment against that of my government, believing strict
obedience to the wishes of my government my first and sole duty."\* \*
\* \* \* \* \*

On July 6, 1881, dispatch No. 327, Mr. Christiancy wrote to the
Department as follows:

"SIR---Referring to your dispatch No. 148 and to my dispatch No. 322,1
have the honor to state that, as I had some reason to fear when I wrote
the last dispatch, I have still more reason to fear now that the
recognition of the provisional government of Francisco Garcia Calderon
was premature \* \* \* yet in view of your dispatch No. 151, as well as
your previous dispatches, it is very clear that you had determined upon
the recognition of the provisional government, and that I only complied
with your wish in making the recognition.

"I fear, however, this recognition will lead to many complications, but
I have obeyed what I was compelled to consider your orders."

These were the views of Mr. Christiancy as to the status of Calderon and
these were in his own language the reasons that impelled him, against
his own judgment, to obey Mr. Blaine's orders and recognize a government
that as yet lacked all the essential attributes of one. What the opinion
of Mr. Blaine himself was as to the legality of the recognition of
Calderon may be judged from the argument contained in one of his last
diplomatic notes, seven months after he all but commanded Mr.
Christiancy to recognize the so-called provisional government, and when
he was about to lose the control of our Foreign Office, he wrote to Mr.
Wm. H. Trescot his dispatch No. 2, dated Washington, December 1, 1881,
in which the following passage occurs:

On February 25, 1881, Mr. Christiancy, the United States Minister at
Lima, wrote to the Department, as follows:

"A movement has, therefore, been initiated among the leading citizens of
Lima and Callao, *and encouraged by the Chilian* authorities to
establish a new government in opposition to that of Piérola."

From this date to April 13, 1881, Mr. Christiancy kept the Department
informed of the probabilities of the establishment of the Calderon
government, socalled from the name of the eminent Peruvian statesman who
had been chosen as President. On that date he wrote:

"In my own private opinion, however, if the provisional government had
come up without any appearance of support from the Chilian authorities,
it would have had many elements of popularity, and would probably have
succeeded in obtaining the acquiescence of the people. This new
government realizes the importance of an early peace with Chili, the
necessity of which must be recognized by every thoughtful man; while
that of Piérola proposes to intend to carry on the war; but it has no
means for the purpose at present, and my own opinion is that any effort
to do so will end in still greater calamities to Peru."

On May 21, the same Minister, in a postscript to his dispatch of the
17th, says:

"Since writing the above it has become still more probable that the
threat of indefinite occupation' was intended only to drive the
Peruvians into the support of the provisional government, as two days
ago they allowed the government to send 75 soldiers to Tacna, Aroyo,
etc., to control that part of the country, so as to allow the members of
Congress to come to Lima; and it now begins to look as if Calderon might
secure a quorum (two-thirds) of the Congress. If he does succeed, it
will be some evidence that Peru acquiesces in that government, and if he
gets the twothirds of the members, I think I shall recognize the
provisional government, or that of the Congress and the President they
may elect, unless, in the meantime, I shall receive other instructions."

On the 9th day of May, 1881, instructions had been sent to him from the
Department, which crossed this dispatch, in which he was told:

"If the Calderon Government is supported by the character and
intelligence of Peru, and is really endeavoring to restore
constitutional government with a view both to order within and
negotiations with Chili for peace, you may recognize it as the existing
provisional government, and render what aid you can by advice and good
offices to that end."

Acting under these instructions, although with some expressed doubt as
to the probable permanence of its existence, Mr. Christiancy, on the
26th of June, 1881, formally recognized the Calderon government.

From the long list of dispatches from Mr. Christiancy containing in
unequivocal terms information as to Calderon's not being even a *de
facto* government, Mr. Blaine picked out only *one* insignificant
passage out of the first and another out of the last, upon which he
grounded his action of recognition, and he suppressed all others.

First---He suppressed Mr. Christiancy's statement in the first dispatch,
in which Calderon's was called a "provisional or proposed provisional
government."

Second---He suppressed the statement contained in the next dispatch of
March 9, showing that the Chilian authorities discountenanced Calderon.

Third---He suppressed Mr. Christiancy's remark in the third dispatch of
March 16, saying that he could not recognize Calderon until he should
appear to be a *government of Peru instead of Lima and Callao.*

Fourth---He suppressed Mr. Christiancy's allusion to Calderon's as "the
new government set up or attempted to be set up," contained in the
fourth dispatch of March 23, and his remark that the United States could
not recognize the proposed provisional government, because that *would
be making themselves* parties in a contest between the two governments,
both claiming *to be the government of Peru, before the people of Peru
had decided that question for themselves.*

Fifth---He suppressed Mr. Christiancy's allusion to Calderon's as the
"pretended government," and he likewise suppressed the information
contained in that fifth dispatch of March 31, that the mass of the
people seemed likely to continue their adherence to Piérola; that the
very localities upon which the new government counted, and even Lima
itself, showed a marked aversion to Calderon; and finally that the
Chilian authorities clearly held the Calderon government in contempt and
had not yet recognized it.

Sixth---He suppressed the valuable information given in Mr.
Christiancy's sixth dispatch of April 4, that nearly all the inhabitants
east of the Andes still adhered to Piérola, and that the same was the
fact with the majority between the mountains and the coast; with other
words that through the length and breadth of Peru Piérola was the
recognized government.

Seventh---While he made a misleading quotation out of the dispatch of
April 13, he suppressed the expressive passage contained in the same
dispatch, that the overwhelming majority of the people of Peru were
opposed to the provisional government, and that if the *Chilian army
should* leave tomorrow the only safety for the members of the
provisional *government would be to leave with them.*

After having made these important suppressions of matters he knew before
he authorized the recognition of Calderon, Mr. Blaine resorted to a
postscript in Mr. Christiancy's dispatch of May 17 to justify his
action. The said dispatch of May 17 could not have influenced Mr.
Blaine's conduct on May 9; but not only he made it precede his dispatch
of May 9, in the passage above quoted from his letter to Mr. Trescot,
but he picked out this one passage, written in haste as the postscript
to a dispatch that dealt upon very different matters, and he wholly
ignored the contents of Mr. Christiancy's dispatches of April 17, May 9,
May 17, and May 27, all of which were especially or mainly devoted to
the question of Calderon and showed not only the preponderance of
Piérola over Calderon but also the marked contempt with which the
Chilian authorities and all other governments represented at Lima
treated the so-called Calderon government.

The suppression almost in toto of Mr. Christiancy's correspondence from
February 25 to April 13, and the resort to a posterior document to
justify an anterior action did not, and with justice, seem enough to Mr.
Blaine to account for his recognition of Calderon. In the passage above
cited from his letter to Mr. Trescot he proceeded to mention his
dispatch of May 9 to Mr. Christiancy, but he found it advisable not to
insert the whole of it, and the public, to whom in fact the Trescot
letter was addressed, is not thereby informed in full of its contents.
As it will be seen, Mr. Blaine carefully suppressed the first portion of
it, wherein he falsely alleged that Mr. Christiancy had informed him
that Calderon was at the head of the government, and with equal care he
dropped the last clause thereof, which was as follows:

"Mr. Elmore has been received by me as the confidential agent of such
provisional government."

And then this mutilated and garbled dispatch is pretended to be the
instructions under which Mr. Christiancy acted.

The fact, however, is that this mutilated dispatch of May 9, as quoted
by Mr. Blaine, was not the real "instructions" under which Mr.
Christiancy acted; nor did he recognize the Calderon government "with
some expressed doubt as to the probable permanence of its existence," as
Mr. Blaine would have it. Mr. Christiancy's dispatches of June 16, June
21, June 28 and July 6, 1881, set out above are expressive on these
subjects, and they contribute a flat denial of Mr. Blaine's assertion.
Puzzled at seeing himself misquoted in that dispatch, No. 143, from
Washington, he consults the diplomatic corps at Lima, and after
hesitating about a fortnight he finally recognized Calderon. An
inspection of his dispatches of June 28 and July 6, 1881, will reveal
the real and controlling reasons why, while his own judgment condemned
the step, he finally took it, viz.: 1st. Mr. Blaine's reception of Mr.
Elmore as the confidential agent of the Calderon government,
notwithstanding he, Mr. Christiancy, had kept the Department carefully
informed as to the real status of that government; and 2d. The reception
by Mr. Christiancy of *several subsequent dispatches* after the one of
May 9, leaving him no option but to recognize Calderon, and forcing him
to the conclusion that in taking that dangerous step he was but *obeying
what he was compelled to consider as the orders of his superior.* And
here it is of importance to notice that we can only infer from the
allusions made to them by Mr. Christiancy, what were the contents of
those expressive dispatches from Washington received by him after the
one of May 9, 1881, and which so greatly influenced his conduct in the
premises; they were not transmitted to Congress in December, 1881, and
are not to be found on that file.

Mr. Blaine did not sin out of ignorance or by mishap. The willfulness of
his reckless disregard of diplomatic usages and of his violation of
well-established principles of international law, noticeable in his
recognition of Calderon, is shown in his anxiety to conceal his
malfeasance, and by the deliberate course of misrepresentation and of
*suppressio veri* to which he resorted in his letter to Mr. Trescot, in
order to deceive the public. The determination with which he entered
upon a policy so fraught with danger for the country must, however, have
been prompted by some adequate and equally monstrous motive. His
intimate connection with the Jacob R. Shipherd scheme for the
appropriation of the whole of Peru by an American company; the absence
from the files of the Department of a number of important letters from
Shipherd to Mr. Blaine, and from Mr. Blaine to Shipherd; Mr. Blaine's
desperate though unsuccessful effort at a later day to appear wholly
disconnected from Shipherd; and finally Mr. Blaine's recognition of the
Landreau claim notwithstanding he knew it had accrued to the claimant
before he had become an American citizen, if he ever became one (a
circumstance which precludes the intervention of this country in that
claimant's behalf), are significant circumstances that explain the
objects and aims of this tortuous diplomacy, and make clear whatever may
seem doubtful or incomprehensible about it. With the prospect, on May 9,
1881, of eight years in the control of our Foreign Department, and the
hope, after that, of eight years in the Presidency, the opportunity must
have been thought by him inviting to set on foot and carry out the
daring scheme which has been openly avowed by the Peruvian Company,
represented by Mr. Shipherd, of establishing a United States
protectorate over Peru, and of instituting in this country a new East
India Company, with Peru as its field of exploitation. To this end the
growing power of Chili had to be checked, and, as Calderon, though at
first favored, soon afterward was discountenanced by that Republic on
account of his disinclination to sign a treaty with Chili ceding
territory, the maintenance of such a government as Calderon's in Peru by
the United States became equivalent to the barring of Chili's claims
upon Peru. For the promotion of the Landreaus and Shipherd schemes, this
was a prerequisite. Mr. Blaine's policy in recognizing a government such
as Mr. Christiancy represented that of Calderon's to be, and
notwithstanding the wishes of Chili to the contrary, jumped in with
Shipherd's desires, and was in accord with the interests of the Landreau
claimants.

But all this policy of artifice and deception in behalf of the so-called
Calderon government was found not to be enough to appropriate Peru for
the benefit of the Peruvian Company and of the Landreau claimants. Our
Foreign Department had further to mould its policy to the purposes of
that daring politico-monetary scheme. Accordingly, Mr. Blaine devised an
additional plan which, had it not also failed, would have gone further
towards establishing in Peru the East India Company scheme than any of
his previous methods to that end. On November 29, 1881, he issued his
circularletter to all the independent nations of North and South
America, inviting them to send delegates to a congress for the purpose
of "considering and discussing the methods of preventing war, etc.,
etc." So far as this plan was benevolent, it was absurd. Utopists might
dream to-day of an international peace; the practical statesman knows,
however, that peace, like order, must be enforced, and that where no
power exists, or, in the nature of things, can exist to enforce such
peace, the provisions to abolish war are futile. Mr. Blaine was not
ignorant of this. The benevolent garb in which this invitation was sent
out was but a cloak to conceal its real object, which was carefully kept
in the background. At about the middle of that circular-letter occurs
the following artfully-worded passage:

"Impressed by these views, the President extends to all the independent
countries of North and South America an earnest invitation to
participate in a general congress to be held in the city of Washington
on the 24th day of November, 1882, for the purpose of considering and
discussing the methods of preventing war between the nations of America.
He desires that the attention of the Congress shall be strictly confined
to this one great object; that its sole aim shall be to seek a way of
permanently averting the horrors of a cruel and bloody combat between
countries, oftenest of one blood and speech, OR THE EVEN WORSE CALAMITY
OF INTERNAL COMMOTION AND CIVIL STRIFE."

Had the Congress met, had it been swayed by Mr. Blaine, and had a plan
been adopted to avert the even worse calamity of internal commotion and
civil strife, the foundation would have been laid for the subsequent
intervention of the United States in all the INTERNAL CONCERNS of our
sister republics, and among them of Peru. Had that foundation been laid,
the doors would have been flung wide open for eternal foreign
complications; our policy of peace would have become a thing of the
past; at every moment we would have been called in by the under dog in
each of those countries, and WE WOULD HAVE INVITED OURSELVES TO BECOME
PARTIES IN ALL COMMOTIONS IN PERU, THE SAME AS GREAT BRITAIN HAS DONE IN
THE EAST INDIES! Committed to such a policy, the face of this country
would have been totally changed. Peace would have fled; an extensive
military class would have sprung up, and the fund of corruption that the
wealthy soil of Peru would have placed at Mr. Blaine's disposal would
have rendered impossible a peaceful reform of our civil service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
