---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Walter Carpenter Free

### Public Congratulations Sunday's Meeting in Beresford Place {#public-congratulations-sundays-meeting-in-beresford-place .cr}

#### (1911)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Irish Worker**, 2 September 1911.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Lost Writings**, (ed. Aindrias Ó
Cathasaigh), [Pluto Press](http://www.plutobooks.com/) 1997.\
The notes, which are © 1997 Pluto Press, have not been included.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for Marxists' Internet Archive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A public meeting under the auspices of the Socialist Party of Ireland
was held last Sunday at Beresford Place to congratulate Mr Walter
Carpenter on his discharge from Mountjoy Prison, where he had been
confined for a term on a charge of having used language alleged to be
derogatory to King George of England. There was a considerable
attendance, which included numbers of the National Boy Scouts in their
uniform. Unlike previous meetings in Beresford Place, which were
attended by a considerable force of the DMP, there was *not a single
Cossack* at Sunday's gathering.

*Mr James Connolly*, Organiser Irish Transport Workers' Union, Belfast,
presided. In the course of his address opening the proceedings Mr
Connolly said he was glad to see such a large meeting despite the rain
and other adverse circumstances. They had their comrade, Carpenter,
again with them, and next to him, but perhaps higher in the degree of
criminality, they had Miss Molony (applause). It is, continued Mr
Connolly, perfectly shocking to hear you cheer such criminals. I take it
that in expressing my own sentiments in this matter I am expressing the
sentiments of every man around me -- that is to say, that in welcoming
Carpenter on his release from prison, we take that opportunity, not only
of associating ourselves with him in the crime that he committed, but of
declaring our fullest sympathy, and not only our fullest sympathy, but
our *completely unqualified endorsement of teh words for which he was
sent to prison* (cheers). We are to-day living in times of change -- in
times of what it is no exaggeration to describe as a revolution. On such
an occasion it is but fitting that the party to which our friend
Carpenter and Miss Molony belong -- the Socialist Party of Ireland --
should come forward and take their position with the people in the great
crisis with which we have been face to face. It is a pleasure to me as
one of the oldest pioneers of trades unionism in Dublin to say how glad
I am to be able to call your attention to the fact that in the two great
crises -- the national crisis and the industrial crisis -- in both of
which the people of Dublin were met with all kinds of temptations and
bribery and with all kinds of poison in order, if possible, to lead them
astray and destroy their national spirit -- in both these crises the
Socialist Party of Ireland were ready with the people to recognise that
the national cause and the industrial cause were at stake, and that
their place was in the firing line in front of the people (cheers). I am
glad to recognise that during these crises you and they acted up to the
fullest sense of your responsibilities as men and women. In the first of
these crises they had to encounter *a perfect orgy of flunkeyism*.
According to the English newspapers Dublin was the most loyal place in
all the dominions of the king of England, and the people were supposed
to be like bellowing slaves going down on their knees and protesting
their loyalty and selfless adulation and worship to a king who rules, we
are told, according to the grace of God, but with forty thousand
bayonets at the back of him (cheers and laughter). Despite all this
attempt to represent Dublin as enthusiastically loyal about a month ago,
no sooner had his Gracious (?) Majesty taken his departure from their
shores than they saw Dublin a seething mass of discontent -- seething
with rebellion and ready to go to any extreme in the attempt to gain
freedom. I cannot tell you how this old heart of mine rose with gladness
when in the North I heard that the people of Dublin -- the workers of
Dublin -- had taken the measure of their responsibilities and *had
unfurled the banner of freedom* -- of national and industrial freedom --
not only for themselves, but for their struggling brothers across the
water. Those men and women who were most enthusiastically national in
the first of these crises were at the same time most enthusiastic in
support of the industrial uprising during the last few days and weeks;
and whether in the workshop or outside it were amongst the first to
support their brothers who took active steps to uphold the dignity and
the rights of the working classes (cheers). Let us draw the lesson of
this great struggle of the last few days and weeks. The newspapers told
them that England was one mass of rebellion. Fifty thousand troops were
concentrated in London, four warships were in the Mersey, and the guns
of these warships and the bayonets of the soldiers were pointed, not
against Germany, not against Russia, but against the working classes in
the cities of England, just as they were presented against the working
classes here in Dublin. All the newspapers had been full of this great
upheaval in England, in Dublin, and in Belfast and elsewhere. They had
been telling you in great headlines of the terrible news of the great
strike in England, Ireland, and Scotland -- everything was powerless,
works had been suspended and railway communication cut off, and the
nation had been threatened with bankruptcy. AS MR MAHONY DECLARED in the
Dublin Police Court, if this went on society would be dissolved. Why?
Because the workers had stopped work -- the poor ill-considered,
badly-paid, ill-requited, slave-driven and degraded workers had stopped
working; and mark you, my friends, the moment you stopped working
society went to chaos, to everlasting smash. Does not that teach you a
great lesson -- the power of the people; the power of the working
classes? We are living in a new age -- the age of solidarity of labour.
You must recognise that you are living not only in an age of progress,
but in an age of revolution. We in Ireland did our part in that
struggle, and we have shown that we are determined to win for the
workers complete industrial freedom, and the right to live in the
country in which they were born. They had but one thing to serve in this
struggle, and that was to maintain and uphold the dignity of labour, and
they would do that by acting their part as men and as women. In
conclusion Mr Connolly read for the meeting the following resolution,
which would be proposed for adoption:-- "That this meeting of Dublin
workers tenders a cordial welcome to Mr Walter Carpenter on his release
from prison, and heartily congratulates him on his timely and effective
protest against the recent outburst of flunkeyism in the city" (cheers).
\[\...\]

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 12.8.2003
