---
layout: default
title: 
---
![title](psq.jpg)

## Daniel De Leon

# The Conference at Berlin on The West-African Question

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info} 1886\
[Provided by:]{.info} The Socialist Labor Party of America's Daniel De
Leon Library, first published in pamphlet form by the National Committee
of Republicans and Independents (Mugwumps), New York, September of 1884\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [Robert
Bills](mailto:slpns@igc.org) of the [The Socialist Labor Party of
America](http://slp.org), Editor of *The People* & [David
Walters](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm)\
[Permissions:]{.info} The Daniel De Leon Internet Archive (DDLIA)
presents this work through courtesy of the Socialist Labor Party of
America. For more information on reproducing these works, please contact
the [SLP](mailto:slpns@igc.org).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[THE]{.cap} conference at Berlin on the West-African question is an
event unique in the history of political science. To judge from outward
show it was a diplomatic conference: the system adopted and the language
used for its convocation; the constant reference during the various
stages of its progress to international law, to the principles and to
the aspirations of that science; the strict diplomatic form of procedure
followed during the debates; and, above all, the ostensible subject of
discussion, would all seem to point to this conclusion. And yet history
records not another instance of an assembly at which were represented so
many powers, gathered together, as it was supposed, for international
purposes, that partook in so small a degree of the essential parts of an
international conference, or that was so barren in results of importance
to the science of international jurisprudence. Hitherto it has been some
international question, that is, some question arising from and
involving the collective interests of a number of states that, in each
instance, first suggested the thought of an international conference;
and the need of a settlement of questions of such nature has hitherto
been the urgent cause for diplomatic gatherings. Such, notably, was the
case with the Congresses of Vienna, of Aix-la-Chapelle, of Verona, and
with the Congress of Berlin of 1878. With the recent Berlin Conference,
however, it was wholly different. Diplomatic in form, it was economic in
fact; ostensibly international in its bearings, in truth it concerned
but one nation; and it was designed to help to solve, for that nation
only, a strictly social problem.

I. History of the Question.

Africa, especially its west coast, has been pre-eminently the ground of
Portuguese exploration. In that region were the earliest Portuguese
discoveries made; and it was a Portuguese naval officer, in command of a
Portuguese expedition, who, following the tracks of previous Portuguese
navigators, first sighted the broad mouth of the Congo as early as 1484.
With the accustomed formalities of the times, possession was taken of
the locality in the name of the crown of Portugal; the river was given
the name of Zaire; and Portugal speedily perfected her inchoate rights
of ownership, arising from original discovery, by actual occupation and
by the establishment of a number of settlements along the coast, north
and south of the estuary.

Whether it was that the papal partition of the southern section of the
globe fully satisfied Spain as to the right of Portugal to Africa; or
whether Spain, the only nation then capable of contending with Portugal
for maritime supremacy, had no leisure to turn to Africa or no taste for
acquisitions on that continent, certain it is that the rights of
ownership and sovereignty which Portugal claimed at an early period over
West Africa were never disputed by her neighbor and rival; and by the
time that other states came to strive for the mastery of the seas and
for colonial grandeur, these rights of ownership and sovereignty had
grown so fixed that, in time of peace, they were respected by one and
all, and regarded as traditional.

The clash of interests that existed between Portugal and Spain at an
early period in their history had driven the former to ally herself with
the enemies of the latter, especially with England and later with the
Netherlands. As Spain was in an almost chronic state of war with these
powers, Portugal found herself, in consequence, involved in continual
hostilities either with Spain herself or with France, Spain's
traditional ally, and sometimes with both. A descent upon each other's
colonial possessions by the maritime belligerents was at that time a
favorite piece of tactics; the colonies suffered most severely during
European wars, and not infrequently passed, during a war, in rapid
succession from the hands of one belligerent into those of another. The
colonies of Portugal, whether in Africa or America, were not exempt from
this fate. Owing perhaps to the proverbial lack of bravery of the
Portuguese, the Spanish or the French flag would, as a rule, be seen,
soon after the breaking out of a war, floating over a large number of
places where the Portuguese flag had waved before the war. But with
equal regularity, due perhaps to the proverbial tact of the cabinet of
Lisbon, most of the territories Portugal had lost, and generally all of
them, were as surely restored after the cessation of hostilities, and by
the treaty of peace were reaffirmed to be Portuguese domain. The
treaties of 1668,^[\[1\]](#n1){#n1.}^ 1715,^[\[2\]](#n2){#n2.}^ and
1761^[\[3\]](#n3){#n3.}^ between Portugal and Spain, and the treaty of
1713^[\[4\]](#n4){#n4.}^, between Portugal and France are, therefore, so
many early title-deeds of Portuguese possessions in both hemispheres.
Taking it for granted, as it would seem, that Portugal had been
dispossessed of all her colonies during the preceding hostilities, it
was declared by a sweeping clause in each of the treaties cited that all
those possessions should be restored to their former owner. But those
colonies only were mentioned by name which were retained by the
conqueror, or transferred to him by way of exchange or for other
considerations; and the name of the territory of Angola, as the western
littoral of Africa then began to be called, does not appear in any of
these treaties.

After the great European war that closed in 1763, into which Portugal
had been drawn as a matter of course, the colonial possessions of all
the belligerents again formed an important part of the negotiations for
peace. During this war, as during all former ones, Portugal had been
stripped of many valuable possessions, her possessions in Angola among
others. These were now to be re-acquired, and her plenipotentiaries
acquitted themselves of their task with their wonted ability. By article
ii. of the treaty of Feb. 10, 1763, all the treaties cited above were
reaffirmed; and by article xxi. it was especially stipulated, in respect
to Africa, that the French and Spanish troops were to evacuate all the
territories which they might have occupied on that continent; those
territories to be restored to Portugal and placed under the guaranty of
the treaties which, by article ii., were declared to be the bases of the
present treaty.^[\[5\]](#n5){#n5.}^

I have not been able to discover any public documents that throw any
light on Angola from the date of this last treaty until 1784, when
important disclosures were made. In that year the Portuguese government,
in the exercise of what it considered its sovereign rights in Western
Africa, ordered the erection of a fort at Cabinda, north of the Congo.
But the fort had hardly been finished when it was attacked by M. de
Marigny, in command of a French frigate, on the ground that the fort was
calculated to interfere with the freedom of traffic of French subjects
on that coast. The fort of Cabinda was not destined to be an exception
to established rules in the military annals of Portugal. Its commander
declared it to be impossible to keep the place; he signed a
capitulation^[\[6\]](#n6){#n6.}^ with M. de Marigny by which, reserving
all the rights of Portugal, the settlement of the question was referred
to the home governments; and in the meanwhile he suffered the fort to be
demolished by the French commander.

The discussion on the subject of freedom of commerce on the coast of
Angola, thus raised by M. de Marigny in Africa, and transferred to
Europe by the timidity of the Portuguese Commander at Cabinda, gave rise
to a protracted discussion between the cabinets of Lisbon and
Versailles. The Portuguese court claimed right of sovereignty at
Cabinda, and all accessory rights; and in aggrieved tones it demanded
reparation for the insult done to the honor of its flag. The French
court, on the other hand, without entering on the question of Portuguese
rights of sovereignty, refused all reparation; and it stood firm on the
right of its subjects to the freedom of commerce with the whole of West
Africa, claiming that that right had been acquired by them by long and
uninterrupted exercise. There was not at the time any prospect of a
peace negotiation, where Portugal might have hoped to retrieve her loss.
France remained unyielding. At this juncture Spain tendered her good
offices to bring about a compromise. The offer was finally accepted; and
on Jan. 30, 1786, the plenipotentiaries of Portugal and France met at
the Pardo {sic}, in Spain, and signed a convention in the nature of a
series of declarations setting forth the claims of their respective
states and amicably adjusting their differences.

On behalf of Portugal, it was declared that the construction of a fort
on the coast of Cabinda was not intended to disturb, to weaken or to
impair the right claimed by the subjects of H.M.C.M., the king of
France, to the freedom of commerce and traffic on that coast in the way
they had hitherto enjoyed it; that accordingly H.M.F.M., the king of
Portugal, had issued precise instructions to the authorities on land and
to the naval officers, as well as to his own subjects, not to offer,
directly or indirectly, the slightest hindrance to the said commerce;
and he pledged himself, furthermore, to indemnify the subjects of France
for all damages which they might sustain by reason of the violation of
his orders.

On behalf of France, it was declared that the expedition of M. de
Marigny had not been ordered with the intention of disturbing, weakening
or impairing the right of sovereignty which the crown of Portugal
claimed over the coast of Cabinda as part of the kingdom of Angola; that
accordingly H.M.C.M. would issue orders to the neighboring governors and
to the naval officers, as well as to his own subjects, not to offer,
directly or indirectly, any obstacle or difficulty, either with the
natives or otherwise, to the said sovereignty or to the exercise
thereof; and he pledged himself, furthermore, to indemnify the crown of
Portugal for all damages which it might sustain by reason of the
violation of his orders as well as by reason of the demolition of the
fort at Cabinda.

Finally, lest the question of indemnity should lead to subsequent
disagreements, it was declared on behalf of France and of Portugal, that
the existing claims of each against the other-as well the claims which
French subjects might at that time have against Portugal for
interference with their commerce, as those of Portugal against France
for the demolition of the fort at Cabinda-should be remitted and
cancelled. ^[\[7\]](#n7){#n7.}^

The recognition by France of Portuguese sovereignty over the coast of
Cabinda, and the indirect recognition of that sovereignty over the rest
of Angola, did not, however, quite fill the measure of the wishes of the
cabinet of Lisbon; and it was found necessary to subjoin a protocol to
the above convention and declarations. In this protocol the
plenipotentiary of Portugal set forth that, it being the desire and the
object of his master to define the limits of French commerce on the
whole coast of Angola, he therefore proposed, with the view of avoiding
fresh disputes in the future, that it be agreed that the said commerce
should never extend to the southward beyond the Zaire and Cape Padron.
The plenipotentiary of France observed that the commerce of the French
in those regions should not be limited more than was that of the English
and the Hollanders, who extended theirs as far south as the rivers
Ambriz and Mossula. Thereupon the plenipotentiary of Portugal declared,
that, to the south of the Zaire, the possessions of Portugal extended as
far south as the southernmost extremity of Benguela, stretching from the
coast inland to the Congo and Casange; that there were situated on that
territory several parishes and military outposts, and several villages
and hamlets the sovereignty of which belonged exclusively to the crown
of Portugal. That for this reason Portugal could not consent to
recognize in any other nation a right to traffic on said coast, unless
it be on that portion which lay north of Zaire; to the south of that
river and of Cape Padron only Portuguese subjects were allowed to trade;
and Portugal looked upon all other commerce or navigation, which the
subjects of any nation whatever might have tried to establish in those
regions, as furtive, clandestine and illicit, such traffic and
navigation never having been authorized by Portugal, and that country
never having lent its assent to such traffic. And, finally, that
Portugal never would authorize or lend her assent thereto, but on the
contrary would hinder and resist it.

The plenipotentiary of France announced himself authorized to reply to
the representations made on behalf of Portugal, and to declare, in the
name of his master, that the principles of justice and moderation which
governed all his actions did not allow him to arrogate to himself the
right either of contesting or of affirming the rights claimed by the
crown of Portugal to the ownership, the sovereignty and the commerce of
the coast of Angola from Cape Padron to the south; but that H.M.C.M.
agreed that the commerce of his subjects should not extend further south
than Cape Padron, provided always the subjects of France were treated in
that respect the same as the subjects of any other
state.^[\[8\]](#n8){#n8.}^

Thus with admirable skill did the cabinet of Lisbon extricate itself
from a serious difficulty, with a minimum of loss to Portuguese
interests and with the acquisition of substantial advantages. Portugal
sacrificed her exclusive colonial policy north of the mouth of the
Congo, where, it would seem, she never had been able to enforce it
strictly. But in return she succeeded in establishing it the more firmly
over the larger and more important tract of land, besides obtaining from
so powerful a state as France the full recognition, as against France
herself, or Portuguese ownership and sovereignty over the whole
territory of Angola.

Whether royal, republican or imperial, France was destined to remain yet
for some time an object of terror to Portugal. At the beginning of this
century the court of that kingdom fled across the seas, to its dominions
in Brazil, and its capital was occupied by the soldiers of France. The
intimacy that had always existed between Portugal and Great Britain was
naturally strengthened by these events. Five successive treaties of
alliance were signed between these two states between the years 1807 and
1810. Among these, the treaty of Feb. 19, 1810, signed at Rio Janeiro,
deserves special study in connection with the subject in hand. This
treaty had two objects in view: first, to renew and render more solemn
the alliance between the two states, both of which pledged themselves to
unremitting efforts against France, while Great Britain assumed the
further obligation never to recognize any but a prince of the house of
Braganza as king of Portugal (articles i.-viii.); and, second, to
provide for the gradual suppression of the slave-trade. It would seem
the hard conditions of the times should have restrained Great Britain
from exacting any sacrifices from the court of Rio Janeiro in return for
the powerful aid which she was then giving that court. To oblige
Portugal to suppress the slave-trade, was to inflict upon it a hard
blow. Portugal had always driven a lucrative trade in negroes; and the
importance of that trade was, just at that time, growing in proportion
as the resources of Brazil and Cuba were being developed. The clause for
the abolition of the slave-trade was insisted upon by Great Britain; the
court of Rio Janeiro had no choice but to yield; and, by article x.,
H.R.H., the prince regent of Portugal, promised to cooperate with H.B.M.
in adopting the most efficient measures gradually to suppress the
slave-trade throughout his dominions; and not to allow his subjects, in
the future, to trade in negroes on any part of the coast of Africa which
did not belong to Portugal. The court of Rio Janeiro was, however,
keenly alive to the dangers to which Portuguese sovereignty in Africa
might be exposed by this concession; and, with far-sighted forecast, it
took the precaution to provide against the danger by stipulating
expressly, in the same article x., that nothing contained therein should
be so construed as to render null or in any way to affect the rights of
the crown of Portugal over the territories of Cabinda and Mollembo,
H.R.H., the prince regent of Portugal, being determined not to abandon
or to renounce his just claims to the said
territories.^[\[9\]](#n9){#n9.}^

As one of the objects of this treaty was to guarantee the crown of
Portugal to the house of Braganza against French usurpation, few things
could be more significant than the clause regarding Portuguese
sovereignty in Africa, a sovereignty which, in a manner, had been
recently disputed by France. There is no evidence in this treaty or in
the negotiations which preceded it, that England contested at the time
or had ever contested the sovereignty of Portugal over Angola. This
treaty supplied Portugal with a new title-deed to the coast of Cabinda
and Mollembo; and it throws important light upon the actual political
status of that coast down to the year 1810.

During the years immediately following the restoration of the exiled
dynasty, the signing of treaties between Portugal and Great Britain
continued to be a no less frequent occurrence than it had been since
1807. There was not, at this later period, any question of alliance; the
*do Ut des* principle could no longer be invoked; but the abolition
policy to which the Portuguese government was driven in the days of its
distress remained a fruitful source of discussion between the two
states, and soon grew to be a vexed question. The treaty of 1810 had not
been faithfully observed by Portugal. Great Britain was not disposed to
relent. New promises were forced from Portugal, and a series of
treaties, each more stringent than the other, was again concluded
between them. Among these treaties, those of January 22,
1815,^[\[10\]](#n10){#n10.}^ and July 28, 1817,^[\[11\]](#n11){#n11.}^
are again important as defining anew the extent of Portuguese dominion
in West Africa. Article i. of the former and article ii. of the latter
enumerate the territories in which the traffic in slaves should continue
to be permitted under certain restrictions to Portuguese subjects, only
on the ground that those territories were owned by Portugal. They were,
upon the west coast, all the territory extending from the eighth to the
eighteenth degree of south latitude; and "those territories to the south
of the equator, over which H.M.F.M. declares that he retains his rights,
namely, the territories of Mollembo and Cabinda, from the fifth degree
to the eighth degree south latitude." In other words, these treaties
recognized the sovereignty of Portugal over the whole western littoral
of Africa, from the fifth to the eighteenth degree south latitude.

Although by these treaties the British cruisers were clothed with
extraordinary powers of visitation and search, the trade does not seem
to have been materially affected. Great Britain continued to complain;
^[\[12\]](#n12){#n12.}^ she demanded and obtained from Portugal a decree
fixing a date after which the trade should be absolutely interdicted;
^[\[13\]](#n13){#n13.}^ she then obtained from the same state a decree
declaring the traffic in negroes to be a crime, and punishable by law;
^[\[14\]](#n14){#n14.}^ and, finally, seeing that notwithstanding all
these precautions the slave-trade continued uninterrupted, especially in
the ports of Cabinda and Ambriz, she questioned Portugal's right of
sovereignty over the coast of Angola, alleging that those territories
were evidently not occupied in a manner that was sufficiently effective
and permanent. If the object of the cabinet of London, in resorting to
such an extreme measure, was, as it is claimed, wholly disinterested,
and if it was only intended to intimidate Portugal, it was highly
successful. Portugal promptly agreed to the treaty of
1842,^[\[15\]](#n15){#n15.}^ by which the trade was to be immediately
suppressed; and the Portuguese officials at Cabinda and Ambriz, and all
along the coast, were seized with unwonted zeal for the execution of
their diplomatic engagements. The cabinet of London, it would seem,
wished to stimulate this zeal; and, pursuing the new policy that had
been inaugurated in 1842, it proposed to Portugal, in 1846, to recognize
the sovereignty and ownership of the latter over Angola, provided that
after a certain number of years, to be subsequently agreed upon, the
Portuguese should make it appear to the satisfaction of the British
government that the slave-trade was wholly suppressed in West Africa.
The Portuguese minister at London considered it humiliating to his
country to subject her rights of sovereignty to a contingency, and the
proposition was rejected. But the question with Great Britain was
becoming delicate. After hinting the doubts of 1842, and making the
significant offer of 1846, the cabinet of London proceeded to a third
stroke of policy: it protested against the military occupation by
Portugal of any point on the coast of Angola; and it threatened to
resist force with force. ^[\[16\]](#n16){#n16.}^

None of these moves were lost on the Portuguese government. It is true,
they garrisoned the port of Ambriz in disregard of the threat of Great
Britain; but at the same time they did not remit their efforts until the
traffic in negroes was actually suppressed in that region, and until, on
July 18, 1871, a treaty could finally be concluded with Great Britain
declaring that the slavetrade no longer existed, and providing for the
abolition of the slave-trade commissions and the recall of the
extraordinary powers of visitation and search which had been conferred
upon the cruisers on the coast of Angola. ^[\[17\]](#n17){#n17.}^

The prestige of Portugal in West Africa could not but suffer during the
long period between 1810 and 1871. The presence of the slave-trade
commissions and the watchfulness of the British cruisers tended
inevitably to produce this result. But by the time the treaty of 1871
was signed, the authority itself of Portugal was greatly impaired on the
coast of Angola. During this disturbed period, a number of factories,
Dutch and French, had been suffered to go up; and the utterances of
Great Britain since 1842 deprived the Portuguese government, as it would
seem, of moral force to insist upon its exclusive prerogatives on the
coast. But Great Britain was the only power that had ever pointedly
questioned the rights of Portugal in Angola; and, moreover, in former
days that same power had more than once acknowledged those very rights.
The government of Portugal had regarded Great Britain's change of
attitude as the outgrowth of an excessive zeal for abolition, and not as
arising from any views founded in history or the law of nations; and it
had acted upon this opinion. Nevertheless, when the presumable causes
for the policy of Great Britain regarding Portugal's possessions in West
Africa had at last ceased to exist, the cabinet of Lisbon opened
negotiations with that of London to remove the cloud upon Portugal's
title in that region. Nearly as the question concerned the honor of
Portugal, it was of no immediate importance at the time when the first
diplomatic notes were exchanged on the subject; and the matter was not
pushed with vigor until the end of 1882. In 1882 the French explorations
under M. Savorgnan de Brazza began to attract attention in Europe; the
French press dilated upon their importance, and advocated their being
pushed to the south. But M. de Brazza could not carry his explorations
much further south, without entering upon domain which Portugal claimed
as her own. Moreover, the explorations under the leadership of M. de
Brazza were not the only ones that began to alarm Portugal at this time.
A geographical society which had been founded in Brussels, with King
Leopold of Belgium as its president, and which subsequently gave itself
the name and style of *The African International Association,* and later
that of *The International Association of the Congo,* had lately been
taking definite shape and assuming alarming proportions. It had
endeavored, though without success, to retain the hero of the Tai-Ping
rebellion to fight its battles on territories it claimed to have
occupied in Central Africa; and it succeeded in enlisting Mr. H.M.
Stanley to forward its plans by his exertions and the popularity of his
name. Owing to the aggressive language which some of the members of the
association began to hold in 1882, or perhaps because of the
relationship existing between the reigning dynasties of Portugal and
Belgium, the Portuguese government inclined to look upon the enterprise
of the association as peculiarly menacing to the interests of Portugal
on the Congo, and deemed it prudent to check its career betimes. These
were the circumstances which, in the fall of 1882, caused the government
of Portugal to feel that the time had come to take active measures
looking to the final settlement of the status of the Congo. The
negotiations with Great Britain, which had flagged since 1876, were, as
a matter of course, first revived; and the Portuguese minister in London
was instructed earnestly to solicit from Lord Granville a solution of
the difficulties. He was to expose the situation on the Congo; without
in any way alluding to the International Association of the Congo, he
was to explain that it was not that Portugal feared encroachment on the
part of France, but that the uncertainty regarding titles in West
Africa, which had been created by Great Britain in 1842, endangered the
situation; and that it was unwise to prolong such a state of affairs,
lest actual occupation by a third power should complicate the matter and
put the rights of Portugal in jeopardy. ^[\[18\]](#n18){#n18.}^

It was, however, not enough to treat with Great Britain only. The
explorations of M. de Brazza could not be ignored; the factories of the
Dutch on the Congo could not be argued out of existence; and the ear
could not be shut to the pretensions of the International Association of
the Congo, loudly urged as they were by many of its enthusiastic
members. It was felt at Lisbon to be prudent to conciliate these
interests, in order to secure to Portugal the unmolested enjoyment of
her rights. Consequently, at the same time that negotiations were
conducted in London, the Portuguese ministers at Paris, Brussels and the
Hague received instructions to sound the governments to which they were
respectively accredited, in order to ascertain their views, and to
secure their concurrence to the treaty which it was confidently expected
the Portuguese minister at London would succeed in obtaining from Great
Britain.

The reports of the Portuguese minister in Paris to his government were
highly satisfactory. He believed he saw evidence that M. de Brazza and
Mr. Stanley were not acting in concert, as had been apprehended in
Portugal; the alleged treaties between Mr. Stanley and African chiefs
were ridiculed by the members of the French cabinet, seeing that those
treaties were concluded, on one side at the least, by a private
individual and not by a constituted state. He found the government of
France moved by the kindest feelings towards Portugal. He was set at
ease on the score of the French press, and was assured France did not
intend to extend her dominions on the Upper Congo without previous
understanding with Portugal. France, he was told, looked upon the affair
of the Congo in the light of a question that was strictly scientific;
nevertheless, questions might arise which would fall within the province
of the French government, and France would at all times act in accord
with Portugal, whose good will, as one of the greatest African powers,
it was in the interest of France to cultivate. ^[\[19\]](#n19){#n19.}^

The reports of the Portuguese minister from the Hague and from Brussels
were less satisfactory. At the Hague he could make no impression with
any argument based on the declarations of France and Portugal of 1786.
The New Dutch Mercantile Association of Africa, having its headquarters
at Rotterdam, was loudly calling upon its government to take active
steps to prevent both France and Portugal from carrying out their
designs of annexation in Central Africa, lest the Dutch government be
later confronted with an accomplished fact; and the government listened
with a willing ear. ^[\[20\]](#n20){#n20.}^ At Brussels no word of
comfort could be drawn for Portugal, either from the minister for
foreign affairs himself or from Baron de Lambermont, who, besides being
general secretary for foreign affairs, was also secretary of the
international Association of the Congo, and was soon to represent
Belgium at the Berlin conference. ^[\[21\]](#n21){#n21.}^

In Great Britain, also, Portugal met with greater difficulties than had
been anticipated. The justice of Portugal's claims was promptly
admitted, and Lord Granville signified his readiness to conclude a
treaty recognizing Portugal's sovereignty on both banks of the Congo;
but he stipulated also that the treaty be drawn upon the further bases
of establishment of freedom of navigation on the Zambezi river and all
its tributaries, abolition of all monopolies on those watercourses,
establishment of a liberal tariff with a low maximum in all Portugal's
possessions in Africa, and, lastly, cession to Great Britain of all the
claims of Portugal, of whatever nature, to all the territories situated
on the west coast of Africa between the fifth degree east and the fifth
degree west longitude. Distasteful as were to Portugal the conditions
demanded for the recognition of her rights by Great Britain, she
submitted readily to all except the last one. She objected, in the first
place, that it was difficult to establish any boundaries in Central
Africa with mathematical precision, as those boundaries depended in a
great measure upon the oscillations of the colonizing movement; and in
the second place, that she could not, without abdicating her dignity,
renounce the right she had in common with all other powers of
establishing colonies in the interior of Africa. Such a course would
place her in a position inferior to that of other European states, whose
rights to extend their possessions and to acquire new ones had never
been denied or curtailed.^[\[22\]](#n22){#n22.}^ The point was discussed
with much pertinacity on both sides for a twelvemonth, until finally a
settlement was reached on Feb. 26, 1884. On that day the treaty was
signed which, known generally as the Anglo-Portuguese
treaty,^[\[23\]](#n23){#n23.}^ has attained a certain celebrity.

In order to settle the disputes about sovereignty at the mouth of the
Congo, to provide for the complete extinction of the slave trade and to
promote civilization and commerce in Africa-so runs the preamble of this
treaty-it was stipulated that Great Britain recognized the sovereignty
of Portugal over the western coast of Africa, between the fifth degree,
twelfth minute, and the eighth degree south latitude, and inland on the
Congo as far as Nokki (article i.). That the navigation of the Congo and
the Zambezi rivers, with their affluents, was to be open to all flags
alike, and that all nationalities were to enjoy in those regions the
same liberties as the Portuguese; that a mixed commission of the two
states should have power to establish police regulations and to impose
such taxes on navigation as might be needed to defray the costs of
maintaining light houses and other necessary works; that no monopolies
should prevail in the navigation and commerce which were thus opened;
that said navigation and commerce were not to be encumbered with any
internal imposts; and that the tariff of Mozambique should be adopted as
a maximum for the space of ten years (articles ii.-xi.). Lastly, that
St. Juan Baptista d'Ajuda should, in a certain contingency, be ceded to
Great Britain by Portugal (article xiv.).

The cabinet of Lisbon had won its point of honor; and it won more than
its point of honor, but not without making important concessions.
Besides the contingent relinquishment of St. Juan, Portugal's exclusive
colonial policy on the Congo was a thing of the past. But in return her
sovereignty was recognized over both banks of that water-course, and it
was acknowledged to extend up to Nokki, where the river ceases to be
navigable. This was the real point of importance. Having won this point,
the Portuguese diplomat felt himself intrenched on unassailable ground.
The most liberal, the most advanced utterances of the law of nations had
not yet claimed that a river, both banks of which were owned by the same
power up to the highest point where such river was navigable, could be
treated as the common property of the world, and used as a common
highway for the commerce and navigation of all flags. Armed with the
treaty of February, 1884, the Portuguese cabinet cared little in what
direction M. de Brazza pushed his explorations; and it felt itself
protected against the International Association of the Congo. It
believed firmly it had outwitted the hidden foes of Portugal, and
demolished at least one lofty aspiration. It now hoped to enjoy the
fruits of arduous labor.

The cry raised against the Anglo-Portuguese treaty immediately after it
became known was loud; but it sounded like the cry of impotent rage. The
opposition seemed utterly disorganized. Outside of Great Britain the
treaty was assailed on the ground that it conceded too much to Great
Britain; in Great Britain it was assailed on the ground that it conceded
too little. The International Association which had claimed the
territory north of the mouth of the Congo was landlocked. The blow dealt
to it demoralized the action of its associates, the manufacturing towns
of Great Britain, and the commercial centers of the Netherlands, before
all of whom Mr. Stanley had spread the prospects of fabulous gains to be
derived from the absolute freedom of commerce and navigation on the
Congo. The association itself seemed seized with a panic. It had relied
upon the sympathy of the continental powers with its project and upon
what it considered the irreconcilable conflict of Portuguese and British
interests, to prevent the conclusion of a treaty between these two
states. Now that the treaty was a fact, the association thought only of
saving its disbursements; it was anxious to liquidate; and, perceiving
no other way to escape the consequences of the treaty of February, it
hastened, on April 23, to sign with France an agreement, which, on its
face was suspiciously unilateral. Absolutely silent as to the *quid pro
quo,* the agreement bound the International Association of the Congo not
to cede any point explored by itself to any power, under the reserve of
special conventions which it might later conclude with France; and it
pledged the association to give to France the right of preference, if
through any unforeseen circumstances it should be led to dispose of its
possessions.^[\[24\]](#n24){#n24.}^

The discussion concerning the Congo had reached this point when a new
figure stepped upon the stage; a figure of such magnitude, such power,
and such controlling influence that it immediately became the central
figure of all. The matter was forthwith taken from the hands of the
British and Portuguese statesmen; the seat of the discussion was
transferred to the capital of the German Empire; and in the hands of the
German Chancellor the essence of the question underwent a radical
change.

II\. The Intervention of Germany.

Few subjects in modern times have given rise to more astonishment and
more comment than the recent aggressive attitude of Germany upon the
seas.

Few subjects have supplied material for so many articles in journals and
magazines. The old saying that Great Britain only has both colonies and
colonists, while France has colonies but no colonists, and Germany
colonists but no colonies, has been quoted as a text upon which all
manner of prophesies have been risked. The maxim, it is said, is about
to receive an important qualification; and the reading public has been
promised the novel sight of portentous German colonies dotting the globe
in all directions. A large emigration of Germans to any of the regions
and latitudes that are yet open to colonization, in the strict sense of
the term, is however an ethnic absurdity. But whether the establishment
of such colonies is or is not absurd, the whole line of conduct of
Prince Bismarck, and the unswerving course of his policy, both foreign
and domestic, as avowed by himself on the most solemn occasions, is
designed to check the present wholesale abandonment of the fatherland.
No measure that would tend to spur emigration can find a place in
Bismarck's plans.

The statesmen of Germany and of France are to-day confronted by the same
social problem: the problem of increasing the population of their
respective countries. But while the problem is the same in France as it
is in Germany, it presents itself in each of these countries under a
different aspect. In France the population remains stationary because of
the paucity of births; in Germany it increases indeed, but not in the
measure of the country's necessities, because of the hugeness of
emigration. In consequence, the expedients adopted to arrest the evil
are different in each country. While in France these expedients savor of
the enactments under Augustus to encourage marriage and the begetting of
children, in Germany the scheme devised by Prince Bismarck to keep the
Germans at home is to furnish them there with ample and gainful
employment. No sooner were the first exploits of the German navy known,
and no sooner had the press began to foretell the founding of German
colonies, than Bismarck gave the first rough outlines of his policy in a
speech before the Reich stag. He wished, he said, to found not provinces
but commercial enterprises; his object was not to open new countries
whither Germans might emigrate; his object was to establish *entrepôts*
for German manufactures, and to insure to these manufactures free access
to new markets. Bismarck's endeavors sped apace. At Angra Pequena, at
Cameroon, at Samoa, at Fernando Po, Germany had gained a footing, and
German industry could compete with all other untrammelled by
discriminating imposts. The time had now come to take the second,
perhaps the last, step required in the peculiar colonial campaign upon
which Bismarck had entered. To establish *entrepôts* for German products
in remote corners of the world without insuring the speedy, regular and
frequent conveyance of these products to those places might have been
but a waste of strength. In order to supplement that which the German
war marine had achieved, it became necessary to create a fleet of
merchant steamers whose mission it should be to establish such speedy,
regular and frequent intercourse between the ports of the empire and
those *entrepôts.* Accordingly, Prince Bismarck promptly began to demand
from the Reichstag credits for the establishment of the needed steamship
lines, besides subsidies for pushing the explorations in Central Africa.
Neither proposition met with favor in the Reichstag. Nevertheless,
during the years 1884 and 1885 the matter was vigorously pressed by
Bismarck; and he finally demanded a credit of five and a half millions
of marks for the establishment of steamship lines to the East, to
Australia, and to Africa. The importance of the question, as regarded
Africa above all, led during these years to protracted debates; and
these debates revealed the full scope of the colonial policy of Germany.
They gave a complete insight into the reasons that caused its adoption;
the methods, foreign and domestic, by which it was to be developed; and
the important end it has in view.

The Chancellor was reminded of his promise not to open new fields for
German emigration; he was warned to avoid conflicts with nations which,
like Great Britain and France, had widespread colonial interests, and
powerful navies to support them; and he was admonished not to impose
upon Germany any greater burdens than she already bore. Von Moltke had
declared that Germany would have to keep up her enormous armament fifty
years longer. Herr Windhorst, the spokesman of the opposition, asked:
"Are we strong enough to bear the additional burden of a naval force
equally enormous?"

Bismarck disposed of the arguments that implied a fear of other powers,
by declaring he did not expect to see the government of Great Britain
alienate the friendship of Germany by any attitude hostile to the
colonial development of the latter, and thus compel Germany to throw the
weight of her influence against the interests of Great Britain when the
Egyptian and other questions of importance should come up for a
solution. And, as to France, he reminded his opponents that she lay
before the gate of sally *(Ausfalisthor)* of the fortress of Metz. No
danger was to be apprehended from those sources. Moreover, Bismarck
declared the fear that the colonial policy of Germany would necessitate
the creation of a vast naval armament to be groundless for other
reasons. That policy did not contemplate the establishment of any
extensive colonial possessions requiring extensive armaments for their
protection; on the contrary, having for its immediate object the opening
of new channels to German commerce and industry, it only contemplated
the establishment of *entrepôts* on the coasts whence Germany might
introduce her manufactories into the interior. It was for this reason
that, in Africa especially, the British threw so many obstacles in the
way, not of the German government, but of the Germans themselves. It was
for this reason that, with praiseworthy tenacity and energy, the British
strove to keep and to extend their possessions in those latitudes; and
their sole object was to be able to land the greatest quantity of
British products possible, in order to dispose of them among the
hundreds of millions of natives in the interior the moment the Africans
should have acquired a taste for European products. Whatever charge
might be brought against the British, they could not be charged with
ignorance in business. What caused the middle classes of Great Britain
to be in much easier circumstances than those of Germany? It was that
Great Britain had many more millionaires than Germany. The larger the
number of millionaires in Germany, the better off would she be: their
millions would redound greatly to the benefit of the masses. It was the
well-being of these masses, the Chancellor declared, he had at heart;
and it was to compass their well-being at home, that the colonial policy
of Germany was conceived. He was opposed to the foundation of colonies.
Far was it from him to stimulate the exodus from the fatherland. His aim
was to check the exodus by removing the necessity or the pretext for it,
by furnishing plentiful and profitable occupation to the laboring
classes, and thus rendering them happy and contented at home. What
districts supplied the largest number of emigrants? It would be found to
be the agricultural districts, where labor often lay idle. In the
manufacturing districts emigration was reduced to a minimum. Increase
the area of the manufacturing districts, the Chancellor urged, and the
area of the districts that furnished emigrants, the area of the
districts that bore citizens for foreign countries, would be diminished
in proportion. To increase the area of the manufacturing districts, it
was a prerequisite to increase the demand for German manufactures. The
first steps to this end were taken. Gates hitherto shut to German
industry had been broken open; new markets had been found for that
industry; all that remained to be done was to seize those markets; the
credits asked for would complete the work.

Notwithstanding such lucid explanation, the measure was stubbornly
opposed; the supporters of the government succeeded ultimately in saving
the line to Australia only. The line to Africa was rejected in the teeth
of Bismarck's strenuous efforts. Bismarck was touched in his most
sensitive part by the bitterness of the resistance he had met; and,
stirred by the failure of what he considered the most important portion
of the important measure proposed by him, he addressed the Reichstag in
language that was as significant as it was poetic. He said:

For the space of twenty years have I been pondering over the strange
analogy so often noticeable between our history and our ancient
mythology; and the thoughts that have come to me have often made me feel
uneasy. In our mythology, whenever the gods were on the point of
enjoying the pleasures of a splendid spring, the jealous Loki stepped in
and stirred up dissensions and hatred among them. That spring of the
year was enjoyed by us in 1866 when, with the aid of Providence, we
untied the inextricable Gordian knot that impeded our national
evolution. Such was the force of our tendency toward unification, that,
after the lapse of not more than four years, no trace remained of the
civil war, and the victors and the vanquished were found united against
the foreign foe. I compare that epoch to the spring of which our
mythology speaks. But it lasted only a few years after our victories of
1870. Whether the milliards have exercised this baneful influence I know
not; but certain it is that Loki, our real hereditary enemy \.... has
risen anew; \... and it is Loki whom I will arraign at the bar of God
and of history if ever he succeed in destroying the magnificent work of
Germanic unification which has been achieved with the
sword.^[\[25\]](#n25){#n25.}^

After these debates, and after these closing remarks, there can be no
doubt as to the meaning of the colonial policy of Germany, and as to the
importance attached thereto by Bismarck. Upon the opening and keeping of
new markets for the industry of Germany, Bismarck pins his hopes for the
retention of the Germans at home; and upon this retention he evidently
considers the perpetuity of Germanic unity to be in great measure
dependent.

Nothing daunted by the resistance he was encountering at home, Bismarck
had continued to pursue his policy abroad. His quick eye perceived that
the state of the Congo controversy, after the treaty of Feb. 26, 1884,
and the claims that had been set up by the International Association,
offered him a rare opportunity to turn to profit the location of the
island of Fernando Po, and to secure free access to the interior of
Africa for German industry. The treaty of 1872,^[\[26\]](#n26){#n26.}^
the latest between Germany and Portugal, had left extant the
restrictions imposed by Portugal on foreign commerce in Angola. Any
objection to the Anglo-Portuguese treaty, based solely on former freedom
of commerce in those regions, would have stood on weak foundations. Nor
could the foothold acquired by Germany at several points of Africa give
her a locus *standi* in the discussion. But the recognition by Germany
of the International Association of the Congo, with all its sweeping
territorial claims, or the seeming readiness on her part to make such a
recognition, would supply the want. Of the two courses, the latter
seemed to be the wiser for the moment; and that course Bismarck promptly
adopted. The sinking hopes of the International Association of the Congo
thereupon instantly revived; and with them the hopes of the boards of
commerce of Manchester, Birmingham, and Glasgow, and of the Dutch and
Belgian mercantile houses; and a new assault, more clamorous and
vigorous than before, was made by these combined interests upon the
course pursued by Lord Granville. Having in this manner first raised an
organized opposition, and what seemed to be a widespread popular cry
against the Anglo-Portuguese treaty, Bismarck proceeded to attack it in
person; and from the commanding height he holds in the affairs of
Europe, he aimed the unerring shafts of his diplomacy. He officially
informed the cabinet of London that he did not think the treaty had any
chance of being universally recognized; Germany, he frankly announced,
was not prepared to admit the previous rights of any of the powers
interested in the Congo trade as a basis for the negotiations; and she
could not take part in any scheme for handing over the administration,
or even the direction of trade and commerce, to Portuguese officials. In
the interest of German should be subjected to the Portuguese colonial
system. ^[\[27\]](#n27){#n27.}^

Although Bismarck believed that the diplomatic difficulties in which
Great Britain was involved and the exposed situation of France enabled
him to control the action of both, he adopted a very different line of
policy toward each; he guarded against furnishing them with a common
cause against Germany; and he strove to detach them from one another by
drawing France over to his side at the same time that he attacked Great
Britain. Accordingly, while he was imperious toward Great Britain, and
in his note to London boldly refused to respect the previous rights of
the parties interested on the Congo, his correspondence with France was
dressed in the most conciliatory terms. He showed himself deferential to
her government, and seemed considerate of the interests of the republic.
Bismarck first broached to M. de Courcel, the French minister at Berlin,
the question of extending the principles of the declaration of the
Congress of Vienna to the river Congo; he then suggested the
advisability of extending those principles to the river Niger also; of
convening an international conference to this end, and of inviting the
United States, Great Britain, Portugal, Belgium, the Netherlands, and
Spain, to take part in the deliberations. M. de Courcel was informed
that the wishes of France would be respected if she desired other
nations to be invited besides those mentioned; and he was assured that
no action should be taken by the proposed conference to force France to
extend to her African possessions the principles which Germany wished to
see enforced on the Congo and the Niger. And, finally, to leave nothing
undone in this policy of propitiation, Bismarck expressed to M. de
Courcel his willingness to abandon any point occupied by Germany in
Africa, should such occupation be thought to conflict with the interests
of France.^[\[28\]](#n28){#n28.}^ Great Britain was the only power of
importance seated at the mouth of the Niger. The principles of freedom
of commerce and navigation had not yet entered upon their first stages
on that river; its navigation formed no part of the Anglo-Portuguese
treaty; and it was jealously guarded by Great Britain. France had
previously endeavored to enter the Niger, but without success. The
prospect was now opened to her of enjoying this coveted privilege; and
the privilege was to be enjoyed without the relinquishment by her of any
of her exclusive rights over her African water-courses. The ill-will of
Portugal, which the French government had but lately declared it was the
interest of France to avoid, and the hostility of Great Britain, which,
it might be thought, it should be slow in arousing, went for little with
them. "*Das kiug und richtig rechnende Frankreich,"* to use Bismarck's
own terms, seemed to find her account in seconding the views of the
German chancellor, and in rendering him the valuable service of allowing
her name to be joined to that of the empire, on the invitation that was
soon to issue to the powers of Europe to meet in a conference at Berlin,
where it was intended to victimize both Portugal and Great Britain.

The cabinets of Lisbon and London had intimation of the powerful
opposition that was gathering against the treaty they had just
concluded. In view of such an opposition, the ratification of the treaty
would have been futile; it was decided it should be cancelled. But the
cabinet of Lisbon did not yet give up its point of vantage. It made one
more effort to restrict the controversy to the original issue; and it
proposed a conference to the governments of Europe as the best means to
settle their conflicting claims on the Congo. But the invitation that
issued from Lisbon, although anterior in date, could not carry with it
the weight of that that issued from Berlin shortly after. The powers of
Europe and the United States were by this document informed that the
governments of Germany and France concurred in believing that it was
desirable to come to an agreement: first, on the question of freedom of
commerce in the basin and at the mouth of the Congo; second, on the
application to the Congo and the Niger of the principles which were
adopted at the Congress of Vienna-principles which had in view the
consecration of the freedom of navigation on several international
rivers, and which were subsequently applied to the Danube; and third, on
the establishment of formalities to be observed in order to render
effective future occupations on the coast of Africa; and the powers
addressed were invited to send representatives to the conference that
was to meet at Berlin on the 15th day of November, 1884, in order to
discuss and settle the matters above enumerated. ^[\[29\]](#n29){#n29.}^

III\. The Conference.

The Berlin Conference met on the appointed day, in the palace of the
German Chancellor, and in the same hall where, six years before, the
Congress of Berlin had held its sittings. The assembly presented an
imposing appearance. Every important state of Europe, with the exception
of Switzerland and Greece, was represented; and, for the first time in
history, a delegation from the United States took their seats with those
of European powers at a diplomatic conference in Europe. Prince Bismarck
was called to the chair, and opened the session with an allocution
regarding the humanizing tendency of the Conference, and its
international significance. He again enumerated the three points for
whose settlement the Conference was convened; these, he said, were the
objective points of the Conference; and as if apprehensive of delay and
of the consequences that might result if the thorny questions regarding
sovereignty were allowed to be raised, he closed his address with the
declaration that the Conference would not consider them. Indeed, the
questions of sovereignty on the Congo and the Niger were of no moment
for the purposes Bismarck had in view. It mattered little to him who
held or claimed the empty honors, so long as Germany derived the
substantial benefits. ^[\[30\]](#n30){#n30.}^

The exclusion of all questions regarding sovereignty shut out the
elaborate brief which had been prepared on the subject by the
representatives of Portugal; it cleared the atmosphere; and the
Conference went to work immediately on the three points which were laid
before it. The rapidity with which it disposed of these points showed
that the principle part of its labors was accomplished before it had
met. All that remained, apparently, was to ratify the decisions of the
mastermind that had called it into being, and that directed its action.
At the first sitting, Great Britain and Portugal gave in their adhesion
to the application of the principles of absolute freedom of commerce and
navigation to the Niger and the Congo. The adhesion of Portugal was
given without qualification. A mixed commission, to be styled The
International Commission of the Navigation and Commerce of the Congo,
was thenceforth to be charged with superintending the application of the
principles of freedom of commerce and navigation on that river. On the
part of Great Britain the single point of honor was raised, that as she
was the chief, if not the sole proprietor on the Lower Niger, it was her
duty and her privilege herself to superintend the execution of those
principles on that river; and the British delegate, Sir Edward Malet,
stipulated that the surveillance over the execution of those principles
should remain exclusively with his government. The two first points
submitted to the Conference were thus settled without difficulty. The
third and last was disposed of with equal ease. In order to render
effective future occupations on the coast of Africa, it was agreed that
prompt notice of such occupation should be given to the signatory
powers; and the state making such occupation was furthermore required to
establish and maintain in each case a sufficient authority to insure
peace, and to uphold the rights assumed by it. After the settlement of
these points, a number of secondary matters were introduced. In the
introduction of these matters, Messrs. Sanford and Kasson, the
representatives of the United States, took most active part; and it was
mainly due to the ensuing discussions in committees, and on the floor of
the Conference, that the sessions were prolonged until the end of
February, 1885. It was thought necessary, in the first place, to define
the basin of the Congo. Through the exertions of our representatives,
supported by Mr. Stanley, our technical delegate to the Conference, the
whole area of land drained by that river was included within the term,
and placed under the jurisdiction of the International Commission of the
Navigation and Commerce of the Congo. In the next place, Messrs. Sanford
and Kasson endeavored to secure the adoption of a declaration binding
the powers represented at the Conference to abstain from hostilities in
the basin of the Congo, and to enforce the neutrality of the basin in
case of war. In this they failed. After lengthy debates, the proposition
was clearly shown to be chimerical; and in its stead a declaration was
adopted by which the signatory states engaged to use their good offices
to the end that, in case of war, the belligerent powers should not
extend hostilities into the basin of the Congo, and should abstain from
using said territory as a base for operations of war. Next to these
propositions there came from the same source a series of well-meant
motions regarding the treatment of missionaries, and the strictest
enforcement of prohibition rules among the savages whom it was desired
to civilize, but who were suspected of rather strong anti-prohibition
leanings. Here their efforts were partially successful. Finally, as if
to give a practical counterpoise to their previous projects, Messrs.
Sanford and Kasson introduced propositions for the establishment of
railroad lines at certain important points in the basin. In this they
failed. But if they failed it was not through want of persistence on
their part. The motion was introduced three times; three times it was
defeated; a fourth and last attempt was made a few weeks after, and a
fourth time the proposition was rejected. ^[\[31\]](#n31){#n31.}^

The promptness with which a common accord was reached upon the three
points that were submitted to the Conference did not, however, exclude
all discussion. The discussion that took place, although not extensive,
is of importance as showing of how little value-notwithstanding the
language of the invitations, notwithstanding the appearance presented by
the Conference, and notwithstanding certain expressions embodied in its
declarations-were its decisions when looked upon strictly from the point
of view of international law. Baron de Lambermont, the Belgian
representative, was made chairman of the committee, to which was
referred the question of "applying to the Congo and the Niger the
principles which were adopted at the Congress of Vienna-principles which
had in view the consecration of the freedom of navigation on several
international rivers, and which were subsequently applied to the
Danube." It was to be expected that the report presented by the chairman
of this committee would reflect the international spirit in which the
invitation to the Conference was cast. In its preamble the report
referred to the Congress of Vienna as having established certain general
principles touching the freedom of navigation on the rivers whose free
navigation was of *international importance;* it stated that the
application of these principles had been extended more and more to other
rivers of Europe and America; that these principles had received their
final sanction by being applied to the navigation of the Danube; and,
lastly, that the declarations which the Conference was invited to make
on this subject would undoubtedly mark an epoch in the history of
international law.

The wording of the invitations to the Conference, and the allusion
therein made to the Danube, had aroused the suspicion of the cabinet of
St. Petersburg. To guard against surprises, Count Kapnist, the best
equipped Russian diplomat on Oriental questions, had been charged to
represent the government of the Czar at the conference. Count Kapnist
was the only delegate on the floor whose attitude was manly. He could
afford to be independent. He had not come to the Conference under the
pressure of danger to his government, as did Sir Edward Malet; nor with
a feeling of utter impotence in the face of a vast coalition against his
country, as did the representatives of Portugal; nor merely to carry out
his part of the performance in a bargain into which his government had
been cajoled, as did M. de Courcel; nor yet had he come to fill an empty
role, as did the rest of the representatives. Count Kapnist was the
watch-dog of the conference. His mission was to hold the delegates to
the actual work before them, and to prevent them from launching into
generalizations for which, at the moment, there was no adequate
international crisis. The preamble of the report presented by Baron de
Lambermont brought the Russian diplomat to his feet. He took exception
to the spirit that pervaded the report, and he objected to its marked
tendency to raise the resolutions of the Conference to the importance of
doctrines of public law. In view of the maxim that silence might imply
consent, Count Kapnist denied, in the first place, that the declaration
of the Congress of Vienna referred to rivers whose free navigation was
of *international importance;* that declaration spoke only of
water-courses traversing or separating several states. He denied that
the principles of the Congress of Vienna were being extended more and
more to several other European rivers; the rivers on which several
states bordered, and to which those principles had been applied, were,
in Europe, principally the Rhine, the Elbe, the Meuse, and the Scheldt;
in so far as the Count knew those principles were applied to those
rivers *pure et simple,* perhaps even with some restrictions; but
assuredly they had not been more and more enlarged. He denied that the
principles of the Congress of Vienna in regard to fluvial navigation had
been applied to the Danube, either in the spirit or the letter of
several essential dispositions contained in the Final Act of that
Congress; he asserted, on the contrary, that the dispositions contained
in that Act had been materially altered in respect to the navigation of
that river. Its mouth had to be opened at a time when a number of vassal
principalities bordered thereon, which were not able themselves to
defray the costs of the undertaking. To that end, a European
international commission was substituted in lieu of the riverine
commission contemplated by the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna. This
European commission had not lost the provisional character which
attached to it from its origin. Count Kapnist challenged his colleagues
to cite a single instance where article xv. of the treaty of Paris was
applied. He doubted the existence of any such case, the explicit
statements in the preamble of the report to the contrary
notwithstanding. The system of an international commission to
superintend the navigation of a river, Count Kapnist insisted, was an
exception to and not an application of the rule established by the
Congress of Vienna. The resolutions establishing such a commission for
the Congo were also exceptional; the best proof thereof was that the
Niger was to be subject to a totally different regimen. The government
of Russia was willing, Count Kapnist declared, to join in the civilizing
work of the Conference; but that government insisted upon the adherence
on the part of the Conference to the exceptional character that typified
it; and, so far from being willing to extend the bearing of the act on
the navigation of the Congo, the government of Russia would acquiesce in
its provisions only in case those provisions were expressly limited to
those regions of Africa which were the legitimate subject of discussion
before the Conference. ^[\[32\]](#n32){#n32.}^ The soundness of the
arguments of Count Kapnist could not be denied. Each time he rose to
what may be called a point of order-and those times were not a few-the
members of the Conference felt themselves forced back to the domain of
facts; and, what is of great significance, each time his views were
accepted and his amendments adopted. The phraseology of the general
declarations concerning navigation that were ultimately embodied in the
General Act of the Conference, was accordingly purged of all
generalizations. These declarations now tamely set forth that an act was
discussed and adopted as to the navigation of the Congo and the Niger,
which takes into consideration the local circumstances affecting these
rivers and their affluents, the waters that are similar to them, and the
general principles set forth in articles 108-116 of the Final Act of the
Congress of Vienna, intended to regulate between the signatory powers to
that act the free navigation of navigable water-courses that separate or
traverse several states-principles that have been generally applied to
the rivers of Europe and America, and notably to the Danube, with the
modifications provided for by the treaties of Paris of 1856, of Berlin
of 1878,^[\[33\]](#n33){#n33.}^ and of London of 1871 and 1883. Thus the
position of the navigation of the Danube was rectified and accurately
defined; the generalizations on the declarations of the Congress of
Vienna, and on the principles of public law which that Congress was
thought to have consecrated, were dropped; and the pregnant phrase
concerning the rivers whose navigation was of *international
importance,* disappeared.

What then is the significance of the Berlin Conference, and of the
General Act^[\[34\]](#n34){#n34.}^ that emanated from it when viewed
from the standpoint of international law? Was the Final Act of the
Congress of Vienna further confirmed; or did the Berlin Conference carry
the declarations of that congress one step further towards the
establishment of the principle of freedom of navigation over navigable
water-courses of *international importance,* whether such water-courses
were or were not wholly within one state? Perhaps it was the secret and
remote intention of Prince Bismarck to lay, by means of this Conference,
the first foundation for the subsequent enforcement of this new
principle. Perhaps he realized the obstacles he might in future
encounter, were he at some later day, in order to bring himself within
the principles of the declarations of Vienna, to be forced again, as he
was forced this time, to recognize a new state on the borders of a
navigable river, before he could demand admission for German bottoms on
that river. If such, indeed, was in part his intention, it was
frustrated by the watchfulness of Count Kapnist; and what might have
been a step forward in the law of nations was prevented. Thus, viewed in
the light of an international conference, the Berlin Conference only
established two more exceptions to the declarations of the Congress of
Vienna; it advanced no theory of international importance; it enunciated
no new maxim of public law; it consecrated no principle of international
jurisprudence.

To these conclusions, however, there may be cited one exception. The
duties of a power, in order to entitle it to maintain its claims over
newly-acquired territories, have not yet received from international
bodies that consideration which the importance of the question demands.
We learn from President Cleveland's message to
Congress^[\[35\]](#n35){#n35.}^ that the Argentine Republic has revived
the long-dormant claim for damages on the subject of the Falkland
Islands. If traced to its source, this claim will be found to originate
in an imperfect understanding of the rights conferred by original
discovery. The affair of the Falkland Islands, the recent serious
differences between Germany and Spain about the Carolinas, and numerous
other instances of the same nature, show a defect in the law of nations
in regard to the matter of new occupations, and are evidence of the
importance of a common accord on that subject. The declarations of the
Berlin Conference as to the formalities to be observed, and the measures
to be taken, in order to render further occupations on the coast of
Africa effective, is a move in the right direction. These declarations
apply, it is true, only to the coasts of Africa; but the soundness of
the principle that underlies them justifies the expectation, that they
may at no distant day receive a general international sanction. With
this single exception, the Berlin Conference contributes nothing to
international jurisprudence. In fact, from the moment when the private
and special wants of Germany were brought to bear upon the discussion
that was going on in Western Europe, the diplomatic character of that
discussion was virtually lost. Diplomacy became subservient to an
economic and social question. The international garb was kept mainly
with the view the better to conceal the private and exclusive interests
which the Conference was intended to promote.

A critical review of the results of the Berlin Conference would not be
complete without a few words on the Free State of the Congo, a political
entity which, though it formed no part of the deliberations, must be
considered as the legitimate issue of the Conference. To enter on the
Congo under the existing rules of public law, Bismarck was constrained
to supply a neighbor to Portugal on that river. Accordingly, on Nov. 8,
1884, a week before the meeting of the Conference, a treaty was
concluded between the German Empire and the International Association of
the Congo, wherein the former declared its readiness to recognize the
territory of the association, and of the new state about to be founded,
"as indicated on the map annexed hereto."^[\[36\]](#n36){#n36.}^ This
map was not then and has not since been made public.

Promptly upon the publication of this treaty, most of the powers
represented at the Conference entered into diplomatic relations with the
representatives of the new state, then already calling itself the Free
State of the Congo, and concluded with them treaties of recognition,
friendship, commerce, and navigation. ^[\[37\]](#n37){#n37.}^ Last among
European states to enter into relations of friendship with the Free
State of the Congo was Portugal. She had still hoped that no further
sacrifices would be asked of her after the complete relinquishment of
her colonial privileges on the Congo; but finally she submitted to this
most unkindest cut of all, and, with the mediation of France, her
representatives signed a treaty^[\[38\]](#n38){#n38.}^ with those of the
Free State the day before the Conference adjourned. The treaties with
France, Great Britain, and Portugal together define the boundaries of
the Free State. The possessions of these three powers in Africa surround
it almost entirely. To the east it reaches the sources of the Nile; to
the north and south it occupies nearly the whole of Central Africa; and
to the west, Portugal ceded to it a narrow strip of land, lying between
her possessions of Cabinda on the north and the estuary of the Congo on
the south, thus giving it an opening to the Atlantic. Having obtained
European sanction, the Free State proceeded to evolve a visible head.
King Leopold, of Belgium, was appointed its
ruler;^[\[39\]](#n39){#n39.}^ and, thus equipped, this novel political
structure started on its career with the millions of subjects it
contains blissfully ignorant of their elevation to the rank of a nation,
and with a number of enterprising men, societies and syndicates to
manage its concerns and to make their fortunes out of it. The
organization of the Free State, if it has any organization at all, is
almost entirely mercantile. The chances of life of such a state in our
century seem to be slim; mercantile sovereignties seem to be
institutions of the past.

We cannot turn from the contemplation of the Berlin Conference without
mixed feelings: admiration for the giant intellect in the chair, and the
reverse of admiration for the pigmies who occupied the floor. While M.M.
de Courcel, Lambermont, Launay, Benomar, and the representatives of
Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway, together with Messrs.
Sanford, Kasson, and Stanley, strutted over the stage, believing they
had in hand weighty questions of international law and were originating
principles of far-reaching importance, they were, in fact, one and all,
either led or driven as Prince Bismarck pointed the way, for purposes
with which they had no concern. Most to be regretted by an American was
the spectacle presented by the delegation from our own country. In view
of the traditional foreign policy of the United States, towards Europe
especially, it was singular to behold this country, of a sudden, not
only participating in a conference called into being by European
rivalries, but going so far as to endeavor to lay the foundation for
future international entanglements of the most serious nature. The
efforts of Messrs. Sanford and Kasson to extend the basin of the Congo,
and to bind the powers represented at the Conference to enforce the
neutrality of that basin, in case of war, looked like a departure by the
United States from its time-honored policy. It was so understood in
Europe. And, so understanding it, it was applauded by the statesmen of
those nations whose raids on the American hemisphere had been balked by
the application of the Monroe doctrine; for the logical counterpart of
that doctrine is the policy of non-interference in Europe.

Nor was the principle of non-interference in European affairs the only
American principle which the attitude of our delegation tended to
weaken. In the discussion with Spain regarding the territory comprised
within the Louisiana purchase, and subsequently in the discussion with
Great Britain regarding the Columbia River, it was maintained on the
part of the United States that the nation which discovered and occupied
a coast line where lay the mouth of a river, or which discovered and
occupied the mouth of a river, whether such discovery was made by an
authorized agent or not, acquired by so doing constructive possession of
the whole basin drained by such river. This position was philosophic,
but it was novel in the law of nations; it was combated in Europe, but
it was insisted upon in the United States. Our State Department has more
than once taken a position in advance of its times, and which was denied
abroad; in such cases, its policy has been to wait until the ripening of
the times should bring about a general acceptation of its views. The
Berlin Conference was an excellent platform from which Messrs. Sanford
and Kasson might have enunciated anew the views of their government. The
mouth of the Congo, and a considerable extent of coast line north and
south of that river, had been discovered by an authorized agent of the
Portuguese government, and had been occupied by Portugal. Whatever her
shortcomings might have been on that coast, Portugal was sovereign over
Angola. It was not for the representatives of the United States to
assist at the carving of a new state on the Congo out of territories
which, according to American principles, were Portuguese; and thus to
abandon, without any assignable cause, the position which their
government had taken on two former and notable occasions.

However, the harm done in these two instances could, to some extent, be
remedied. Our present administration has decided to withhold the General
Act of the Conference from the Senate, and thus the government of the
United States will not stand officially committed by the action of its
representatives. But there is one consequence attending the presence of
our representatives at the Berlin Conference, which no action on the
part of the administration can now avoid. Had the Conference met at
Lisbon, at Paris, or at London, the United States might have been
represented without special injury to her interests. But the Conference
at Berlin was one of {a} series of measures adopted for the special
purpose of checking the emigration from Germany; the bulk of this
emigration comes to our shores; and of all ethnic alloys which the
people of this country receives, that which proceeds from Germany is the
most valuable. The bare presence of a delegation from the United States
at Berlin increased the effectiveness of the Conference in the
accomplishment of its special purpose; and that purpose assuredly was
not to the interest of the United States.

These were the grossest political blunders of our representatives at the
Berlin Conference; but there were others, though of minor importance.
They rocked the cradle of a most singular kingdom. They advanced
political theories so naive and of such primitive simplicity, that their
views were, in mild derision, styled Arcadian by their colleagues. And,
finally, their instinct for enterprise so far overcame the diplomatic
character with which they were clothed, that they left an unpleasant
suggestion of speculation behind them.

The Conference closed its sessions on Feb. 26, 1885, and its General Act
has been ratified by all the powers who participated in the
deliberations, except the United States. Since then, and fortified with
the new advantages he has secured for Germany, Bismarck has returned to
the charge in the Reichstag, and is anew engaged in proving the
needfulness of credits for the establishment of steamship lines between
Germany and the new markets that have been opened to her industry. Loki
may be stirring. Though frequently presented and strongly urged, the
credits demanded may continue to be refused. Ethnic causes may be
silently at work that may counteract the efforts of Prince Bismarck to
solve the social problem with which he is grappling. But whether he be
successful or not, the Berlin Conference will stand as a monument of the
restless activity of the man who, overlooking no opportunity, and
spurning no means which his genius may suggest or which accident may
create, steadily pursues his life's aim of welding into one self-reliant
and stable nation the German-speaking peoples that are settled in the
valleys of the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Oder, the Vistula, and
the Danube.

*DANIEL DE LEON.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Endnotes

[\[1\]](#n1.){#n1} Du Mont, VII. P.1. 70; La Clede, VIII. 518; Castro,
1.357; Schoell, 1.321.

[\[2\]](#n2.){#n2} Du Mont, VIII. P.1. 444; Cantillo, 164; Calvo, II.
167; Castro, II. 262; Schoell, II. 149.

[\[3\]](#n3.){#n3} Cantillo, 467; Calvo, II. 348; Castro, III. 126;
Koch, II. 162; Schoell, III. 225.

[\[4\]](#n4.){#n4} Du Mont, VIII. P.1. 353; Castro, II. 243; Calvo, II.
109; Schoell, II. 109; British and Foreign State Papers, IV. 818.

[\[5\]](#n5.){#n5} Castro, III. 100; Schoell, III. 106; Martens, RI.
127; Calvo, II. 359; Cantillo, 486; Ghillany, I. 170.

[\[6\]](#n6.){#n6} Martens, R. IV. 466; Castro, III. 348.

[\[7\]](#n7.){#n7} Martens, R. 2, IV. 101; Castro, III. 41; Koch, II.
490.

[\[8\]](#n8.){#n8}Martens, R. 2, IV. 103.

[\[9\]](#n9.){#n9} Martens, N.R. 1.245; Castro, IV. 396; Calvo, V.207;
B. and F. State Papers, 1.547.

[\[10\]](#n10.){#n10} Martens, N.R. II. 96; N.S. II. 253; Hertalet, II.
72; Castro, V. 18; Calvo, V. 328; B. and F. State Papers, II. 348; XI.
587, 688.

[\[11\]](#n11.){#n11} Martens, N.R. IV. 458; N.S. II. 278; Hertalet, II.
80; Castro, V. 324; Calvo, VI. 70; B. and F. State Papers, IV. 85; XI.
689.

[\[12\]](#n12.){#n12} B. and F. State Papers, VIII. 116.

[\[13\]](#n13.){#n13} *Ibid., XXIV.* 782.

[\[14\]](#n14.){#n14} *Ibid., VIII.* 18.

[\[15\]](#n15.){#n15} B. and F. State Papers, XXX. 448; Castro, VI. 374;
Hertalet, VI. 625; Martens, N.R.G. III. 244.

[\[16\]](#n16.){#n16} B. and F. State Papers, XXVII -XXXVII.:
Correspondence between Great Britain and Portugal on the Slave Trade.

[\[17\]](#n17.){#n17} Martens, N.R. XX. 511; B. and F. State Papers,
LXI. 22.

[\[18\]](#n18.){#n18} Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, p. 234.

[\[19\]](#n19.){#n19} Archives Diplomatiques, 2de Serie. XII. pp.
284-321; Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, pp. 681,697,727,262.

[\[20\]](#n20.){#n20} Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 329.

[\[21\]](#n21.){#n21} Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 280.

[\[22\]](#n22.){#n22} 22 Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 234.

[\[23\]](#n23.){#n23} 23 Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 216; Archives
Diplomatiques, 2de Serie. XII. 299.

[\[24\]](#n24.){#n24} Archives Diplomatiques, 2de Serie. XII. pp. 326,
331.

[\[25\]](#n25.){#n25} Stenographische Berichte, 1884, II. pp. 719-747,
1050-1087; Europlischer Geschichtskalender, Schulthess, 1884, VI. 14,
17, 18, 26; XII. 1; Archives Diplomatiques, Chronique, 1884-1885;
Memorial Diplomatique, 1884,425; 1885, 39, 151, 183.

[\[26\]](#n26.){#n26} Martens, N.R.G. XIX. 500; B. and F. State Papers,
LXII. 43. commerce, he declared he could not consent that a coast of
such importance

[\[27\]](#n27.){#n27} The Congo, Stanley, II. 384.

[\[28\]](#n28.){#n28} Archives Diplomatiques, 2de Serie. XII. pp.
332-337; Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 664.

[\[29\]](#n29.){#n29} Europlischer Geschichtskalender, Schuithess, 1884,
X. 6; Archives Diplomatiques, 2de Serie, XII. 363; XIII. 140; Memorial
Diplomatique, 1884, p. 731.

[\[30\]](#n30.){#n30} Europlischer Geschichtskalender, Schuithess, 1884,
XI. 15.

[\[31\]](#n31.){#n31} MemorialDiplomatique,1884,pp.721, 744, 753, 769,
785, 801, 817;1885, Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14; Archives
Diplomatiques, 1885, 111. 67, 181.

[\[32\]](#n32.){#n32} Memorial Diplomatique, 1885, No. "pp. 6,71. No.
3,p. 41.

[\[33\]](#n33.){#n33} MémorialDiplomatique, 1885, 41.

[\[34\]](#n34.){#n34} Mémorial Diplomatique, 1885, pp. 171, 185; The
Congo, Stanley, App. 440.

[\[35\]](#n35.){#n35} Dec. 7, 1885.

[\[36\]](#n36.){#n36} Europlischer Geschichtakalender, Schuithess, 1884,
XI. 8; Memorial Diplomatique, 1884, 774; Archives Diplomatique,
1885,111. 133; The Congo, Stanley, App. 421.

[\[37\]](#n37.){#n37} Memorial Diplomatique, 1885, pp. 232-233, 247-248;
Archives Diplomatiques, 1885, III. 130-147; The Congo, Stanley, App.
423-429.

[\[38\]](#n38.){#n38} Memorial Diplomatique, 1885, 247; Archives
Diplomatiques, 1885, III. 144; The Congo, Stanley, App. 431.

[\[39\]](#n39.){#n39} Archives Diplomatiques, 2de Serie. XIII. 225.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Back to the Daniel De Leon Internet Archive](../../index.htm)
