---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# British Labour and Irish Politicians

#### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 3 May, 1913.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I have spent a great portion of my life alternating between interpreting
Socialism to the Irish and interpreting the Irish to the Socialists. Of
the two tasks, I confess, that while I am convinced that the former has
been attended with a considerable degree of success, the latter has not.
At least as far as the Socialists of Great Britain are concerned, they
always seem to me to exhibit towards the Irish working-class democracy
of the Labour movement the same inability to understand their position
and to share in their aspirations as the organised British nation, as a
whole, has shown to the struggling Irish nation it has so long held in
subjection.

No one, and least of all the present writer, would deny the sympathy of
the leaders of the British Labour movement towards the Labour and
Socialist movements of Ireland, but a sympathy not based upon
understanding is often more harmful than a direct antagonism. A case in
point will serve to illustrate my meaning as well as to provide a guide
and a warning for the future.

Upon the passing of the Local Government Act, establishing household
suffrage for the municipalities and local governing bodies of Ireland,
in 1898, the Trades Councils and other trades bodies all over this
country proceeded to form independent Labour Electoral Associations for
the purpose of running Labour candidates against the nominees of both
the orthodox Irish political parties.

At once, as was natural, the capitalist politicians took fright, and in
press and on platform the Irish workers were denounced for daring to
abandon their 'natural leaders'.

But the Irish workers who knew the Irish political cliques and their
leaders at first hand and appraised them accordingly at their just
value, went on with the nomination of their candidates, practically
every trades council in this country being actively engaged in the work
of fighting for independent Labour representation.

The small British Socialist press which then existed had given, up till
this, a cordial approval of this hopeful development of the political
side of the Irish Labour movement.

But so ominous did this movement appear to the interests which control
the Home Rule party that eventually the present leader of that party
took the field against it, and in a carefully reported speech, declared
that 'Labour and Nationality must march together', meaning as all his
hearers knew, as everybody in Ireland knew, that Labour must abandon its
political adventure as a separate cause, and must be content to seek its
fortunes as a subordinate issue in the Home Rule camp.

Labour, in Ireland, did not pay much attention to this pronouncement
against it, but the responsible leaders of the Labour movement in Great
Britain immediately seized upon this phrase and in press and on platform
it was heralded in that country as a 'magnificent pronouncement of the
Irish party *in favour of Labour*'.

In the **Workers' Republic**, March, 1901, and October, 1901, Connolly
made similar criticisms of the British Labour attitude; in his final
article he wrote: "Mr. Keir Hardie, MP, and his colleagues on the
**Labour Leader** have been assiduously instilling into the minds of the
British Socialists the belief that Mr. John Redmond's Home Rule Party
are burning with enthusiasm for Labour and are favourably inclined
towards Socialism. We beg our readers in Ireland not to laugh at this
\... We do not agree with Hardie's general policy, would decidedly not
adopt it as our own, but we believe in his honesty of purpose. We ask
nothing from the English democracy but we do not wish to cross one
another's path. We believe the Irish working class are strong enough to
fight their own battles and we would be the last to advise them to seek
outside help in the struggle that lies before them. We do not propose to
criticise Hardie's voting alliance with the Home Rulers, but a voting
alliance need not be accompanied by indiscriminate praise of your
temporary allies." In his first article Connolly wrote: "The Irish Home
Rule party is essentially a capitalist party \... Its chiefs do indeed
'recognise that there is a Labour question', but they recognise it only
in order to sidetrack and postpone indefinitely its discussion."

A more ridiculous perversion of facts it would be hard to conceive. But
all during these fiercely contested Local Government elections in
Ireland where Irish MP's were brought down in shoals into the municipal
wards to fight against the nominees of the Irish Trade Unions, these
same MP's had no better weapons in their armouries than the eulogies
which, in England, were being lavished by responsible Labour men upon
the Home Rule leaders -- eulogies based upon and only made possible by a
wresting of the language of a politician from all relation to the
circumstances which inspired it.

If some one had said, in England, that "Labour and Liberalism must march
together", no one would have or could have construed it into a
declaration of Liberalism in favour of the Labour movement, but all
would have recognised it as a declaration against that political
independence of Labour which is the very essence of the movement. So it
was with the former declaration in Ireland; but the British Socialists,
accustomed to think of the Home Rule party as a minority party, utterly
misunderstood its attitude and language when speaking in Ireland as a
majority party deprecating all political activities not under the
control of its officials.

This is but one sample out of many that could be quoted of the
difficulty of making the comrades in Great Britain understand the
totally different conditions in Ireland and also understand that these
conditions naturally produce catch-words, phrases and rallying cries
which bear no relation to the conditions which prevail in Great Britain.

The Labour party in Parliament tries to surmount this difficulty by, so
to speak, establishing Home Rule in its relations with Ireland. Thus, if
a trade union in Ireland writes to the Labour party asking that a
certain question be raised in Parliament, if that question pertains to a
district represented by a member of the Home Rule party, the answer sent
to the trade union generally is that the question has been turned over
to the Irish party, and that should that Party raise it in the House,
the Labour Party will support it.

As the Irish Parliamentary Party desires to pose in Ireland as opposed
to all class division, and as a cold matter of fact is generally bossed
locally by small sweating employers, slum landlords and publicans, the
MP from the district never brings the question up and the incident never
is made public, but only serves to accentuate "the pleasant relations
which exist in the House between the Irish Party and Labour". Ahem!

As a result of these "pleasant relations", there was no one in the House
to fight for the inclusion of Ireland in the Meals for *Necessitous*
School Children Act and thus while reformers in England are now fiercely
fighting for the right to feed children during holidays, the school
children of Ireland are yet denied the primary right of being fed during
school hours.

A threat from the Labour Party to wreck the Insurance Bill unless
Ireland was included in the Medical Benefits would have secured that,
the best part of the Act, for Ireland. But that would have disturbed the
pleasant relations also, and Ireland was left out, and a totally
inadequate, unworkable Act without that provision foisted upon this
country.

Ireland is, to-day, the battle-ground almost daily of fierce industrial
disputes. In these disputes there are continual outrages by a police and
constabulary over whom no popularly elected body in city or country
exercises the smallest control; but in no case are these outrages upon
Labour made the subject of Parliamentary questions by the Irish parties.
Strikers arrested in industrial disputes are tried and sentenced by
resident magistrates drawn entirely from the possessing classes; but
although their findings and sentences are usually a travesty upon law
and an outrage upon justice, the smug serenity of our lawmakers is never
troubled by any question pertaining thereto.

Labour and Nationality, now as in 1898, are marching together (in
Parliament) and the fierce battles of the labourer in the towns of
Ireland for bread must not disturb their pleasant relations.

Oh yes, the Home Rulers are great democrats -- in England; great friends
of Labour -- in England; heroic defenders of the common people -- in
England. But in Ireland. Ah! that is another matter.

During a lock-out in Dundalk at the beginning of last year, a girl
picket was arrested for striving to induce another girl not to blackleg.
She was summarily tried and sentenced to prison on a charge of "indecent
conduct in the streets". No unclean language or action had been
attributed to her and the police evidence simply stated that she had
persisted in picketing, yet the cold-blooded scoundrelism of the
authorities framed a charge against her calculated to blast her
character and ruin her whole life. If she had been a daughter of an
Irish farmer fighting an Irish landlord in Land League days the then
Irish Party would have made the world ring with their denunciations of
such character assassinations; but she was only an Irish working girl
fighting an Irish employer, and none of the Irish heroes who, on the
platforms of the Liberal Party in England, are fighting for the "Glory
of God and the Honour of Erin", had time to waste on such as her.

Small wonder that we in Ireland are working to establish a Labour Party
of our own. We have no fault to find with the Labour Party in Great
Britain. We recognise that it has its own problems to face and that it
cannot well be expected to turn aside to grapple with ours. And, Heaven
knows, these problems are serious enough to require the most earnest
study and undivided attention of men on the spot. They require more
study and attention that can be given by men absorbed in the urgent
problems of the greater population across the water.

From time to time I propose to give some attention to the elucidation of
the problems peculiar to Ireland and particularly to this part of it.
For the present, it is sufficient to emphasise the fact that the
religious affiliations of the population of Ulster determine their
political leanings to a greater extent than is the case in any part of
Europe outside the Balkans. But the manner in which this has developed
is also unique. I believe that it is true to say that, politically
speaking, the Protestantism of the North of Ireland has no parallel
outside this country, and that the Catholicism of the Irish Catholics
is, likewise, peculiar in its political trend.

To explain -- I mean that, whereas, Protestantism has in general made
for political freedom and political Radicalism, it has been opposed to
slavish worship of kings and aristocrats. Here, in Ireland, the word
Protestant is almost a convertible term with Toryism, lickspittle
loyalty, servile worship of aristocracy and hatred of all that savours
of genuine political independence on the part of the 'lower classes'.

And in the same manner, Catholicism which in most parts of Europe is
synonymous with Toryism, lickspittle loyalty, servile worship of
aristocracy and hatred of all that savours of genuine political
independence on the part of the lower classes, in Ireland is almost
synonymous with rebellious tendencies, zeal for democracy, and intense
feeling of solidarity with all strivings upward of those who toil.

Such a curious phenomenon is easily understood by those who know the
history of Ireland. Unfortunately for their spiritual welfare -- and I
am using the word 'spiritual', not in its theological but in its better
significance as controlling mental and moral development upward -- the
Protestant elements of Ireland were, in the main, a plantation of
strangers upon the soil from which the owners had been dispossessed by
force. The economic dispossession was, perforce, accompanied by a
political and social outlawry. Hence every attempt of the dispossessed
to attain citizenship, to emerge from their state of outlawry, was
easily represented as a tentative step towards reversing the plantation
and towards replanting the Catholic and dispossessing the Protestant.

Imagine this state of matters persisting for over 200 years and one
realises at once that the planted population -- the Protestants -- were
bound to acquire insensibly a hatred of political reform, and to look
upon every effort of the Catholic to achieve political recognition as an
insidious move towards the expulsion of Protestants. Then the Protestant
always saw that the kings and aristocrats of England and Ireland were
opposed by the people whom he most feared and from recognising that it
was but an easy step to regard his cause as identical with theirs. They
had a common enemy, and he began to teach his children that they had a
common cause, and common ideals.

This is the reason -- their unfortunate isolation as strangers holding a
conquered country in fee for rulers alien to its people -- that the
so-called Scotch of Ulster have fallen away from and developed
antagonism to political reform and mental freedom as rapidly as the
Scots of Scotland have advanced in adhesion to these ideals.

The Catholics, for their part, and be it understood I am talking only of
the Catholic workers, have been as fortunately placed for their
political education as they were unfortunately placed for their
political and social condition. Just as the Socialist knows that the
working class, being the lowest in the social system, cannot emancipate
itself without as a result emancipating all other classes, so the Irish
Catholic has realised instinctively that he, being the most oppressed
and disfranchised, could not win any modicum of political freedom or
social recognition for himself without winning it for all others in
Ireland. Every upward step of the Catholic has emancipated some one of
the smaller Protestant sects; every successful revolt of the Catholic
peasant has given some added security even to those Protestant farmers
who were most zealously defending the landlord. And out of this struggle
the Catholic has, perforce, learned toleration. He has learned that his
struggle is, and has been, the struggle of all the lowly and
dispossessed, and he has grown broad-minded with the broad-mindedness of
the slave in revolt against slavery.

But with the advent of Home Rule, nay even with the promise of Home Rule
and the entrance of Ireland upon the normal level of civilised,
self-governing nations, the old relation of Protestant and Catholic
begins to melt and dissolve, and with their dissolution will come a new
change in the relation of either faith to politics. The loss of its
privileged position will mean for Protestantism the possibilities of an
immense spiritual uplifting; an emergence into a knowledge of its
kinship with its brothers and sisters of different creeds. Whether the
entrance of Catholicity into a position of mere numerical voting power
will lead, in its turn, to a withering up of those kindly feelings born
of its past sufferings is another matter. I do not believe that it will,
at least amongst the toilers. Our apprenticeship to misery has been too
long, our journeyings in the desert of slavery have surely implanted in
our breasts a sense of the criminality of any attempt to impose fetters
upon others such as we have ourselves worn. And out of that belief the
writer looks forward with confidence to the future, believing that the
tale these Notes from Ireland will have to tell will be a hopeful one,
even if the hope is nurtured amid storm and stress.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
