---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Catholicism, Protestantism & Politics

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 3 May, 1913.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From time to time I propose to give some attention to the elucidation of
the problems peculiar to Ireland and particularly to this part of it.
For the present, it is sufficient to emphasise the fact that the
religious affiliations of the population of Ulster determine their
political leanings to a greater extent than is the case in any part of
Europe outside the Balkans. But the manner in which this has developed
is also unique. I believe that it is true to say that, politically
speaking, the Protestantism of the North of Ireland has no parallel
outside this country, and that the Catholicism of the Irish Catholics
is, likewise, peculiar in its political trend.

To explain -- I mean that, whereas, Protestantism has in general made
for political freedom and political Radicalism, it has been opposed to
slavish worship of kings and aristocrats. Here, in Ireland, the word
Protestant is almost a convertible term with Toryism, lickspittle
loyalty, servile worship of aristocracy and hatred of all that savours
of genuine political independence on the part of the "lower classes".

And in the same manner, Catholicism which in most parts of Europe is
synonymous with Toryism, lickspittle loyalty, servile worship of
aristocracy and hatred of all that savours of genuine political
independence on the part of the lower classes, in Ireland is almost
synonymous with rebellious tendencies, zeal for democracy, and intense
feelings of solidarity with all strivings upward of those who toil.

Such a curious phenomenon is easily understood by those who know the
history of Ireland. Unfortunately for their spiritual welfare -- and I
am using the word "spiritual", not in its theological but in its better
significance as controlling mental and moral development upward -- the
Protestant elements of Ireland were, in the main, plantation of
strangers upon the soil from which the owners had been dispossessed by
force. The economic dispossession was, perforce, accompanied by a
political and social outlawry. Hence every attempt of the dispossessed
to attain citizenship, to emerge from their state of outlawry, was
easily represented as a tentative step towards reversing the plantation
and towards replanting the Catholic and dispossessing the Protestant.

Imagine this state of matter persisting for over 200 years and one
realises at once that the planted population -- the Protestants -- were
bound to acquire insensibly a hatred of political reform and to look
upon every effort of the Catholic to achieve political recognition as a
insidious move towards the expulsion of Protestants. Then the Protestant
always saw that the kings and aristocrats of England and Ireland were
opposed by the people whom he most feared and from recognising that it
was but an easy step to regard his cause as identical with theirs. They
had a common enemy, and he began to teach his children that they had a
common cause, and common ideals.

This is the reason -- their unfortunate isolation as strangers holding a
conquered country in fee for rulers alien to its people -- that the
so-called Scotch of Ulster have fallen away from and developed
antagonism to political reform and mental freedom as rapidly as the
Scots of Scotland have advanced in adhesion to these ideals.

The Catholics, for their part, and be it understood I am talking only of
the Catholic workers, have been as fortunately placed for their
political education as they were unfortunately placed for their
political and social condition. Just as the Socialist knows that the
working class, being the lowest in the Social system, cannot emancipate
itself without as a result emancipating all other classes, so the Irish
Catholic has realised instinctively that he, being the most oppressed
and disfranchised, could not win any modicum of political freedom or
social recognition for himself without winning it for all others in
Ireland. Every upward step of the Catholic has emancipated some one of
the smaller Protestant sects; every successful revolt of the Catholic
peasant has given some added security even to those Protestant farmers
who were most zealously defending the landlord. And out of this struggle
the Catholic has, perforce, learned toleration. He has learned that his
struggle is, and has been, the struggle of all the lowly and
dispossessed, and he has grown broad-minded with the broad-mindedness of
the slave in revolt against slavery.

But with the advent of Home Rule, nay even with the promise of Home Rule
and the entrance of Ireland upon the normal level of civilised,
self-governing nations, the old relation of Protestant and Catholic
begins to melt and dissolve, and with their dissolution will come a new
change in the relation of either faith to politics. The loss of its
privileged position will mean for Protestantism the possibilities of an
immense spiritual uplifting; and emergence into a knowledge of its
kinship with its brothers and sisters of different creeds. Whether the
entrance of Catholicity into a position of mere numerical voting power
will lead, in its turn, to a withering up of those kindly feelings born
of its past sufferings is another matter. I do not believe that it will,
at least amongst the toilers. Our apprenticeship to misery has been too
long, our journeyings in the desert of slavery have surely implanted in
our breasts a sense of the criminality of any attempt to impose fetters
upon others such as we ourselves have worn. And out of that belief the
writer looks forward with confidence to the future believing that the
tale these Notes from Ireland will have to tell will be a hopeful one,
even if the hope is nurtured amid storm and stress.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
