---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Many-Headed Opposition

### (1913)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 10 May, 1913.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

That our readers might understand the position, it is as well to state
that for some years back the main interest of the Congress has centred
around the proposal to establish an Irish Labour Party. At last year's
Congress at Clonmel this proposal was carried, much to the chagrin of
the reactionary elements.

The opposition to the proposal came from most strangely assorted forces.
The Hibernians opposed it, the Orangemen opposed it, the
All-for-Irelanders (William O'Brien's followers) opposed, and the
members of the Belfast Branch of the British I.L.P. opposed it in the
name (wonder of wonders!) of international solidarity. To this wonderful
combination of Orangemen, United Irish Leaguers, O'Brienites and
Socialists (?) were opposed the Irish Trade Unionists who were sick of
all the old parties, and had already fought them in municipal elections,
and the Socialists, who adhered to the policy of the Socialist Party of
Ireland. That policy was the policy of encouraging the working dass of
Ireland to work in harmony with the national aspirations of Ireland, but
to go on with the formation of a definite class party to fight all the
old parties upon the political field.

Although the Labour Party resolution, as it was called, was carried,
circumstances have prevented it taking other than a municipal direction
so far, and it is believed in some quarters that an effort will be made
at Congress under some guise to have the question re-opened.

If it is re-opened, we may expect again to see Belfast Socialists who
still retain their affiliation with the I.L.P. of Great Britain, uniting
with Orangemen and Hibernians to strangle the infant movement of an
Irish Labour Party. Already that element was the chief agent in securing
by a majority of one the withdrawal of the Belfast Trades Council from
the Irish Trades Congress. As the Orangeman says "We will not have Home
Rule," so the Belfast dissenters from the position accepted by most
Socialists in Ireland say "We will not have an Irish Labour Party." So
he repeats in the Labour movement the same feelings of hatred and
distrust of his Catholic brothers and sisters, as his exploiters have
instilled into him for their own purposes from infancy.

The great majority of Socialists in Ireland have united under one banner
and one name, that of the Independent Labour Party of Ireland, quite
distinct from the Trade Union organisation, but also in harmony with it.
But a small section of Belfast Socialists still holds aloof,
unconsciously influenced by old prejudices against the rest of Ireland,
and trying to fool itself into the belief that it is opposing the
development of the political movement of the working class in Ireland --
in the interests of internationalism. The kind of internationalism that
is most eloquently advocated by Sir Edward Carson and his followers
under another and more genuine name.

It will be interesting to see this young infant of the political
movement of Labour in Ireland grapple with this many-headed opposition
at Cork.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 13.8.2003
