---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Roman Catholicism and Socialism

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Harp**, September, 1908.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the title of a pamphlet by Patrick J. Cooney of Bridgeport,
Conn., which we would like to see in the hands of all our readers, and
especially those who are struggling towards the light out of the
economic darkness of today. To Catholics who have been repelled from
socialism by the blatant and rude atheism of some of its irresponsible
advocates -- and unfortunately the number of such Catholics is legion --
this book will be as refreshing as an oasis in the desert to the tired
and thirsty traveller.

The author is an active Catholic and at the same time a militant
socialist, and in his presentation of our socialist doctrines he never
wavers in his allegiance to either. Here and there indeed his loyalty to
the Church seems to betray him into statements regarding her position
which to our mind would hardly stand the test of modern criticism and
historical research. But we confess that in that respect his attitude is
a refreshing change from that of the crudely superficial thinkers (?)
and scribblers who so commonly discredit the socialist ranks by their
dogmatisms on that subject. If we had to choose between the perfervid
Catholicity of our author and the blatant anti-Catholicism of the men
who are so fond of repelling earnest Catholics by their assertion that
the great conflict of the social revolution will be between the forces
of the Catholic Church and those of socialism, then we should prefer the
position of Comrade Cooney as containing the highest propagandist value,
as well as being, if historical precedents count for anything, the most
probable to last and stand the test of time. As a matter of fact the
Catholic Church always accepts the established order, even if it has
warred upon those who had striven to establish such order.

To use a homely adage the Church "does not put all her eggs in one
basket," and the man who imagines that in the supreme hour of the
proletarian struggle for victory the Church will definitely line up with
the forces of capitalism, and pledge her very existence as a Church upon
the hazardous chance of the capitalists winning, simply does not
understand the first thing about the policy of the Church in the social
or political revolutions of the past. Just as in Ireland the Church
denounced every Irish revolutionary movement in its day of activity, as
in 1798, 1848 and 1867, and yet allowed its priests to deliver speeches
in eulogy of the active spirits of those movements a generation
afterwards, so in the future the Church, which has its hand close upon
the pulse of human society, when it realises that the cause of
capitalism is a lost cause it will find excuse enough to allow freedom
of speech and expression to those lowly priests whose socialist
declarations it will then use to cover and hide the absolute
anti-socialism of the Roman Propaganda. When that day comes the Papal
Encyclical against socialism will be conveniently forgotten by the Papal
historians, and the socialist utterances, of the von Kettelers, the
McGlynns, and McGradys will be heralded forth and the communistic
utterances of the early fathers as proofs of Catholic sympathy with
progressive ideas. Thus it has been in the past. Thus it will be, at
least attempted, in the future. We are not concerned to champion or to
deny the morality of such a cause in anticipation, we are simply
attempting to read the lessons of the past into the future. And, we
modestly submit, this forecast has infinitely more of probability in it
than the dreams of those who tell us so glibly of a coming Armageddon
between the forces of socialism and Catholicism. Such dreams are not the
product of modern socialist philosophy, they are a survival from the
obsolete philosophy of the days preceding the first French Revolution.

To the free-thinkers and rebels of those days -- and the professional
free-thinkers of today have not advanced much beyond that mental stage
-- God and the Church were nothing more than the schemes of a designing
priesthood intent on enslaving and robbing the credulous masses.
Religion was a systematised business of deception and trickery invented
and perpetuated by men thoroughly aware of its falsehood and baseness,
and consciously laying plans to maintain and spread it for their own
selfish ends. Kings and rulers of all kinds were the creation of this
crafty priesthood which used them to its own purposes. That we are not
in the slightest degree mistating the ideas of the times we are
criticising any student of the early freethought literature will readily
concede. That many otherwise excellent comrades have brought such ideas
over into the camp of socialism is also undeniable. But that they are
also held by an even greater number of enemies of socialism is truer
still. And it is in truth in the camp of the enemy such ideas belong,
such doctrines are the legitimate children of the teachings of
individualism, and their first progenitors both in England and France
were also the first great exponents of the capitalist doctrines of free
trade and free competition, free contract and free labour. Such
conceptions of religion are entirely opposed to the modern doctrine that
the intellectual conceptions of men are the product of their material
conditions, and flow in the grooves channelled out by he economic
environment.

In the light of this modern conception of the conditions of historical
progress religion appears as the outcome of the efforts of mankind to
interpret the workings of the forces of nature, and to translate its
phenomena into the terms of a language which could be understood. The
undeveloped mind cannot grasp an abstract proposition. Therefore that
which the cultured man of the twentieth century would explain and
understand as 'a natural process,' the mental vision of our forefathers
could only see as the result of the good or ill will of some beneficent
or evil spirit -- some God or Devil.

Hence we had in Ireland in our Celtic legends a plentiful store of
fairies, leprechauns and good and evil spirits, and every thing on land
or sea, on wind or water that our fathers did not understand was readily
attributed to the good or perverse genius of some member or members of
this fairy host. In their turn the fairies were the descendants of the
servants of the 'Unknown God' whom the Celt of old worshipped in his
Druidic Groves. Anyone at all acquainted with the beliefs of the Irish
peasant before the advent of the National School to 'spoil' him of his
innocence is well aware chat his Catholicity was almost inextricably
mingled with a belief in fairy lore and legend that testified that he
was still in a transition state of mentality between belief in the
spirits of Druidism and the angels of Catholicity.

He would have hotly repudiated such an insinuation. But to the seeing
eye the proofs were palpable and undeniable, and this mental development
of the Irish Celt towards a clearer conception of the universe, this
progress, for it was a progress, from the conception of a world
helplessly torn by the warring of spirits to the conception of a world
ruled by a Creator holding a spirit world in subjection for a beneficent
purpose, this development was paralleled throughout the earth by all the
advanced races in their upward march to the conquest of truth. The point
to be noted is this:

The different stages of development of the human mind in its attitude
towards the forces of Nature created different priesthoods to interpret
them, and the mental conceptions of mankind as interpreted by those
priesthoods became, when systematised, Religion. Religions are simply
expressions of the human conceptions of the natural world; these
religions have created the priesthoods. Only he who stands upon the
individualist conceptions of history can logically claim that
priesthoods created religion. Modern historical science utterly rejects
the idea as absurd.

Yet it is this utterly unhistorical idea, rejected by historical science
as it is also rejected by the record of the countless thousands of
priests of all religions who have cheerfully gone to martyrdom for their
beliefs and martyrdom is incredible in a conscious imposter -- it -- it
is this belief that is often brought in and made to do duty as a result
of socialist thought by those who ought to know better. It is a matter
for congratulation that Irish socialists are free of such excrescences
on socialist belief.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 8.8.2003
