---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Irish Masses in History

### (1908)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The Harp**, September, 1908.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In its issue of August 8, the Boston **Pilot** had a very interesting
article upon the life of a typical Irish girl of ancient Ireland. The
article dealt with the life of the ancient Irish as it has been
reconstructed by antiquarians from a study of the gold and silver
ornaments found in various bogs in Ireland, and from the allusions to
the use of those ornaments made in old Irish manuscripts

All this is interesting, especially to those who desire to have their
Irish patriotism or pride of race buttressed up by historical data. And,
of course, there are many such.

I, also, was much interested in the article, but for another reason. To
me it was especially interesting as illustrative of the curious effect
modern property relations have upon the mind of even the most gifted
amongst us. The gifted authoress of the article in question took as the
imaginary subject of her sketch an ancient Irish princess and
reconstructed her life in the most ingenious manner, describing her
lying down and uprising, her hunting and riding and chess-playing and
sweet-hearting and, in fact, all the incidents in which an Irish
princess is revealed or touched upon by the old Irish manuscripts in
song or story.

In all of those pursuits she was waited upon by a slave woman, a
different slave woman for each separate amusement; in all, there must
have been at least a dozen different slave women waiting upon the one
princess, and what appeared to my cold Socialistic mind as curious was
that the writer wrote and treated of the princess as a typical 'colleen'
of ancient Ireland, and utterly neglected to recognise in the slave
women any right to be regarded as Irish types at all.

Yet when we remember that for every princess living the life of luxury
and ease sketched by the Pilot writer there must have been at least a
dozen other women attending her and a hundred other Irish women working
in the fields attending cattle and weaving and spinning to feed and
clothe and house and ornament her, it must be conceded that any one of
these hundred useful Irish women had more right to be considered
'typical Irish colleens' than the useless drone whose life our authoress
has reconstructed with such loving fidelity and care.

By all means tell us about the typical colleens of ancient Erin, shake
up for us the dry bones of history and tell us about the wives and
mothers and daughters of the producing classes of our native country,
but do not ask us to believe that a princess was anything more than a
type of the class to which she belonged -- a predatory useless class --
a class whose predatory proclivities hindered the free development of
the nation and prepared the way for its subjection.

What a history that would be which would tell us the history of the real
women of Ireland -- the women of the people ! What a record of ceaseless
suffering, of heroism, of martyrdom! What a recital of patient toil, of
uncomplaining self-sacrifice, of unending abnegation! Aye, and what a
brilliant tale of things accomplished, of deeds done, of miracles
achieved!

Think of all the insurrections against British tyranny in Ireland, and
as you honour the men who went out to front the armed force of the
oppressors think also of the brave women who kissed them and cried over
them ere they went, but bade them go for freedom's sake.

Think of all the slimy roll of informers in Erin, and wonder when you
remember how seldom even tradition places a woman's name upon the list.

Think of the long and bloody history of the fight against private
property in Irish land -- against Irish landlordism, and when you
remember how the Irish mother, the woman of the house, consented to
suffer eviction and ruin rather than let her husband betray the cause of
his friends and neighbours, then if you believe in a God thank Him for
the spirit and courage and honour of our Irish womanhood.

But then you will not be accepting princesses as the types of Irish
life, you will be looking for types of the real womanhood of Ireland
where only they can be found, among the producing classes.

Those Irish girds who in the recent dock strike in Belfast joined their
fathers and brothers and sweethearts in the streets to battle against
the English troops imported in the interests of Irish capitalism are to
my mind a thousand times more admirable 'types of Irish colleens' than
the noblest bean uasal of Gaelic Erin much as I admire the latter.

What would we think of the historian who would picture the life of the
daughter of an Irish aristocrat of today, and then tell us that this was
a picture of the life of a typical Irish girl of the twentieth century?
We would laugh him to scorn. Yet that is the manner in which history is
written.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 8.8.2003
