---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Lafargue](../../index.htm)

 

## Paul Lafargue

# Economic Determinism and the Natural and Mathematical Sciences

### (March 1906)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Source:** *Social Democrat*, Vol.10 no.3, March 1906, pp.137, 145.\
**Transcribed:** Ted Crawford. for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Will you afford me a little space in which to refute an assertion of
Bax? Not that I wish to substitute myself for Rothstein, who needs no
one to answer for him, nor do I desire to discuss the value "in itself"
of the Marxist method; I avoid the scholastic discussions beloved of
Bax's metaphysical mind.

Bax claims to demonstrate the imperfection of the method in affirming
that the natural and mathematical sciences are not attached by any
connection to the economic conditions, or if such connections exist they
are of insignificant importance. This is a rather bold assertion!

Bax says, with perfect justice, "that man attained to natural knowledge
essentially through observation of fact (supplemented later on by
experiment), and reasoning from fact." But are not the every-day
experiences and observations made constantly by men in procuring the
means of existence a thousand times more numerous and varied than those
made by savants in their petty scientific laboratories? Are those
observations which are made in the gigantic economic laboratory not
susceptible of forcing man to reason and to seek out general laws?

"The doctrine of Natural Selection" which Bax has cited in support of
his thesis is on the contrary an excellent example of the superiority of
the method that he condemns. In effect, Darwin gathered in the economic
world the observations and the experiences which he needed to complete
the observations which he and the naturalists had made in the natural
world, and to conceive his doctrine. Let Bax open the "Origin of
Species" and he will read that Darwin says that the first suggestion of
his theory was afforded him by Malthus's "Law of Population," which
placed to the account of Divine Providence the miseries of the workers
engendered by capitalist production, just as Aristotle made nature
responsible for slavery. It was by starting from the social struggles of
man that Darwin conceived the idea of the natural struggles of animals.
But industrial and commercial competition, which, on the one hand,
deteriorated the producer by poverty and excessive toil, and, on the
other, transformed the capitalist into a social parasite, could not
furnish him with the idea of progressive evolution; that was suggested
to him by economic phenomena of another order. He saw and admired the
farmers and breeders around him, who experimented upon the various
animals, long before the naturalists had dreamt of doing so, and who, by
"artificial selection," perfected horses and other animals in order to
increase their exchange value. Darwin is, perhaps, the naturalist who
has devoted the most attention to the variations of domestic animals. He
was led to think that Nature did unconsciously what the farmers did
intentionally for the sake of profit. It may, therefore, be advanced
that the doctrine of natural selection could only have been produced in
an epoch of ferocious commercial competition, and in a country in which
methodical and intelligent breeding was carried on. [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} It
is necessary to add that the works of constructing the railways, and of
mining coal, which have given birth to a new science, geology, by
drawing from the bowels of the earth the remains of extinct plants and
animals, have incontestably prepared the scientific mind for the idea of
the progressive evolution of the organic world.

"The history of mathematics is a crucial refutation of the one-sided
Marxian view," says Bax. Let us see. He is obliged to recognise "that
geometry had its origin in land measurement may be perfectly true. But
it is the correctness of the formulation of the space-relations involved
in it that is the crucial point for the science as such. The practical
necessities which led men's attention to these relations is the mere
superficial and proximate cause." Quite too metaphysical is this disdain
for the "practical necessities" which have caused men to count and to
calculate, and which have furnished the axioms of mathematics. It is not
because the mathematical sciences make abstraction of the properties of
things and consider only a few of them -- number in arithmetic and
algebra, the point and the line in geometry -- it is not because in the
abstract sciences observation and experimentation are consequently
useless and are replaced by speculation, that one ought, as philosopher
of "the thing in itself," to declare that they owe nothing to
experience. They are groups of speculative theorems rigorously deduced
from a small number of axioms of an incontestable and incontested truth;
the axioms, then, are of capital importance. If they are not found
mathematical sciences cannot exist, and if they are erroneous the
rigorous speculative deductions are false. But the axioms -- (two and
two make four; a straight line is the shortest way from one point to
another; from a given point we can only draw one line parallel to
another straight line, etc. -- this third and important axiom bears the
name of the *postulatum* of Euclid) -- are undemonstrable. Leibnitz has
vainly endeavoured to demonstrate that 2 and 2 make 4. They have been
given to us not by reasoning but by experience, and, I would add, by
economic experience.

It is probable that animals have bequeathed us many axioms. For example,
ducks in going to the water follow a straight line as being the shortest
way; pigeons know that 1 and 1 make 2, since they do not sit until they
have laid two eggs, etc. Economic experience has given a value to the
axioms inherited from the animals and has caused others to be discovered
of equal importance, as, for instance, the *postulatum* of Euclid.

We know that numeration is very limited among savages, that many of them
can only count up to 20 and that the first figures have, in their
language, the names of the fingers because they count by naming and
touching the fingers one after the other. The savage must extend his
numeration in proportion as the number of animals and other objects he
may possess increases. When they are too numerous to be counted on the
fingers, he makes use of pebbles, as is shown by the word "calculate,"
which comes from the Latin calculus, signifying pebble; in order to
obtain an account of their augmentation, he is obliged to invent
addition, the beginning of arithmetic, and algebra, the operations of
which are only additions transformed, complicated by unknown and
imaginary quantities, and simplified; and in order to state any decrease
in their numbers he must invent subtraction, which is only the addition
of that which remains to that which has disappeared -- the unknown
quantity to be found. The Romans performed these two operations with
pebbles, as is evidenced by the expressions *calculum ponere,* to place
the pebble, and *calculum subducere,* to withdraw the pebble, which
indicated that they added and subtracted, by adding or taking away
pebbles. As exchanges multiplied it became necessary to calculate the
number of objects to be given in order to obtain some other; in order
for anyone to estimate his wealth in animals and other objects, he had
to invent multiplication, which is only a long addition simplified. The
traders of the maritime cities of Asia Minor and of Greece made
multiplications long before Pythagoras had erected the table which bore
his name, and which, perhaps, they had invented. When they had to share
out the gains of a commercial expedition according to the number of
participants they discovered division, which is a complicated operation
of multiplications and subtractions. Many centuries after economic
necessity had compelled men to find the four rules of arithmetic, the
mathematicians made their theoretical demonstration.

If the possession of flocks and herds and other objects developed
numeration, and brought forth the invention of the rules of arithmetic,
the manufacture of baskets and of receptacles for liquids engendered the
idea of capacity; and the production of precious liquids, such as wine
and oil, taught the measurement of the capacity of vessels.

The savage, while he lived by fishing, the chase, and on the wild fruits
of the earth, did not dream of measuring the land; but when he became a
cultivator and had to divide the arable land among the different
families, he had to learn to measure it. The Greek philosopher
attributed to the Egyptians the invention of geometry, because after
each inundation of the Nile it was necessary to redistribute the fields,
the bounds of which had been swept away by the overflowing river. The
men of all countries had no need to go to the school of the Egyptians;
the agrarian divisions they made every year were the masters that taught
them the first elements of geometry.

The savage cultivators, not knowing how to measure surfaces, solved the
problem of equal division of land, by dividing the field to be shared
out- generally a level ground more or less *plane --* by long and narrow
bands, which, having the same length and the same breadth, were equal;
these bands were quadrilaterals, the sides of which were parallels, as
the straight furrows which bounded them were of an equal distance from
each other. The obtaining of these straight furrows had such an
importance that in many languages the word "straight" has come to
signify that which is just.[\[2\]](#n2){#f2} The equal length of the
furrows was obtained by passing over each an equal number of tines a
staff which served as measure. This measuring staff had in their eyes so
august a character that in the Egyptian hieroglyphics it signified
justice and Truth; while among the Russian peasants the staves used for
measuring in the division of land are called sacred measures.
Haxthausen, who, about 1846, assisted at one of these divisions in
Russia, declared that the measurements are made as accurately by the
illiterate peasants as they would be by scientific land-surveyors. This
primitive land measurement, which may still be seen in India, gives
birth, says Paul Tannery, the erudite historian of the *Science
Hellene,* to "a collection of processes, but loosely related, serving
for the solution of the usual problems of life, and the demonstration of
which, when it was made, found its support on propositions regarded as
evident, but which were rigorously proved very much later." One of these
propositions is the famous *postulatum* of Euclid, on which rests
geometry. This "empirical" geometry, long before the creation of
scientific geometry, enabled the Egyptians, the Greeks, and, in fact,
all peoples, to construct monuments which, by their grandeur, their
solidity, and their harmonious proportions awaken the wonder and
admiration of modern engineers.

The primitive cultivators divided level lands which they regarded as
*plane*. The geometry of Euclid starts from the hypothesis that space is
absolutely *plane*. Consequently, two straight lines at equal distance
from each other are parallel and can never meet, as well in the level
lands of the primitive cultivators as in Euclidian space.

But the idea of *curved space* was introduced in science towards the
middle of the nineteenth century. Lowachevsky, Ricman, Helmholtz, Sophus
Lee, and other mathematicians, rejecting the *postulatum* of Euclid,
created what has been called the non-Euclidian geometry, of which the
rigorously deduced theorems are, however, in complete contradiction to
the theorems of the Euclidian geometry taught for two thousand years as
the absolute truth. The illustrious mathematician Gauss, who, at the end
of the eighteenth century, already foresaw the possibility of a
non-Euclidian geometry, dared only to speak of it in private letters,
which have been published recently, for fear of arousing "the clamours
of the Boeotians." The solutions of the new geometry, which overthrow
all accepted ideas, are, according to the mathematicians, more simple
from the purely mathematical point of view, than the solutions of the
old geometry; which, however, retains its practical utility because
surveyors, engineers and architects, operating on surfaces of small
extent, neglect, like the primitive cultivators, all their unimportant
curves. The creators of the new geometry, nn the contrary, take account
of every curvature in space, however slight it may be; and they also
think there will be as many non-Euclidian geometries as there are places
on the terrestrial globe.

From whence came this idea of the curve of space?

The savage cultivators regarded the level lands they divided among
themselves as *plane*. When men conceived an idea of the earth, they
imagined it to be flat, like a disc, said Archelaus. But their voyages
having shown to the traders of the Mediterranean cities that different
places of the earth were lighted one after the other by the sun, they
represented the earth as a hollow half-sphere, the border of which was
lighted before the bottom, But as a result of astronomical observations,
the Greeks, towards the fifth century BC. regarded the earth as a solid
sphere. But the idea of the sphericity of the earth remained barren
Practically and theoretically. It led to no practical result until the
fifteenth century, when Columbus, misled by art error of calculation of
Ptolemy, discovered America instead of the maritime route which he
sought for commerce with the Indies and which the Venetians monopolised.
It was necessary still to wait some centuries before the sphericity of
the earth, demonstrated every day merchant ships, determined the
mathematicians to deduce from it the theoretical consequences. The
geometricians, after having taken account of the observations collected
by sailors, merchants, travellers and savants, conceived the earth as a
sphere, flattened at the two poles, and enveloped in an atmosphere
corresponding to its solid form. All the plans constructed on the earth
or in space would, therefore be necessarily curved; all the lines traced
on these *plans would*, perforce, be curved; the line which describes
the flight of a cannon ball, whatever may its initial velocity, is a
curved line. The curvature these plans and these lines must vary as the
place which they are traced is more or less distant from the Equator.
The *postulatum* of Euclid, on which geometry rests, and which cannot be
demonstrated by reasoning, is then false experimentally. The
non-Euclidian geometries, which appeared to be erroneous, opposed to
reason, because they contradicted the truths to which men had been
accustomed for thousands of years, are then a superior approximation to
the truth. Absolutely plane space, which the necessities of agrarian
divisions and of architectural constructions had introduced into the
heads of the mathematicians, began to be elbowed out by the idea of
curved space only after commercial voyages and expeditions on land and
sea had popularised the idea of the sphericity of the earth and of its
atmospheric envelope.

Bax, therefore, cannot say that "the history of mathematics is a crucial
refutation" of the Marxist method.

I may remark, in conclusion, that Marx did not present economic
determinism as a doctrine, but as a tool for historical research,
valuable only according to the ability of him who uses it. In his hands
it has given us the theory of the class struggle, which explains the
political history of human society. If after an essay with economic
determinism Bax finds it defective, it is because, like all
metaphysicians, he has been unskilful in applying it, and, like the bad
workman, he ascribes his own want of skill to the tools.

PAUL LAFARGUE

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} All plants and animals cultivated and bred for the market
have for centuries been transformed by persistent experimentation; It is
only since the last forty years that naturalists, who had confined
themselves to observation, are attempting some few timid experiments.
If, like Darwin, they had begun by making themselves acquainted with the
experiments on plants and animals made by cultivators and breeders of
all countries, and if they had studied their method of work, they would
be surprised by their numberless experiments, quite as interesting as
that of De Vries on the Oenotheries, of which they had retained only the
practical results, without drawing the theoretical consequences, as the
Dutch botanist had done from his one experiment.

[2.](#f2){#n2} The French word "*droit*" is the equivalent of both
"right" and "straight." -- TRANS.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.9.2008
