---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Industrial Unity and Political Division in Ireland                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 21 March 1914.\
Republished in **James Connolly: Selected Political Writings**, (ed.
Owen Dudley Edwards & Bernard Ransom), New York 1974.\
The 3 paragraphs on partition appeared in the collection **Ireland Upon
the Dissecting Table**, published by the Cork Workers' Club.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I have so often animadverted upon the manner in which the Transport
Unions of Great Britain have scabbed upon the Irish Transport and
General Workers' Union in Dublin that I feel a real pleasure in being
able to announce to the readers of **Forward** that a definite movement
is now on foot among the same bodies to compel the proprietors of the
Ulster Head Line of steamers to reinstate our members in Belfast and
Dublin.

The fact that the weakness of our Union owing to the aforementioned
scabbing taking place at the end of our struggle had enabled the
Shipping Federation to reintroduce the Federation "slip" among the
seamen and firemen upon the steamers in question served no doubt to
emphasise the suicidal nature of the conduct I have complained of so
bitterly.

The Scottish Union of Dock Labourers, whose Executive I interviewed on
Friday, March 6, were the first to promise action, and the other Unions
involved are now falling in line. As a result, I am glad to say that I
see the probability of a speedy, successful ending of this particular
phase of the struggle.

We had a recrudescence of police brutality in Dublin on Friday, March
13. A mass meeting of the unemployed was held in Beresford Place to
demand that provision be made for supplying work to the unemployed.
Several of the speakers pointed out that every possible hindrance had
been put in the way of the men to prevent them registering their names
in the Labour Exchange; that the great number of unemployed now in the
city was quite abnormal, and was due principally to the number of scabs
brought in by the employers during the dispute, and that there were
various much-needed schemes of public improvement ready for commencement
if the public Boards would only act.

At the conclusion of the Meeting, Captain White announced that he would
lead a procession of the unemployed to the Mansion House. Gathering
together about thirty of the younger ones he arrayed them in military
order, furnishing them with long broom handles used by the stewards to
marshal our processions, and the remainder of the crowd falling in
behind started off to interview the Lord Mayor. They had not gone two
hundred yards when a mail cart driver attempted to drive through the
ranks at top speed. Captain White held up his stick to remonstrate with
the driver, and in a moment there was a charge of police with batons
striking like machines. The crowd was sent flying by the suddenness of
the attack, five of the number who attempted resistance being stretched
upon the ground, and Captain White arrested after being most
unmercifully beaten. He made a fierce resistance, and the uniformed
savages clubbed him until their arms must have ached. At present he has
forty stitches in his head, and it was no fault of his assailants that
his life was not taken.

The Liberal Government is making quite a record for itself as a
Government by outrage and coercion. Its attacks upon the women, its
brutality towards the men, its general attitude towards all progressive
forces -- when these forces are weak -- have all the marks of a
Government saturated with medieval ideas -- a Government resolved to
stamp out all opposition by carefully calculated exhibitions of
brutality. The exhibition of the brutality in the most odious and
shameless manner possible is an essential part of the scheme. Indeed,
the scheme revolves around the idea that by brute force nakedly
exercised, the ideas of progress may be frightened out of existence.
Supposing that Captain White had committed an illegal act in impeding
the progress of His Majesty's mail, the fact remains that a summons to
appear at the police court would have served all the requirements of the
law. The Captain is not a fly-by-night, his residence is well known to
the police; his standing is such that even on the lowest grounds it
would not pay him to evade the law or disobey the summons.

But such a summons would necessarily result in a trial when the whole
case would be argued out cold-bloodedly and strictly according to the
legal aspects of the conduct of all parties concerned, *i.e.*, the mail
van driver, the Captain, the police. But when the arrest is preceded by
an unprovoked baton charge, when such a baton charge necessarily would
produce an attempt at resistance (since human beings have a natural
objection to having their heads broken), then the police are compelled
to exaggerate the importance of every incident, to represent a hand
lifted in remonstrance as a hand lifted to strike, and to outswear
everybody in order to secure a conviction. Then the press gets an
opportunity, of which it is eager to take an advantage, to work up
excitement upon the incident, and to make it the basis of an attack upon
its opponents. Under such circumstances, a fair trial is impossible; it
becomes imperative for all the forces of law and order to secure
conviction, even by sheer forgery and intimidation.

The circumstances attending the arrest of Mrs. Pankhurst in Glasgow are
another exemplification of the policy pursued by the Government in
effecting arrests of this nature. No sane man but must admit that Mrs.
Pankhurst could easily have been arrested outside the hall, but that
would not have produced the terroristic effect aimed at. It was
necessary for the purposes of the Government that the arrest should be
carried out with every accompanying show of murderous brutality and
reckless severity. That this brutality and severity was exercised
against women was from the point of view of this Liberal Government
rather fortunate than otherwise, since it demonstrated the perfect
control over the coercive forces possessed by the capitalist class and
its executive. When policemen can be safely relied upon to baton, kick
and maltreat women, then it is certain that no mere striker can hope
anything from their mercy, and therefore every such outrage is a
training in cruelty for the forces upon which capitalism relies for its
future defence.

Here in Ireland the proposal of the Government to consent to the
partition of Ireland -- the exclusion of certain counties in Ulster is
causing a new line of cleavage. No one of the supporters of Home Rule
accepts this proposal with anything like equanimity, but rather we are
already hearing in Ulster rumours of a determination to resist it by all
means. It is felt that the proposal to leave the Home Rule minority at
the mercy of an ignorant majority with the evil record of the Orange
party is a proposal that should never have been made, and that the
establishment of such a scheme should be resisted with armed force if
necessary.

Personally I entirely agree with those who think so; Belfast is bad
enough as it is; what it would be under such rule the wildest
imagination cannot conceive. Filled with the belief that they were after
defeating the Imperial Government and the Nationalists combined, the
Orangemen would have scant regards for the rights of the minority left
at their mercy.

Such a scheme would destroy the Labour movement by disrupting it. It
would perpetuate in a form aggravated in evil the discords now
prevalent, and help the Home Rule and Orange capitalists and clerics to
keep their rallying cries before the public as the political watchwords
of the day. In short, it would make division more intense and confusion
of ideas and parties more confounded.

Before closing this week, I wish to make a special appeal to readers of
**Forward** for some financial help to enable us to pay some little
strike pay to the victimised Dublin girls. Hundreds of these are
starving; scores are forced to sleep on the floors of slum dwellings,
already overcrowded by the families of the friends and acquaintances who
give them this poor privilege, and who have themselves been victimised.

They are in dire need, and any sum forwarded for that purpose, and
marked "For Victimised Girls", will be applied exclusively to their aid.
I have every confidence that the readers of **Forward**, who have
laboured so splendidly in the past in this respect, will personally and
by securing grants from their Unions come to the rescue now of those
splendid, whole-hearted, and brave-souled daughters of Erin.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
