---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The Outrages at Jacob's

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Irish Worker**, 14 March 1914.\
Recently republished in **Red Banner**, No.5 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcription: Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the course of the abortive Board of Trade Inquiry into the Labour
situation in Dublin, Mr Tim Healy, acting as Counsel for the employers,
waxed eloquent upon the high esteem in which the people of Ireland held
the Quakers owing to the exceedingly charitable work performed by
members of that religion during the years of the great Irish famine. As
a piece of historical information it was based upon facts; as what it
was intended to be, a justification of the industrial practices of
Messrs Jacob's, it was a senseless pandering to a foolish sentiment.
Foolish, because as no sect or party can be held responsible for the
acts of individuals acting as individuals, neither can individuals
shelter themselves behind the record of their sect or party in matters
foreign to their own conduct as individuals. That the Quakers organised
charitable relief to the Irish victims of an absurd and aggressive
social system does not justify the Quakers of another generation seeking
to mercilessly crush the Irish victims of that system in their day. The
difference of method employed does not materially alter the fact of the
aggression. A work girl, sweated in a biscuit factory, is, or should be,
as sacred in the eyes of humanity as a tenant farmer, rackrented and
starving on an Irish farm.

Especially does this show true when dealing with practices by members of
a sect, which are totally antagonistic to the principles of that sect,
which in another and stricter day would have led to expulsion from that
sect as the acts of unworthy members.

And this is especially and emphatically the record of Jacob's. If
Quakerism -- the principles of the Society of Friends -- claims to be
the embodiment of the most rigid application of the higher moral
teachings of Christianity, it must be conceded that the commercial
principles which in Messrs Jacob's are practised in their crudest, most
shameless form, are the negation or denial of those principles -- are,
in fact, the very essence of diabolical cruelty.

Let us be a little more explicit. At the calling off of the strike in
Dublin [\[1\]](#n1){#f1} it was understood that since the workers were
willing to handle all goods, the employers' lock-out would also be
called off. Especially was this believed as the employers had been
declaring their desire for peace and restoring harmonious relations with
their employees, and as at each conference they had been vehement in
their repudiations of any intention to victimise.

Furthermore it must be conceded that the great majority of the employers
have so acted as to justify their claims. Among those who have refused
to fall in line with the effort to restore harmony in Dublin, and whose
mean and petty souls saw only in the occasion an opportunity to wreak
vengeance, the employers of women labour are the worst offenders, and
the worst among the worst are the firms of Paterson's, Match Makers, and
G. Jacob's, Biscuit Manufacturers. Paterson's we will deal with another
time; at present Messrs Jacob's deserve our attention as exhibiting the
basest characteristics, and the most cowardly swinishness in dealing
with its former employees. It is difficult to believe that in Ireland
there could be found any man capable of giving vent to passions as low
and bestial as must have filled the man whose actions we are about to
describe.

Messrs Jacob's have recently been luxuriating in a crop of threats of
actions for libel against journalists who dared to mention the
conditions under which their slaves have toiled in the past. We propose
to give them in this article a few grounds for action against us, and we
cheerfully invite them to go ahead with their action and give us the
greater audience before which we may expose the scoundrelly and
blackguardly conduct of their Manager, Mr Dawson, to the girls who have
applied to him for re-employment.

Let it be remembered that in Jacob's case the girls were locked out
because they refused to surrender their right to wear a Union Badge, or
be false to the Irish Women Workers' Union.

We have been told that when the girls apply for re-employment this
manager, after brutally insulting them before the scabs whom he brings
in, in order that he may parade the applicants before them, compels them
to submit to his examination of their clothes, their hats, skirts and
blouses, to submit while he pinches their arms, and examines their
physical condition, and that all through this degrading examination he
keeps up a running fire of insulting remarks of which the following are
a fair sample:--

"So you had to come back when you got hungry, had you?"

"You have bad teeth, that is with eating the rotten English food, from
the food ships."

"Did you get that coat from Larkin?"

"It is a wonder that the Englishmen did not give you a better pair of
boots."

"Why did you not go to the Liberty Hall kitchen instead of coming here?
Oh, I forgot, this kitchen is closed, and you are coming here for us to
feed you now." [\[2\]](#n2){#f2}

"So you are one of Larkin's girls? It's a wonder he didn't feed you
better."

"Is this one of the Liberty Hall blouses you have on?"

"Where did you get that skirt? Did you get it from Larkin?"

But why go on sullying our paper with further quotations from the
language of this brute, especially when we know that no quotation in
print can convey the vile nature of the insults heaped upon girls whose
boots he is not worthy to clean.

In addition to this the girls have to strip to the waist, take off boots
and stockings, and then in a semi-nude state go before a doctor to be
examined. After submitting to all this they receive the final verdict
from the manager. Usually that verdict is a refusal to re-employ -- a
refusal that was determined on before the ordeal, and was only delayed
in order to give this vile brute of a manager an opportunity to gloat
over the sufferings of the girls.

In the re-employment that has taken place the higher-paid girls have
been usually refused, and only the lower-paid get a ghost of a chance.
And boys or girls who get maimed in this service have absolutely no
chance of re-employment. The firm seizes gloatingly upon the opportunity
to victimise them.

That such things should be possible and provoke no protest from those
who are eternally preaching to Labour upon its immoral conduct and lack
of true Christian charity. Could the records of all the Labour Unions
combined exhibit any vileness to equal this gloating over poor girls
whose one fault it was to be beaten in a struggle to maintain their
rights as workers to organise in the manner they thought best?

As we have said before, the brute capable of such conduct is not morally
fit to blacken the shoes of those girls -- our sisters.

Now, bring on your libel action!

JAMES CONNOLLY.

 

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} The workers returned to work in early 1914.

[2.](#f2){#n2} Strikers and their families received food and clothing at
Liberty Hall during the lockout, much of it sent by workers in Britain.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 20.8.2003
