---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| # Labour and the Proposed Partition of Ireland                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

### (1914)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From [Irish Worker]{.underline}, 14 March 1914.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The recent proposals of Messrs. Asquith, Devlin, Redmond and Co. for the
settlement of the Home Rule question deserve the earnest attention of
the working class democracy of this country. They reveal in a most
striking and unmistakeable manner the depths of betrayal to which the
so-called Nationalist politicians are willing to sink. For generations
the conscience of the civilised world has been shocked by the historical
record of the partition of Poland; publicists, poets, humanitarians,
patriots, all lovers of their kind and of progress have wept over the
unhappy lot of a country torn asunder by the brute force of their alien
oppressors, its unity ruthlessly destroyed and its traditions trampled
into the dust.

But Poland was disrupted by outside forces, its enemies were the
mercenaries of the tyrant kingdoms and empires of Europe; its sons and
daughters died in the trenches and on the battlefields by the thousands
rather than submit to their beloved country being annihilated as a
nation. But Ireland, what of Ireland? It is the trusted leaders of
Ireland that in secret conclave with the enemies of Ireland have agreed
to see Ireland as a nation disrupted politically and her children
divided under separate political governments with warring interests.

Now, what is the position of Labour towards it all? Let us remember that
the Orange aristocracy now fighting for its supremacy in Ireland has at
all times been based upon a denial of the common human rights of the
Irish people; that the Orange Order was not founded to safeguard
religious freedom, but to deny religious freedom, and that it raised
this religious question, not for the sake of any religion, but in order
to use religious zeal in the interests of the oppressive property rights
of rackrenting landlords and sweating capitalists. That the Irish people
might be kept asunder and robbed whilst so sundered and divided, the
Orange aristocracy went down to the lowest depths and out of the lowest
pits of hell brought up the abominations of sectarian feuds to stir the
passions of the ignorant mob. No crime was too brutal or cowardly; no
lie too base; no slander too ghastly, as long as they served to keep the
democracy asunder.

And now that the progress of democracy elsewhere has somewhat muzzled
the dogs of aristocratic power, now that in England as well as in
Ireland the forces of labour are stirring and making for freedom and
light, this same gang of well-fed plunderers of the people, secure in
Union held upon their own dupes, seek by threats of force to arrest the
march of idea and stifle the light of civilisation and liberty. And, lo
and behold, the trusted guardians of the people, the vaunted saviours of
the Irish race, agree in front of the enemy and in face of the world to
sacrifice to the bigoted enemy the unity of the nation and along with it
the lives, liberties and hopes of that portion of the nation which in
the midst of the most hostile surroundings have fought to keep the faith
in things national and progressive.

Such a scheme as that agreed to by Redmond and Devlin, the betrayal of
the national democracy of industrial Ulster would mean a carnival of
reaction both North and South, would set back the wheels of progress,
would destroy the oncoming unity of the Irish Labour movement and
paralyse all advanced movements whilst it endured.

To it Labour should give the bitterest opposition, against it Labour in
Ulster should fight even to the death, if necessary, as our fathers
fought before us.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 14.8.2003
