---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# The War in Ulster

### (1914

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Forward**, 28 March 1914.\
From the collection: **Ireland Upon the Dissecting Table**, Cork
Workers' Club 1975.\
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.\
Proofread by Chris Clayton, August 2007.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that all the world and its wife has its eyes fixed upon Ulster, and
now that I am back at my Post in Belfast, it is, I suppose, strictly in
order that I shall this week say something about the Ulster crisis.

At the time of writing (Sunday afternoon) all the posters of the
**Sunday Press** are announcing in great letters that "Ulster is on the
brink of war"; that "The outlook is black"; that "100 officers have
resigned"; that "Regiments throw down their rifles"; that "Warships are
in Belfast Lough"; and that, briefly speaking, hell has been let loose.
All of which seems to convince us that we are living in stirring times.

Strangely enough, Belfast itself seems bent upon its use lines of strict
attention to the business of profitmaking, and when I look around for
the "grim, determined faces", so celebrated in the song and story of the
Tory Press, I fail to see them, and see instead in all the shop windows
the usual alluring advertisements of next week's sales; in the columns
of the Tory Press the usual invitation to buy and sell and leave all
sorts of property; and in the faces of the people in the streets the
same unimaginative smugness, tempered by the effects of a Calvinistic
theology in some cases, and by drink in many more.

Are these, then, the signs of times that try men's souls? Belfast may or
may not go to war, but if she does she still wears the outward
appearances of respectable mediocrity and slave-driven wagedom. There is
none of the enthusiasm of rebellion for a holy cause, nor the excitement
of men who do and dare all things for a great principle; here are only
the signs and symbols of a people who have pawned their souls for a
usurer's promise of prosperity -- a people who would breathe the spirit
of the Past into all the institutions of the Present, and continually
shrinking from a contemplation of the Future, recite as their Litany and
Article of Faith a thanksgiving that they are not as other men.

Have the governing forces of these countries shrunk from their people in
fear of their powers on the field of battle? Has the Liberal Government
really a dread that the motley hosts of Orangemen led by landlord
rack-renters, capitalist sweaters, and lawyers on the make, will take
the field against the forces of the Crown? If they have, it is at least
certain that the Home Rule population of Belfast, indeed of Ulster
generally, have no fears whatever upon the score. Nationalists,
Socialists, Liberals, to put them in the order of their numerical
importance, feel quite confident that were the forces of the Crown
withdrawn entirely, the Unionists could or would put no force into the
field that the Home Rulers of all sections combined could not protect
themselves against with a moderate amount of ease. Why, then, this
sudden flurry in Government circles?

The present writer is quite satisfied that the "war" scare is all part
of a great piece of theatricals, carefully arranged between the Liberal
Ministry, the official Home Rule party, and the Unionist leaders.

He is quite assured that the exclusion of a part of Ulster from the Home
Rule Bill is already agreed upon between those tricky gentry, and that
the so-called scene in Parliament between Devlin and Carson, the
latter's flight from the House to Ulster, and the rush of troops to this
province, are all parts of a carefully arranged programme having for its
end the blinding of Nationalist Ireland to the infamous character of the
Partition scheme to which Redmond and Devlin had given their consent.

Without some such theatricality the democracy of Nationalist Ireland
would have had time to think -- to think how any of their leaders in the
past would have received such a proposal, and had they so thought those
who accepted it now would have been hounded out of Irish public life.

Think, for instance of the position of the Nationalists of Belfast! If
they are included in the Home Rule Bill now it will be Sir Edward Carson
they will have to thank, as Joe Devlin was willing to leave them out if
Sir Edward would agree.

To prevent the people understanding this infamy we are treated to
columns of balderdash about civil war. You may think my accusation
over-strained. Wait and see. And while you are waiting ponder over the
circumstance that Sir Edward Carson has not given a definite refusal,
that Bonar Law has given a qualified acceptance, and that all the
threats of the Government are accompanied by a renewal of the offer -- a
renewal made with the tacit consent of the Home Rule leaders.

I wish to state it to be my most solemn conviction that the only real
obstacle in the way of the Exclusion policy being accepted by both sides
in Parliament is the fear of the business men of Ulster that it would
ruin their trade with the other provinces.

That the orders to certain regiments to march upon Ulster has been the
cause of a large number of officers resigning is, I am sure, an
unwelcome fact to all the official parties. The Carsonite officials are
not at all pleased, I suspect, at the readiness with which the poor
fools of officers acted. Lawyers and politicians use language inciting
to mutiny under certain contingencies, but they always reserve to
themselves the right to say whether those contingencies have or have not
arrived, and always save their precious skins by deciding that the
contingency which justifies mutiny has not arrived, not quite. Thus they
save their skins, even although they lose their honour. But they
sometimes by their language lead into real mutiny other men who are not
quite such discriminating judges, and who are more solicitous of their
honour than their skins. I rather think that those officers are in this
position, and I suspect that the greatest suffering that will befall
them will be the shock to their feelings when they discover that neither
Bonar Law nor Carson will stand sponsor for their acts.

But suppose mere privates on being ordered to march against strikers had
refused, what would befall them. Imagination fails to picture the
columns of the Tory, Liberal, and Home Rule Press during the ensuing
week. But of one thing we may be assured, viz., that any one of such
privates so refusing who was out of prison inside of twelve months would
be a lucky man.

It is to be hoped that the growing number of Socialist privates in the
Army and Navy are not forgetting to drive this lesson home to their
mess-mates, so Carson will not have lived in vain if he thus helps to
popularise amongst these men the idea involved in the historic appeal --
don't shoot!

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.8.2007
