Marx-Engels Correspondence 1882

# Engels to [Karl Kautsky](../../../../../glossary/people/k/a.htm#kautsky-karl) In Vienna

#### Abstract

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Published:]{.info} *Gesamtausgabe*, International Publishers, 1942;\
[Transcribed:]{.info} Sally Ryan;\
[HTML Markup:]{.info} Sally Ryan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### London, 12 September, 1882

You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well,
exactly the same as they think about politics in general: the same as
what the bourgeois think. There is no workers\' party here, there are
only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals, and the workers gaily share the
feast of England\'s monopoly of the world market and the colonies. In my
opinion the colonies proper, i.e., the countries occupied by a European
population, Canada, the Cape, Australia, will all become independent; on
the other hand the countries inhabited by a native population, which are
simply subjugated, India, Algiers, the Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish
possessions, must be taken over for the time being by the proletariat
and led as rapidly as possible towards independence. How this process
will develop is difficult to say. India will perhaps, indeed very
probably, produce a revolution, and as the proletariat emancipating
itself cannot conduct any colonial wars, this would have to be given
full scope; it would not pass off without all sorts of destruction, of
course, but that sort of thing is inseparable from all revolutions. The
same might also take place elsewhere, e.g., in Algiers and Egypt, and
would certainly be the best thing for us. We shall have enough to do at
home. Once Europe is reorganised, and North America, that will furnish
such colossal power and such an example that the semi-civilised
countries will follow in their wake of their own accord. Economic needs
alone will be responsible for this. But as to what social and political
phases these countries will then have to pass through before they
likewise arrive at socialist organisation, we to-day can only advance
rather idle hypotheses, I think. One thing alone is certain: the
victorious proletariat can force no blessings of any kind upon any
foreign nation without undermining its own victory by so doing. Which of
course by no means excludes defensive wars of various kinds.

The business in Egypt has been contrived by Russian diplomacy. Gladstone
is to take Egypt (which he has not got yet by a long way and if he had
it he would still be a long way from keeping it) in order that Russia
may take Armenia, which according to Gladstone would be a further
liberation of a Christian country from the Mohammedan yoke. Everything
else about the affair is a sham, humbug, pretext. Whether the humbug
will succeed will soon be seen.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1882 Letters](index.htm) \| [Letters
Archive](../../../letters/index.htm) \| [Marx Engels Internet
Archive](../../../index.htm)
