---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

# For the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel's Death

### (1891)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** 1891\
**Source: Selected Works of G.V. Plekhanov**, Volume I.\
**Publisher:** Lawrence & Wishart, 1961.\
**Transcribed:** [Andy
Blunden](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/ablunden.htm).\
**HTML Markup:** Andy Blunden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sixty]{#P01} years ago, on November 14, 1831, died a man who will
indisputably and always occupy one of the very first places in the
history of thought. Not one of the sciences which the French call
"*sciences morales et politiques*" has remained unaffected by the
powerful and fruitful influence of Hegel's genius. Dialectics, logic,
history, right, aesthetics, the history of philosophy and the history of
religion have all assumed a new countenance thanks to the impulse
received from Hegel.

Hegel's philosophy formed and steeled the thinking of men like Strauss,
Bruno Bauer, Feuerbach, Fischer, Hans, Lassalle, and finally Engels and
Marx. During his life Hegel enjoyed immense, world-wide fame; after his
death, in the thirties, the almost universal attraction of his
philosophy became still more notable; but then came a quick reaction:
Hegel began to be treated, to quote Marx, just as the honest Mendelssohn
treated Spinoza in the time of Lessing, i.e., like a "dead dog."
Interest in his philosophy disappeared altogether among the "educated"
sections, and in the world of science it weakened to such a degree that
so far no specialist in the history of philosophy has thought of
determining and pointing out the "remaining value" of Hegel's philosophy
in the various branches of science that it deals with. Below we shall
see to a certain extent the explanation of this attitude towards Hegel
let us now merely note that a revival of interest in his philosophy, and
particularly his philosophy of history, can be expected in a near enough
future. The enormous success of the working-class movement, compelling
the so-called educated classes to take an interest in the theory under
whose banner that movement is proceeding, will force those classes also
to show interest in the historical origin of that theory.

And once they show an interest in this, they will soon come to Hegel,
who will thus be transformed in their eyes from the, "philosopher of the
Restoration" into the founder of the most progressive ideas of today.

[That]{#P02} is why we can foretell that although there will be a
revival of interest in Hegel among the educated classes, they will never
adopt towards him the attitude of profound sympathy that he was the
object of sixty years ago in the countries of German culture. On the
contrary, bourgeois scientists will undertake a feverish "critical
revision" of Hegel's philosophy and many doctors' diplomas will be
obtained fighting the late professor's "extremes" and "arbitrary logic."

Naturally, science's only gain from that "critical revision" will be
that the learned defenders of the capitalist system will repeatedly
display their theoretical worthlessness, just as they have already shown
it in the field of politics. But not without reason it is said that it
is always useful to "dig around the roots of truth." The revival of
interest in Hegel's philosophy will give impartial people an opportunity
to study his works independently, and this will be a very fruitful,
though not easy a exercise for their minds. Those who really wish for
knowledge will learn very much from Hegel.

In the present essay we wish to attempt an appraisal of the
philosophico-historical views of the great German thinker. This has
already been done in the main lines by the hand of a master in Engels's
articles [*Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy*](../../../marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/ch01.htm) which
were printed in *Neue Zeit* and then published as a separate booklet.
But we think that these views of Hegel fully deserve more detailed
study.

[Hegel's]{#P03} importance in the social sciences is determined first
and foremost by the fact that he considered all their phenomena from the
standpoint of the process *des Werdens* (of coming into being), i.e.,
from the standpoint of their appearance and their disappearance. It may
seem to many people that this was not a very great merit, as one cannot,
apparently, consider social phenomena in any other way. But firstly,
this standpoint, we shall see, is even today far from being understood
by many of those who term themselves "***evolutionists***"; secondly,
during Hegel's time, people who studied the social sciences were still
farther from that standpoint. It is sufficient to remember the
socialists and the economists of those days. The socialists then
considered the bourgeois system as indeed a very harmful, but
nevertheless entirely ***accidental*** product of human ***error***. The
economists were enthusiastic over it and could find no words to express
their praise, but they too regarded it as no more than the fruit of the
***accidental discovery*** of ***truth***. Neither the former nor the
latter got any further than this ***abstract counterposition of truth
and error***, although the teachings of the socialists contained
***elements*** of a more correct view of things.

In Hegel's eyes this abstract counterposition of truth and error was one
of those absurdities into which "rational" thought often falls. Jean
Baptiste Say considered it useless to study the history of political
economy because before Adam Smith all economists professed erroneous
theories. For Hegel, philosophy was nothing more than the intellectual
expression of its time.

[Each]{#P04} philosophy that has been "surpassed" at a particular time
was the ***truth for its time***, and if for only that reason Hegel
could not cast aside the previous philosophical systems as old and
useless rubbish. On the contrary, as he himself said, "[the most recent
philosophy is the result of all preceding philosophies and must
therefore contain the principles of them
all](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sl/slintro.htm#SL13a)".
Underlying such a view of the history of philosophy there was of course
the purely idealist consideration that "the leader of this spiritual
work" (i.e., the work of philosophical thought -- G.P.) "[is the single
living spirit, whose thinking nature consists in coming to
self-consciousness, and having attained it, to rise immediately above
the stage reached and go
further](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sl/slintro.htm#SL13)."

[But]{#P04a} the most consistent materialist will not refuse to admit
that each particular philosophical system is no more than the
intellectual expression of its time. And if, turning again to the
history of political economy, we ask ourselves which standpoint we must
consider it from at present, we shall immediately see how much nearer we
are to Hegel than to Say. For instance, from Say's standpoint, i.e.,
from the standpoint of the abstract counterposition of truth and error,
the mercantile system or even the system of the physiocrats must, and
indeed did, appear as no more than an absurdity which accidentally found
its way into man's head. But we now know to what extent each of the
systems mentioned was the necessary product of its time.

["If]{#P05} the money and mercantile systems consider world trade and
the branches of national labour which flow directly into it as the only
true sources of wealth or money, we must take into account that in that
epoch a very great part of the national production still moved in feudal
forms and was its producers' immediate means of subsistence. Most
products were not transformed into commodities, and, therefore, did not
become money, they did not enter the material circulation of social
life, and therefore did not represent the embodiment of abstract labour
and did not, in fact, constitute bourgeois wealth\.... In conformity
with the preparatory stage of bourgeois production, these unrecognised
prophets held fast to the tangible and shining form of exchange value,
to its form of universal commodity in opposition to all particular
commodities." (Karl Marx, *Critique of Political Economy*) Marx explains
the physiocrats' disputes with their opponents as a dispute about which
kind of labour creates surplus-value. (*ibid*) Was not this question
most "timely" for the bourgeoisie, who were then preparing to become
everything?

[But]{#P05a} not only philosophy appears to Hegel as the natural and
necessary product of its time; he takes the same view of religion and
right. And it must also be noted that philosophy, right, religion, art,
and even technology ("*technische Geschicklichkeit*") are, in Hegel's
opinion, closely interrelated: "only with a particular religion can a
particular form of state exist, as also in that particular state a
particular philosophy and a particular art." This again may seem
somewhat trivial: who does not know that all aspects and manifestations
of the people's life are closely interlinked? Every schoolboy knows that
now. But Hegel did not understand this interrelation of the different
aspects and manifestations of the people's life as many "educated"
people and schoolboys still understand it now. They see this link as a
simple interaction of the aspects and manifestations referred to, and at
that, first, this interaction itself remains completely unexplained, and
secondly, -- and this is the main thing -- they completely forget, that
there must be one common source out of which all these aspects and
manifestations that are interrelated arise. Thus, this system of
interaction proves to be deprived of all foundation, to be hanging in
the air; right influences religion, religion influences right, and each
of them and both together influence philosophy and art, which in turn,
affecting each other, also affect right, religion, and so on. That is
indeed what universal wisdom tells us. Let us assume that we may be
satisfied with such an exposition of the matter for each particular
period. But then the question still remains: what determines the
historical development of religion, philosophy, art, right, etc., down
to the present epoch?

[This]{#P06} question is usually answered by referring to the same
[***interaction***](../../../../glossary/terms/r/e.htm#reciprocity),
which thus finally ceases to explain anything; or else some accidental
causes are pointed out which influence one aspect or other of the
people's life but have nothing whatever in common; or, finally, the
whole matter is reduced to subjective logic. It is said, for instance,
that Fichte's system of philosophy derived naturally from Kant's,
Schelling's flowed naturally from Fichte's, and Hegel's from
Schelling's. The succession of schools in art is also "logically"
explained in exactly the same way. Doubtless there is a measure of truth
in this. The trouble is that it explains nothing at all. We know that in
some cases the transition from one philosophical system to another or
from one school in art to another takes place very rapidly, in a few
years, but in other cases it requires whole centuries. How is this
difference explained? The logical filiation of ideas does not explain it
at all. Neither do references made by the generally known classical
wisdom to interaction and accidental causes. But "educated" people are
not embarrassed by this. Having uttered profound things about the
interaction of various aspects of people's life, they are satisfied with
this "manifestation" of their own profoundness of thought and cease to
think at the very place ***where strict scientific thought first comes
into its own***. Hegel was as far from such profoundness of thought as
heaven from earth. "[To be satisfied with considering a particular
content from the standpoint of
interaction](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sl/slactual.htm#163),"
he says, "\... is an extremely poor method in the sense of
understanding; then one deals merely with the plain fact and the demand
for mediation which is manifest when it is a question of finding the
causal link remains unsatisfied. The defect of the method which consists
in considering phenomena from the standpoint of interaction lies in the
fact that the relation of interaction, instead of serving as an
equivalent of the concept, must itself be understood; this is achieved
by both interacting aspects being acknowledged as moments in some third,
higher one, and not being taken as immediately given." This means that
speaking, for instance, of the various aspects of people's life, we must
not be satisfied with references to their interaction, but must see
their explanation in something new, "higher," i.e., in what determines
their very existence as well as the possibility of their interaction.

[Where]{#P07} must this new, "higher" thing be sought?

Hegel answers that it must be sought in the qualities of the people's
spirit. That is quite logical from his point of view. For him the whole
of history is nothing but the "exposition and embodiment of the
universal spirit." The movement of the universal spirit is accomplished
***by stages***. "Each stage being different from the others, has its
own definite principle. Such a principle in history is\... a special
spirit of the people. The qualities of the spirit of the people are the
concrete expression of all aspects of the people's consciousness and
will, of the whole of their reality; they place their imprint on the
people's religion, their political constitution, their morality, their
system of right, their customs and also their science, art, and
technical skill. All these particular qualities are to be explained by
the universal qualities, and vice versa, the universal qualities may be
explained by the particulars of the life of the people provided by
history."

Nothing is easier than to make here the brilliant discovery that Hegel's
view of world history that we have quoted is imbued with ***the purest
idealism***. That immediately strikes, as Gogol says, even anybody who
did not study in a seminary. In just the same way there is nothing
easier than to limit one's criticism of Hegel's philosophy of history to
scornfully shrugging one's shoulders at its extreme idealism. This is
done often enough by people who are incapable of any consistent
thinking, people who are dissatisfied with the materialists because they
are materialists, and with the idealists because they are idealists and
are extremely satisfied with themselves because they suppose their own
outlook to be free from any extremes, whereas in reality it is simply a
completely undigested and completely indigestible mish-mash of idealism
and materialism. In any case, Hegel's philosophy has the undeniable
merit that it does not contain a trace of ***eclecticism***. And if its
erroneous idealistic basis does really make itself felt too often, if it
places too narrow limits on the movement of the great man's genius, that
very circumstance must force us to pay the utmost attention to Hegel's
philosophy; for it is precisely what makes his philosophy supremely
instructive. Hegel's idealist philosophy itself contains the very best,
the most irrefutable proof of the inconsistency of idealism. But at the
same time it teaches us consistency in thought, and whoever goes through
its stern school with love and attention will acquire for ever a
salutary repugnance for eclectic mish-mash\....

[If]{#P08} we now know that world history is not at all the "exposition
and embodiment of the universal spirit," that still does not mean that
we may be satisfied with the current considerations on the theme that
the political structure of every given people influences their morals,
that their morals influence the constitution, and so on. We must agree
with Hegel that both morals and political constitution proceed from a
common source. What that source actually is we are shown by the modern
materialist explanation of history, about which we shall for the present
merely note that Messrs. the eclectics have just the same difficulty in
understanding it as in penetrating the secret of Hegel's idealistic
views, which are diametrically opposed to it.

Every time Hegel undertakes to give a characteristic of any great people
in history he displays versatile knowledge and enormous penetration; he
gives truly brilliant and at the same time profoundly instructive
characteristics, scattering as he goes a number of valuable remarks on
the various aspects of history of the people in question. He carries you
away, and you are prepared to forget that you are dealing with an
idealist, you are ready to admit that he really "*die Geschichte nimmt,
wie sie ist*," that Hegel strictly follows his rule: "to remain on
historical, empirical ground." But what does Hegel need that historical,
empirical ground for? To determine ***the quality of the spirit*** of
the people in question. The spirit of a particular people is, as we
already know, but a stage in the universal spirit's development; and the
qualities of the latter are not brought out by studying universal
history; the concept of it is ***brought into that study*** as a
ready-made one, a concept which is complete in all respects. Here is
what arises from this: as long as history does not contradict the
concept of the universal spirit, and the "laws" of the development of
that spirit, it is taken "as it is." Hegel "remains on historical,
empirical grounds." But when history, without exactly contradicting the
"laws" of the development of the universal spirit, simply leaves the
track of that supposed development and turns out to be something not
foreseen by Hegel's ***logic***, it receives no attention. Such an
attitude to history apparently should have saved Hegel at least from
contradicting himself. In actual fact it did not. Hegel is far from
being free from contradictions. Here is a sufficiently vivid example. In
the following lines Hegel speaks of the religious concepts of the
Indians.

["Love,]{#P09} heaven, in brief, everything spiritual, on the one hand,
passes through the Indian's imagination, but, on the other hand, what he
thinks is just as present to his senses and he plunges \... into the
natural. Thus religious objects are either horrible forms created by
art, or natural things. Every bird, every ape, is the god of the
present, an absolutely universal being. For the Indian is unable to
grasp an object in its rational definition, since this requires
reflection."

On the basis of this characteristic, Hegel considers animal worship a
natural consequence of the fact that the spirit of the ***Indian
people*** is one of the lower ***stages*** in the development of the
***universal spirit***. The ancient Persians, who deified light and also
"the sun, the moon and five other heavenly bodies," which they
acknowledged to be "venerable images of Ormuzd," are placed higher than
the Indians by Hegel. But see what the same Hegel says of animal worship
among the ancient Egyptians.

"The cult" (of the Egyptians -- G. P.) "consists mainly of animal
worship\.... Zoolatry is repulsive to us; we can accustom ourselves to
praying to heaven, but to worship animals is alien to us\.... And yet it
is certain that the peoples who worship the sun and other heavenly
bodies are in no way higher than those who worship animals; on the
contrary, for in the animal world the Egyptians saw the Interior and the
Incomprehensible\...."

[The]{#P10} same animal worship is given a completely different
significance in Hegel's opinion according as he is dealing with the
Indians or the Egyptians. Why this? Can the Indians have worshipped
animals in a different way from the Egyptians? No, it is simply that the
"spirit" of the Egyptian people is a "***transition***" to that of the
Greeks and occupies a comparatively higher stage in Hegel's
classification; that is why Hegel is reluctant to testify that it has
weaknesses of which he has convicted the spirit of the Indian people,
which he places at a lower stage. Similarly Hegel adopts quite a
different attitude to castes according as he comes across them in India
or in Egypt. The Indian castes "arise from natural differences," and
therefore the personality in India is less able to appreciate itself
than in China, where there is unenviable equality of all before the
despot. Of the Egyptian castes we are told that they "have not become
petrified, but are in mutual struggle and mutual contact; they often
disintegrate and then appear again." But, if only from what Hegel
himself says about ***castes*** in India, it is obvious that in India
too there was no complete absence of struggle and contact between them.
On this question, as on that of animal worship, Hegel is obliged for the
sake of a rather arbitrary logical construction to attribute completely
different significance to analogous phenomena of social life. But that
is not all. The Achilles' heel of idealism is bared to us particularly
where Hegel is obliged to consider the transfer of the vortex of the
historical movement from one people to another, or a change in the
***interior*** situation of a particular people. Naturally, in such
cases there arises the question of what causes such transfers and
changes, and Hegel, being an idealist, seeks the answer in the qualities
of the same ***spirit*** whose embodiment, in his opinion, constitutes
history. For instance, he asks himself why ancient Persia declined,
whereas India and China still exist. He prefaces the answer with the
following remark:

["First]{#P11} of all, we must put aside the prejudice that length of
resistance to disintegration is something excellent: indestructible
mountains are by no means superior to the ephemeral rose\...."

Of course that preliminary remark must in no case be considered as the
answer. Further we have the following considerations:

"In Persia the principle of the free spirit begins in its opposition to
naturalness, and this natural existence therefore fades and falls; the
principle of separation from nature is to be found in the kingdom of
Persia, which is therefore higher than the worlds which are plunged in
the natural. Thereby the necessity of progress has come out; the spirit
has revealed itself and must fulfil itself. The Chinese has significance
only when he is dead, the Indian kills himself, plunges into Brahma and
dies while living, in complete unconsciousness, or is god by virtue of
his birth; here there is no change, no progress, for advance is possible
only through the fulfilment of the independence of the spirit. With the
light of the Persians begins spiritual contemplation, in which the
spirit parts from nature. That is why (sic!) we first find here \...
that objectness remains free, that is, that the peoples are not
oppressed, but retain their wealth, their system, their religion. This
was precisely Persia's weakness compared with Greece."

[In]{#P12} this long disquisition only the very last lines, giving the
internal organisation of the kingdom of Persia as the cause of the
weakness which it manifested in its clashes with Greece -- only these
last lines can be termed an attempt to explain the historical fact of
Persia's fall. But this attempt at an explanation has little in common
with the idealist explanation of history which Hegel adhered to: the
weakness of Persia's internal organisation has but a very doubtful
connection with the "light of the Persians." But where Hegel remains
true to ***idealism***, the best he does is to wrap in an idealist cover
the fact requiring an explanation. His idealism comes to grief in the
same way everywhere. Take, for instance, Greece's internal decay.
Greece's world, according to Hegel, was a world of beauty and "splendid
moral morality." The Greeks were excellent people, profoundly devoted to
the country and capable of all kinds of self-sacrifice. But they
accomplished great feats entirely "without reflection."

For the Greek, his nation was a necessity without which he could not
live. Only later did the sophists introduce principles; there appeared
subjective reflection, moral self-consciousness, the teaching that each
must act according to his conviction. Then it was that the internal
decay of the "splendid moral morality" of the Greeks mentioned above
began; the "self-liberation of the interior world" led to the decline of
Greece. One of the aspects of this interior world was ***thought***.
Consequently we here find the interesting and historic phenomenon that
the forces of thought act, incidentally, as "principles of decay." This
view deserves attention if only because it is much more profound than
the rectilinear views of the Enlighteners, for whom success in thought
in any people must unconditionally and directly lead to "progress."
Nevertheless, the question of where this "self-liberation of the
interior world" came from still remains open. Hegel's idealist
philosophy answers that "the spirit could only for a short time remain
on the standpoint of splendid moral morality." But this, of course, is
still not an answer, it is only a translation of the question into the
philosophical language of Hegel's idealism. Hegel himself seems to feel
this, and that is why he hastily adds that "the principle of decay
***revealed itself*** first of all in external political development,
both in the wars of the Greek states among themselves and in the
struggle of the different factions within the cities." Here we already
stand on ***concrete*** historical ground. The struggle of the
"factions" within the cities, in Hegel's own words, was the product of
Greece's ***economic*** development, i.e., in other words, the struggle
between the political parties was but the expression of the ***economic
contradictions*** which had arisen in the Greek cities. But if we
remember that the Peloponnesian War, too, was, as we see from
Thucydides, nothing but a class struggle that spread to the whole of
Greece, we shall conclude without any difficulty that the causes of the
decline of Greece are to be found in her ***economic*** history. Thus,
Hegel puts us on the way to the materialist conception of history,
although to him the class struggle in Greece appears only as a
manifestation of the "principle of decay." Expressing it in the terms
used by Hegel, we can say that ***materialism is the truth of
idealism***. And we constantly meet with such unexpected things in
Hegel's philosophy of history. This greatest of ***idealists*** seems to
have set himself the task of clearing the road for ***materialism***.
When he speaks about the cities of the Middle Ages he pays tribute to
idealism, but considers their history, on the one hand, as the struggle
of the burghers against the nobility and the clergy, and, on the other,
as a struggle between different sections of citizens -- the rich
citizens and the common people." When he speaks about the Reformation,
he again first reveals to us the secrets of the "universal spirit" and
then passes the following remark, which is completely unexpected on the
lips of an idealist, about the spread of protestantism:

["In]{#P13} Austria, in Bavaria and in Bohemia, the Reformation had
already achieved great success, and although it is said: when truth has
once permeated minds it can never be torn away from them, it was
nevertheless suppressed here by force of arms, by cunning or persuasion.
***The Slav nations were agrarian peoples*** (Hegel's italics). But this
condition carries with it the relationship of master and slave. In
agriculture the impulse of nature is overwhelming, human industry and
subjective activity are less to be found in this work. That is why the
Slavs were slower and had greater difficulty in arriving at the basic
feeling of the subjective ego, to consciousness of what is universal,
\... and they were unable to take part in the rising freedom."

By these words Hegel tells us outright that the explanation of the
religious views and all the emancipation movements that arise among a
particular people must be sought in that people's economic activity. But
even that is not enough. The state which, according to Hegel's idealist
explanation, is "the embodiment of the moral idea, is the moral spirit,
as the obvious will, clear and substantial to itself, which thinks
itself and knows itself and fulfils itself insofar as it thinks and
knows itself \...," in Hegel the state itself is nothing more than the
***product of economic development***.

"A real state and a real state government appear only when there is
already a difference between the estates, when wealth and poverty become
very great and there sets in a condition in which a great majority can
no longer satisfy their needs as they are accustomed to."

In exactly the same way, the historical origin of ***marriage*** in
Hegel is closely connected with the ***economic*** history of mankind.

["The]{#P14} true beginning, and the first institution, of the state
have correctly been attributed to the ***introduction*** of agriculture
and also of ***marriage***, since the principle gives rise to exclusive
private ownership, and the wandering life of the savage seeking
subsistence in that wandering is led back to the tranquillity of private
right and the guaranteed satisfaction of requirements, with which is
linked the restriction of sexual love to matrimony, and hence the
extension of this union to a ***lasting***, in itself universal, union,
of the craving for ***care of the family*** and for the possession of
***family property***." \[[Hegel's Philosophy of
Right](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/pr/prcivils.htm#PRn203)\]

We could quote many more examples of this kind, but as space does not
allow this, we shall confine ourselves to pointing out the significance
attributed by Hegel to the "[geographical basis of world
history](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sp/osethica.htm#OS548)."

Much was written both before and ***after*** Hegel about the
significance of the geographical environment in man's historical
development. But after him, as well as before him, scientists often made
the mistake of bearing in mind only the psychological or even the
***physiological*** influence of surrounding nature on man, completely
forgetting its influence on the condition of the social ***productive
forces and through them*** on all the social relations between people in
general, with all their ideological superstructures. \[Montesquieu in
his [*Espirit des
lois*](../../../../reference/subject/philosophy/works/fr/montesqu.htm)
not infrequently dwelt on the influence of nature on man' physiology. He
tries to ewxplain many historical phenomena by such influence.\] Hegel
avoided this enormous error, if not in details at least in the
***general setting of the question***. According to him there are three
typical varieties of geographical environment: 1) a waterless high
plateau, with great steppes and plains; 2) low lands intersected by
great rivers; 3) coastal lands having direct communication with the sea.

[Cattle-rearing]{#P15} is dominant in the first, ***agriculture*** in
the second, trade and the crafts in the third. The social relations of
the inhabitants assume various characters according to these basic
differences. The people inhabiting the high plateaux, the ***Mongols***,
for instance, lead a patriarchal nomadic life and have no history in the
proper sense of the word. Only occasionally, assembling in great
numbers, they swoop like a storm on the civilised countries leaving
desolation and destruction in their wake. Cultural life begins in the
lowlands, which owe their fertility to the rivers. "Such a lowland we
find in China, India \... Babylon \... and Egypt. Great empires arise in
these lands and great states are formed there. For agriculture, which is
dominant here as the first source of subsistence for individuals, is
bound by the regularity of the seasons, by the regular occupations
corresponding to them; here landed property and the relationships of
right corresponding to them have their beginning." But the agricultural
peoples who live in the lowlands are distinguished by greater
sluggishness, immobility and segregation; they are unable to use for
their mutual relationships the means that nature places at their
disposal. This defect does not exist in peoples in a coastal country.
The sea does not separate peoples, it unites them. That is why precisely
in the coastal countries culture, and with it the development of human
consciousness, reaches its highest development. There is no need to look
far for examples, it is sufficient to point to ancient Greece.

[Perhaps]{#P16} the reader knows L. Mechnikov's book *La civilisation et
les grands geuves historiques*, which appeared in 1889. The author has
undeniable deviations towards idealism, but in general he adheres to the
materialist standpoint. Well? This ***materialist's*** view of the
historical significance of the geographical environment agrees almost
entirely with that of the ***idealist*** Hegel, although Mechnikov would
probably be very surprised to hear of such a resemblance.

Hegel also explains, in part, the rise of inequality among the more or
less primitive societies by the influence of geographical environment.
Thus, he pointed out that in the Attica of ***before Solon's time***,
the differences between estates (by estates he means the various more or
less well-to-do sections of the population: the inhabitants of the
plains, those of the mountains, and those of the coastal areas -- G. P.)
were based on differences in the localities. And there is no doubt that
local differences and the ***occupations*** which varied with them must
have had great influence on the ***economic*** development of primitive
societies. Unfortunately, this aspect of the matter is far from being
always taken into consideration by modern investigators.

It is improbable that Hegel busied himself much with ***political***
economy, but here, too, as in many other fields, his genius helped him
to grasp the most characteristic and essential aspect of phenomena.
Hegel understood more clearly than all economists of his time, not
excepting even
[Ricardo](../../../../glossary/people/r/i.htm#ricardo-david), that in a
society which is based on private property, the growth of wealth, on the
one hand, is inevitably accompanied by the growth of poverty, on the
other. He says this expressly in his [*Philosophy of
Right*](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/pr/prcivils.htm#PR245).
To use his words, this ***dialectics***, meaning a lowering of the
living standard of the majority of the population as a result of which
they can no longer satisfy their requirements correctly, and which
concentrates wealth in comparatively few hands, must necessarily lead to
a situation in which civil society, despite the ***surplus of wealth***,
***is not rich enough***, i.e., has no sufficient means to do away with
the excess of poverty and the dregs of the population (*des Pobels*).

[The]{#P17} result is that civil society finds itself forced to emerge
from its own limits and to seek new markets, to turn to world trade and
colonisation. Of all Hegel's contemporaries only
[Fourier](../../../../glossary/people/f/o.htm#fourier-francois)
distinguished himself by a similar clarity of views and good
understanding of the dialectics of bourgeois economic relations.

The reader has probably noted that to Hegel the proletariat is no more
than the "Pobel," incapable of using the "spiritual advantages" of civil
society. Hegel did not suspect to what degree the modern proletariat
differed from the proletariat of the ancient world, say, at any rate,
from the Roman proletariat; he did not know that in modern society the
yoke weighing down the working class infallibly gives rise to
counteraction from that class, and that in modern society the
proletariat is destined considerably to outstrip the bourgeoisie
intellectually. Neither, of course, did the utopian socialists know
this; for them too the proletariat was no more than the "Pobel," worthy
of all kinds of sympathy but incapable of any initiative. Only
***scientific*** socialism was able to understand the great historical
significance of the modern proletariat.

Let us resume what we have said. As an idealist, Hegel could not regard
history otherwise than from the idealist standpoint; he made use of all
the powers of his genius, all the gigantic resources of his dialectics,
to give at least some scientific character to the idealistic conception
of history. His attempt proved vain. He himself seemed dissatisfied with
the results he had achieved and he was often obliged to come down from
the misty heights of idealism to the concrete ground of economic
relationships. ***Every time he turned to it, economics freed him from
the shallows into which his idealism had led him. Economic development
turned out to be the premise determining the whole course of history***.

[This]{#P18} determined the subsequent orientation of science. The
transition to materialism which took place after Hegel's death could not
be a simple return to the naive metaphysical materialism of the
eighteenth century. In the sphere which interests us here, i.e., in the
explanation of history, materialism had to turn first and foremost to
economics. ***To act otherwise would have meant not progress, but
retrogression compared with Hegel's philosophy of history***.

The materialist conception of nature is still not the materialist
conception of history. The materialists of the last century saw history
with the eyes of idealists and very naive idealists at that. Insofar as
they dealt with the history of human societies, they tried to explain it
by the ***history of thought***. For them the remarkable proposition of
Anaxagoras that "reason (*nous*) governs the world" was reduced to the
proposition that human ***judgement governs history***. The sad pages in
human history they put down to mistakes of judgement. If the population
of a certain country patiently suffers the yoke of despotism, this is
only because it has not yet understood the advantages of freedom. If it
is superstitious it is because it is deceived by the priests who thought
out religion for their own advantages. If humanity suffers from wars the
reason is that it is not yet able to understand how detrimental they
are. And so for everything. "***The progress of ideas depends on the
progress of things***," said the remarkable thinker, G. B. Vico, at the
beginning of the last century. The materialists thought just the
opposite: the progress of things in society is determined by the
progress of ideas and the latter is determined by \... well, say the
rules of formal logic and accumulation of knowledge.

[Hegel's]{#P19} absolute idealism was very far from the naive idealism
of the thinkers of the Enlightenment. When Hegel repeated with
Anaxagoras that reason governs the world, on his lips that did not at
all mean that the world is governed by the thought of man. Nature is a
system of reason, but that does not mean that nature is endowed with
consciousness. "[The movement of the solar system takes place according
to immutable laws; these laws are the reason of that system, but neither
the sun nor the planets which gravitate around it according to these
laws have any consciousness of doing
so](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/hi/history3.htm#015)."

Man is endowed with consciousness; he sets a definite purpose for his
actions; but it does not follow from this that history proceeds as
people wish it to. The result of every act of man always has an
unforeseen side and it is precisely this side that often, or more
correctly nearly always, constitutes the most substantial acquisition of
history, and it is this side that leads to the realisation of the
universal spirit.

"[In world history man's actions result in something quite different
from what he purposes or
intends](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/hi/history3.htm#031)";
he fulfils his own interests but thereby something more is brought into
being, which is, admittedly, contained therein, but was not in his
consciousness or his intention. States, peoples and individuals pursue
their own private interests, their particular aims.

From this standpoint they are undeniably ***conscious, thinking***
agents. But, consciously pursuing their own private aims (which
generally are also permeated with definite universal aspirations to what
is good and right), they unconsciously accomplish the aims of the
universal spirit.

[Caesar]{#P20} aimed at autocracy in Rome, that was his personal aim;
but autocracy was at the same time a historical necessity; hence, in
accomplishing his personal aim, Caesar served the universal spirit. In
this sense we can say that historical figures, and also whole peoples
are ***blind instruments of the spirit***. It forces them to work for it
by holding out to them the bait of their private aims and urging them on
with the spur of ***passion***, without which nothing great is done in
history.

In relation to people there is here no mysticism of the "unconscious."
People's actions are necessarily reflected in their heads, but it is not
this reflection that determines the movement of history. ***The progress
of things*** is not determined by the ***progress of ideas*** but by
something outside and independent of man's will and hidden from human
consciousness.

[The]{#P21} ***accident*** of human arbitrariness and human prudence
gives place to ***conformity to law***, i.e., consequently, to
necessity. In this lies the unquestionable superiority of
"***absolute*** idealism" compared with the naive idealism of the French
thinkers of the Enlightenment. Absolute idealism is to this latter
idealism what monotheism is to fetishism and magic. Magic leaves no room
in nature for conformity to law; it assumes that the "progress of
things" can be disrupted at any moment by the intervention of a
magician. Monotheism attributes to God the establishment of the laws of
nature, but it acknowledges (at least at the higher stage of its
development when it ceases to be reconciled with miracles) that the
progress of things is determined by these once-and-for-all-established
laws. In so doing it gives science a large place. In just the same way
absolute idealism, seeking the explanation of the movement of history in
something which is independent of human arbitrariness, sets science the
task of explaining the phenomena of history in conformity with laws, and
the fulfilment of this task does away with any necessity for the
***hypothesis of the spirit*** which was quite worthless as far as this
explanation was concerned.

If the view of the French materialists of the last century on the
progress of history came to the proposition that human judgement governs
history, their expectations from the future could be expressed by
saying: from now on everything will be arranged and put in order by
enlightened reason, ***philosophy***. It is remarkable that Hegel, the
absolute idealist, reserved philosophy a far more modest role.

["To]{#P22} speak once more on the precept of how the world must be,
here philosophy always arrives too late," we read in the preface to
*Philosophy of Right*. "[As the world thought, it appeared first at the
time when reality had accomplished the process of its formation and was
all complete\.... When philosophy paints its grey things grey, it is a
form of life already grown old, and can no longer be rejuvenated but
only known; the owl of Minerva only flies out as twilight sets
in](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/pr/preface.htm#xxx)."

Beyond doubt, Hegel goes too far here. Completely agreeing that
"philosophy" cannot revive a decrepit, obsolete social system, one may
all the same ask Hegel what then prevents it from showing us -- of
course only roughly -- the character of the new social system which is
coming to take the place of the old. "Philosophy" considers phenomena in
the process of their appearance. But this process has two sides:
appearance and disappearance. These two sides can be considered as
separate in time. But, both in nature and especially in history the
process of appearing is, at every particular time, a ***double
process***: the old is destroyed and ***at the same time*** the new
arises out of its ruins. Must this process of the appearance of the new
always remain a mystery for "philosophy?" "Philosophy" takes cognisance
of what is, and not what should be according to this or that person's
opinion. But what is at each particular time? Precisely the
***obsolescence of the old*** and the birth of the new. If philosophy
takes cognisance only of the obsolescent old, its cognisance is
***one-sided***, and philosophy is unable to fulfil the task of knowing
what is. But this contradicts Hegel's assurance of the omnipotence of
cognisant reason.

[Modern]{#P23} materialism knows not such extreme. On the basis of what
is and is ***becoming obsolete*** it can judge of what is ***coming into
being***. But we must not forget that our conception of what is
***coming into being*** differs essentially from the conception of
***being to be*** (*sein sollenden*), against which Hegel directed the
words we have quoted from him on the owl of Minerva. For us, what is
***coming into being*** is the necessary result of what is ***becoming
obsolete***. If we know that ***such a thing***, and ***no other*** is
coming into being, we are indebted for this to the objective process of
social development, which prepares us to know ***what is coming into
being***. We do not oppose our ***thought*** to the ***being*** around
us.

But those whom Hegel argued with did not consider the matter that way.
They imagined that thought could change the natural course of
development of being as it wished. Therefore they did not find it
necessary to study its course or take it into consideration. Their idea
of what ***was to be*** was based not on the study of reality around
them but on their reasoning about the just and normal social system they
had at a particular time. This reasoning was prompted by nothing but the
reality around them (chiefly its ***negative*** side). To rely on such
reasoning meant in essence to be governed by the directions of that same
reality but accepted indiscriminately without any attempts at checking
them by studying the reality which prompted them. It was like trying to
get to know a thing by looking not straight at it, but at its reflection
in a convex mirror. Mistakes and disappointments were inevitable. And
the more people forgot that their ideas of "what was to be" originated
in the reality surrounding them the more they believed that, equipped
with these ideas, they could treat reality as it occurred to them, the
greater was the distance separating what they aspired to and what they
attained. How far modern bourgeois society is from the Kingdom of Reason
which the French thinkers of the Enlightenment dreamed of! Ignoring
reality, people could not free themselves from the operation of its
laws; they only deprived themselves of the possibility to foresee the
working of those laws and to use them for their own aims. That was
precisely why their aims were unattainable. To adopt the standpoint of
the thinkers of the Enlightenment meant to go no farther than the
abstract opposition between ***freedom and necessity***.

[It]{#P24} seems at first sight that if necessity predominates in
history there is no room in it for the free activity of man. This
enormous mistake was corrected by German idealist philosophy.
[Schelling](../../../../glossary/people/s/c.htm#schelling-friedrich) had
already pointed out that in the correct view of the matter ***freedom is
necessity, necessity is freedom***. Hegel finally solved the antinomy
between freedom and necessity. He proved that we are free only insofar
as we know the laws of nature and sociohistorical development and
insofar as ***we, submitting to them***, rely upon them. This was a
tremendous gain in the field of philosophy and also in that of social
science -- again which, however, only modern, dialectical materialism
has exploited to the full.

The materialist explanation of history presupposes the dialectical
method of thought. Dialectics was known before Hegel. But Hegel
succeeded in making use of it as none of his predecessors had. In the
hands of this idealist of genius, dialectics became a most powerful
weapon for the cognition of everything which exists. "Therefore," Hegel
says, "[the dialectical constitutes \... the motive soul of the
scientific process and is the principle by which alone the content of
science acquires ***immanent connection and
necessity***](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sl/sl_vi.htm#SL81)
\... [Diversion from abstract rational definitions seems to our ordinary
consciousness a profession of simple prudence according to the rule:
live and let
live](../../../../reference/archive/hegel/works/sl/sl_divis.htm#SL81n1),
whereby everything seems equally good. But the essence of the matter is
that what is definite is not only limited from without, but is bound to
be destroyed and to pass over into its opposite by virtue of its own
inherent nature." As long as Hegel remains true to the dialectical
method, he is a highly progressive thinker. "We say that all things
(i.e., all that is finite as such) must be submitted to the judgement of
dialectics and by the very fact we define it as a universal, invincible
force, which must destroy everything, no matter how lasting it may
seem." Therefore Hegel is perfectly right when he says that serious
mastery and clear comprehension of dialectics is a matter of
extraordinary importance. The dialectical method is the most powerful
scientific weapon bequeathed by German idealism to its successor, modern
materialism.

[However,]{#P25} materialism could not make use of dialectics in its
idealist form. It had first of all to be freed from its mystic
wrappings.

The greatest of all materialists, a man who was in no way inferior to
Hegel by his genius, the true successor of the great philosopher,
***Karl Marx***, said quite rightly of himself that [his method is the
complete opposite of Hegel's
method.](../../../marx/works/1867-c1/p3.htm#3b) "To Hegel, the
life-process of the human brain, i.e., the process of thinking, which,
under the name of 'the idea' he even transforms into an independent
subject, is the demiurgos of the real world, and the real world is only
the external, the phenomenal form of 'the idea.' With me, on the
contrary, the ideal is nothing. else than the material world reflected
by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought."

Thanks to Marx, materialist philosophy has been elevated to an
integrate, harmonious and consistent world outlook. We already know that
the materialists of the last century remained naive idealists in the
field of history. But Marx drove that idealism out of its last refuge.
Like Hegel, he saw human history as a process conforming to laws and
independent of man's arbitrariness; like Hegel, he considered all
phenomena in the process of their appearance and their disappearance;
like Hegel, he was not satisfied with barren metaphysical explanation of
historical phenomena, and lastly, like Hegel, he endeavoured to trace to
a universal and single ***source*** all the acting and interacting
forces of social life. But he found that source, not in the absolute
spirit, but in the same economic development to which, as we saw above,
Hegel too was forced to have recourse when idealism, even in his
powerful and skilful hands, was a powerless and useless instrument. But
what in Hegel is accidental, a guess of greater or lesser genius,
becomes in Marx a rigorous, scientific investigation.

[Modern]{#P26} dialectical materialism has made clear to itself
incomparably better than idealism the truth that people make history
unconsciously: from its standpoint the course of history is determined
in the final account not by man's will, but by the development of the
material productive forces. Materialism also knows ***when*** the "owl
of Minerva" starts its flight, but it sees nothing mysterious in the
flight of this bird, any more than in anything else. It has succeeded in
applying to history the relation between freedom and necessity
discovered by idealism. People made and had to make their history
***unconsciously*** as long as the motive forces of historical
development worked behind their backs, independently of their
consciousness. Once those forces have been discovered, once the laws by
which they work have been studied, people will be able to take them in
their own hands and submit them to their own reason. The service
rendered by Marx consists in having discovered those laws and made a
rigorous scientific study of their working. Modern dialectical
materialism, which, in the opinion of philistines, must turn man into an
automaton, in actual fact opens for the first time in history the road
to the kingdom of freedom and conscious activity. But it is possible to
enter that kingdom only by means of a radical change in the present
social activity. The philistines realise, or at least have a foreboding
of this. That is why the materialist explanation of history causes them
such vexation and grief; and for that reason too not a single philistine
is able or willing to understand or grasp Marx's theory in all its
fullness. Hegel saw the proletariat as a ***mob***. For Marx and the
Marxists the proletariat is a majestic force, the bearer of the future.
Only the proletariat is capable of mastering the teaching of Marx (we
are not speaking of exceptions) and we see how it is in fact becoming
more and more permeated with its content.

[Philistines]{#P27} in all countries are raising a hue and cry about
there not being a single important work in the whole of the writings of
Marxism besides *Capital*. But first, that is not true, and secondly,
even if it were, it would prove nothing. Can one speak of stagnation of
thought at a time when thought daily subjugates masses of followers,
when it opens new and broad perspectives for a whole class of society?

Hegel is enthusiastic when he speaks of the people of Athens in whose
presence the tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles were played, to whom
Pericles addressed his speeches, and from among whom "emerged
personalities who became classical characters for all ages." We can
understand Hegel's enthusiasm. Nevertheless it must be noted that the
Atheneans were a ***people of slave-owners***. It was not the slaves
that Pericles addressed himself to, nor was it for them that the great
works of art were intended. In our time science addresses itself to the
working people, and we are fully entitled to be enthusiastic when we
consider the modern working class, to whom the profoundest thinkers
address themselves and before whom the most talented authors make their
speeches. Only now has a close and unseverable union between science and
the working people at last been established, a union which will lay the
foundations of a great and fruitful epoch in world history.

[It]{#P28} is sometimes said that the standpoint of dialectics is
identical with that of evolution. There can be no doubt that these two
methods have points of contact. Nevertheless between them there is a
profound and important difference which, it must be admitted, is far
from favouring the teaching of evolution. Modern evolutionists introduce
a considerable admixture of conservatism into their teaching. They want
to prove that there are no leaps either in nature or in history.
Dialectics, on the other hand, knows full well that in nature and also
in human thought and history leaps are ***inevitable***. But it does not
overlook the undeniable fact that the same ***uninterrupted process***
is at work in all phases of change. It only endeavours to make clear to
itself the series of conditions under which gradual change must
necessarily lead to a leap.

From Hegel's standpoint ***utopias*** have a symptomatic importance in
history: they display contradictions characteristic of the epoch in
question. Dialectical materialism gives the same appraisal of them. It
is not the utopian plans of various reformers, but the laws of
production and exchange which determine the now continually growing
working-class movement. That is why, contrary to what happened in past
centuries, not the reformers are at present utopians, but all those
public figures who want to stop the wheel of history. And the most
characteristic feature of our epoch is that not the reformers, but their
opponents, resort to ***utopias***. The utopian champions of the present
unsightly reality want to convince themselves and others that of itself
this reality; has all perfections, and that therefore all that is
necessary is to remove from it certain abuses that have accumulated. In
this connection we cannot help remembering what Hegel said about the
Reformation. "The Reformation," he said, "arose out of the ***corruption
of the Church***. The corruption of the Church is not accidental, not
only ***abuse*** of power and authority. Abuse is usually regarded as
the ***cause*** of corruption; it is presumed that the base is good, the
thing in itself irreproachable, but passions and in general subjective
interests, the accidental will of men, use that good as a means for
themselves and that all that is needed is to remove these accidental
things \... With such an idea the thing is saved and the evil considered
as only extraneous to it. But accidental abuse of a thing is only a
particular case; it is quite another matter in the case of a general and
great evil in such a great and general thing as the Church." It is not
surprising that Hegel gets so little sympathy from those who like to
appeal to "accidental" rents where it is really a matter of radical
change in the "thing" itself. They are horrified by the audacious,
radical spirit that permeates Hegel's philosophy.

[There]{#P29} was a time when those who more or less belonged to the
innovators' camp rose against Hegel. What shocked them in his doctrine
was his philistine attitude to the contemporary Prussian situation.
These opponents of Hegel were gravely mistaken: underneath the
reactionary ***husk*** they did not notice the innovatory ***kernel***
in his system. But however that may be, these people's antipathy for the
great thinker proceeded from noble motives, worthy of all respect. Now
Hegel is condemned by scientists representing the bourgeoisie, and they
condemn him because they understand or at least feel instinctively the
innovatory spirit of his philosophy. For the same reason people now like
to pass over Hegel's merits in silence; they willingly oppose him to
Kant and nearly every assistant professor considers it his calling to
extol the system of "the Konigsberg thinker." We willingly give Kant his
due and do not dispute his merits. But it seems very suspicious to us
that the bourgeois scientists' tendency to criticism is called forth not
by his strong sides but his weak ones. It is the ***dualism***
characteristic of this system that attracts bourgeois ideologists most.
And dualism is a particularly convenient thing in the field of
"morality." With its help the most attractive ideals can be built up,
the most daring expeditions into a "better world" can be undertaken
without any thought of embodying those "***ideals***" in ***reality***.
What could be better? In the ideal one can, for example, completely
destroy the existence of classes, abolish the exploitation of one class
by another, and at the same time defend the class state, etc., in
reality. Hegel saw the current assertion that an ideal cannot be
implemented in reality as a terrible insult to human reason. "All that
is rational is real, all that is real is rational." This proposition, we
know, perplexed many people, not in Germany alone, but abroad,
especially in Russia. The reason for this perplexity must be sought in
the lack of clear understanding of the meaning which Hegel gave to the
words "***reason***" and "***reality***." It would seem that even if one
gives these words their usual vulgar interpretation, one is bound, all
the same, to be struck by the innovatory content of the first half of
this proposition: ' all that is rational is real." Applied to history
these words can mean, nothing else than the unshakeable conviction that
everything rational, far from remaining something "***of the beyond***,"
must ***become*** reality. Without such promising conviction innovatory
thought would lose all practical significance. According to Hegel,
history is the manifestation and realisation in time of the universal
spirit (i.e., reason). How can the continual superseding of social forms
be explained from this standpoint? It can be explained only if one
considers that in the process of historical development "reason becomes
madness and blessing an evil." One must not, according to Hegel, be
ceremonious with reason which has gone over into its opposite, i.e.,
which has become madness. When Caesar seized state power he violated the
Roman constitution. Such a violation was obviously a heinous crime.
Apparently Caesar's opponents were fully justified in considering
themselves as champions of right because they stood on legal ground. But
the right which they championed "was formal right, void of any living
spirit and abandoned by the Gods.' The violation of that right was thus
only formally a crime and therefore there is nothing easier than to
justify Julius Caesar, the violator of the Roman constitution.

[Hegel]{#P30} gave the following opinion of the fate of Socrates,
condemned as the enemy of the prevailing morality: "Socrates was a hero
because he consciously acknowledged the higher principle of the spirit
and gave voice to it. The right of this higher spirit absolute \... Such
is the position adopted by heroes in world history in general; it is
through them that the new world dawns. The new principle is in
contradiction with the one that has so far existed; it seems
destructive; therefore heroes appear as men of violence who break the
laws. As individuals, they are doomed, but the principle itself forges
on, even if in another person, and undermines what already exists."
These words are sufficiently clear in themselves. But the matter will
become still clearer if we pay attention to the fact that according to
Hegel not only heroes appear on the scene of world history, not only
individual personalities, but whole peoples too, inasmuch as they are
vehicles of the new historical principle. In such cases the field of
activity to which the rights of the people extend is extraordinarily
vast. "Against this its absolute right to be the vehicle of the present
stage of development of the universal spirit, the spirits of the other
peoples have no right and are as those whose epoch is past, they do not
count any more in the history of the world."

We know that at the present time the vehicle of the new principle of
world history is not any single people, but a definite social class. But
we shall still be faithful to the spirit of Hegel's philosophy if we say
that all other social classes will go into world history in the degree
in which they will be able to give support to this class.

***The irresistible striving to the great historical goal, a striving
which nothing can stop -- such is the legacy of the great German
idealist philosophy***.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 19.2.2005
