## [V. I.](../../1914/oct/x01.htm "The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International")   [Lenin](../../1914/granat/index.htm "KARL MARX")

### Letter to *Vorwärts* and *Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung* {#letter-to-vorwärts-and-wiener-arbeiter-zeitung .title}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ Published:]{.info style="text-indent: 0%"} First published in 1930, in
*Lenin Miscellany XIV*. Translated from the German. Published according
to the manuscript.\
[Source:]{.info} [*Lenin Collected Works*](../../cw/index.htm#volume21),
Progress Publishers, [\[197\[4\]\]](../../cw/v21pp74h.txt), Moscow,
[Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm#1914-nov-08), page [42]{.page}.\
[Translated:]{.info}\
[Transcription\\Markup:]{.info} [D.
Walters](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/dwalters.htm) and
[R. Cymbala](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/rcymbala.htm)\
[Public Domain:]{.info} Lenin Internet Archive (2005). [You may freely
copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make
derivative and commercial works. Please credit "Marxists Internet
Archive" as your source.]{.infobloc_copyleft} •
[README](../../readme.htm)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#v21pp74h:42}

[Dear]{onmouseover="window.status=' 21 . 042 . v21pp74h '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} Comrades:

[Some]{onmouseover="window.status=' 21 . 042 . v21pp74h '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} days ago, Vorwärts published a brief item
regarding the paper I read in Zurich, on the subject of war and
social-ism, and conveying an entirely false impression of that paper.
The impression is created that I limited myself to a polemic against
tsarism. In actual fact, however, as one who is convinced that it is the
duty of the socialists of every country to wage an unrelenting struggle
against the chauvinism and patriotism of their own country (and not only
of the enemy), I vehemently attacked tsarism, and, in that connection, I
spoke of freedom for the Ukraine. However, the sense of my argument may
be utterly distorted if no mention is made of what I said of opportunism
and the collapse of the Second International, and against the stand
taken by the Social-Democrats of Germany and Austria. Nine-tenths of my
paper, whose reading lasted two hours, dealt with that criticism.

[I]{onmouseover="window.status=' 21 . 042 . v21pp74h '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} would be grateful for publication, in
*Vorwärts*, of the omissions I have named
(or\...).^[\[1\]](#fwV21E027){#bkV21E027 .endnote}^

With Social-Democratic greetings

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#notes}

### Notes

[]{#footnotes} []{#endnotes}

[\[1\]](#bkV21E027){#fwV21E027 .endnote}
[The]{onmouseover="window.status=' 21 . 463 . v21pp74h . ENDNOTE '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} notes on Lenin's report referred to in
the article were published in *Vorwärts* No. 308 of November 10 and in
*Wienner Arbeiter-Zeitung* No. 309 of November 7, 1914. On November 22,
1914, the *Vorwärts* editorial board published a brief note replying to
Lenin's letter, claiming that the report had criticised the stand taken
by the German and Austrian Social-Democrats and gave an appraisal of the
Second International's collapse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {align="center"}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      [[\< backward](../../1914/oct/x01.htm "The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International")]{.footer}      [[forward \>](../../1914/granat/index.htm "KARL MARX")]{.footer}
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[Volume 21](../../cw/volume21.htm#1914-nov-08)]{.footer}  \|  [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm#volume21)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

 
