---
layout: default
title: 
---
### Leon Trotsky

## The First Five Years of the Communist International

#### Volume 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# On *l'Humanité*, [the Central Organ of the French Party]{.small}

DEAR COMRADE [[\[1\]](#n1){#f1}]{.note}, in accordance with your
expressed desire, I shall formulate in greater detail my views
concerning **l'Humanité**.

1\) Parliamentary reports occupy a very important place in the French
Communist newspaper. Not because we consider -- like the reformists --
participation in parliament to be either the basic or supremely
important method of working-class struggle; but precisely because we
must -- while assigning to parliament and parliamentarianism that place
which is actually occupied by them in modern society -- work to dispel
both the prejudices of parliamentary reformism as well as the
anti-parliamentary superstitions of anarchism. Through parliamentary
reports our aim is to show the workers the real role of parliament and
of the parties represented there. However, in my opinion, this
department is at bottom incorrectly organized in **l'Humanite'**. The
debates are treated in a light journalistic vein, with quips, jokes, sly
hints, etc. No mention is ever made of the party to which this or that
orator belongs, nor is it pointed out just what class or sectional
interests he happens to represent; the class character of the espoused
ideas is never laid bare; neither speeches nor proposals are ever
reduced to their essentials but everything is slurred over in catching
up superficial contradictions, and in making puns, jokes, etc. I have no
doubt that out of 100 workers whom you might approach at factory gates
and to whom you might read a parliamentary report from **l'Humanité**,
99 would understand nothing and learn nothing, while the hundredth one
might perhaps understand something but he, too, could learn nothing. In
a workers' newspaper it is impermissible to write about the parliament
and its internal struggles in the style of journalists discussing among
themselves in a cloakroom in parliament.

In this field, clarity, precision and a popular style are particularly
indispensable. I don't at all mean to say that one should give dry
summaries of the debates, interspersed with commentaries on the orators
and their parties. On the contrary, the reports must be written in a
lively agitational manner. But this means that the writer must have his
audience clearly in mind, and must set himself the task of laying bare
before his audience the class essence of parliamentary activities and
machinations. Sometimes a couple of words out of a whole speech suffice
to characterize not alone the orator but his party as well. It is
necessary constantly to repeat, underscore and hammer away, and then to
repeat and to underscore all over again, instead of fluttering
journalistically over the surface of parliamentary discussions.

2\) **L'Humanité**'s attitude toward the Dissidents
[[\[2\]](#n2){#f2}]{.note} is far too vague and at times utterly false:
A split is a very serious matter, and once we recognize that a split is
inevitable, then it is necessary to make its full meaning comprehensible
to the masses. It is necessary to mercilessly expose the policy of the
Dissidents. It is necessary to make their leaders and their press
ludicrous and hateful in the eyes of the masses. In this way the broad
party mass attains a far greater political distinctness and clarity. In
the April 17 (1921) issue of **l'Humanité** Comrade Launat takes a
position toward the Dissidents that is absolutely incorrect. He
expresses the hope for an early publication of the text of Paul
Boncour's bill in order that it may be possible to corroborate whether
the differences are really as irreconcilable as Blum
[[\[3\]](#n3){#f3}]{.note} claims. This entire article, together with
some others on the same subject, is written in a spirit as if we were
engaged not in an irreconcilable political struggle with the
Longuetists, but simply in a comradely discussion. This is false to the
core. Naturally, we must tear away from the Longuetists the section of
workers who follow them. But we shall attain this only through a
merciless campaign against Longuetism in all of its manifestations.

3\) I read Comrade Frossard's article in the May 5 issue: *Sang Froid et
Discipline* (*Composure and Discipline*). The article is in the main
quite correct, insofar as it tells what to do and how to do it. But it
is inadequate, because it doesn't give vent to the feeling of protest
prevalent among the best elements of the working class. The newspaper's
tone is not firm and energetic enough. The paper failed to supplement
the parliamentary fraction, whose public speeches were exceedingly
feeble and even wrong in principle. I can't say so definitively, but in
all likelihood protests could have been made in such a form as would not
have committed the party to any decisive actions. There were no
indications of this in **l'Humanité**.

4\) The issue for April 3 contains a leading article: *Christianity and
Socialism*.This article is in glaring contradiction with Marxism, for it
seeks to justify socialism by platitudes from the Bible. The author
cites the example of Soviet Russia where the church is tolerated and
puts forth the demand that the French Communist Party emulate the Soviet
Republic in this respect. But this is a monstrous confusion of concepts.
The Soviet Republic is a state, constrained to tolerate prejudices and
their organized expression -- the church -- in its midst. The Communist
Party is a voluntary association of co-thinkers and cannot tolerate in
its ranks propaganda of Christian Socialism, nor make the pages of its
central organ available to such propaganda, all the less so in the guise
of leading articles. The party can reconcile itself to the fact that
individual members, especially workers and peasants, remain as yet not
free from religious prejudices, but the party as a party, in the person
of its leading organs, is duty-bound to conduct genuine educational
activity. In any case, we cannot permit mystic-intellectuals to exploit
the party as an auditorium for their religious ravings. At the decisive
moment elements of this type will nine times out of ten espouse their
fifty percent Christian self and become a brake upon revolutionary
action.

5\) The Luxembourg comrades have complained about the party's apathy in
connection with the military brutalities perpetrated by the French
government upon the workers of Luxembourg. On this subject I was able to
find in **I'Humanité** one solitary article by Comrade Victor Méric.
[[\[4\]](#n4){#f4}]{.note} Unquestionably, it is possible and necessary
to conduct far more agitation around precisely such issues.

6\) Colonial questions are treated in the pages of **l'Humanité** in
much too weak a tone. Yet its attitude toward colonial slavery is a
genuine test for the revolutionary spirit of a proletarian party. The
leading article in the May 20 issue dealing with the alleged conspiracy
in Indo-China is written in a democratic and not Communist spirit. We
must utilize every opportunity to implant in the minds of workers that
the colonies have the right to rise up against and separate from the
metropolises. In every instance we are obliged to underscore that it is
the duty of the working class to support the colonies in their uprisings
against the metropolises. Not alone in England but in France as well,
the social revolution implies not only the uprising of the proletariat
but also the uprising of the colonial peoples against the metropolises.
Any vagueness in this connection becomes a source of and a cover for
chauvinism.

7\) In a number of articles and particularly among the commentaries
there is a careless handling of concepts: fatherland, republic, love for
one's country, etc., etc. Precision in terminology and a firmly
sustained class character of political phraseology are more important in
France than anywhere else.

8\) I shall refrain from citing numerous instances of extreme vagueness
and outright indecision in **l'Humanité**'s line with regard to
syndicalism. A number of articles directly violate the fundamental
principles of Marxism and Communism. Communists write articles which are
directed wholly against the party line. Syndicalist resolutions are
published without any commentaries. To be sure, the columns of
**l'Humanité** should be opened up at present for a discussion on the
trade union question, with the opposing side given an opportunity to
express itself. But in every case the editorial board must make its
voice heard, otherwise the reader becomes hopelessly disoriented and
confused. A discussion on this question especially in France must
inescapably partake of the nature of pandemonium. This can give rise to
the greatest disorder, if the editorial board vacillates. On the other
hand, if the editorial board steers a firm course, the masses will
choose the principled, correct and firmly sustained Communist line, and
reject the confusion, equivocation and contradictoriness of all other
lines.

9\) **L'Humanité** readily publishes photographs of German and English
ministers, including German Social Democrats and others. In my opinion
it would be desirable to carry instead pictures of Communists. It is
necessary to bring the Communist parties closer to one another, in
personal respects as well.

10\) In conclusion I take the opportunity to express again my admiration
for the work of your wonderful cartoonist, Gassier.
[[\[5\]](#n5){#f5}]{.note}

With comradely greetings.

July 23, 1921. Moscow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

[1.](#f1){#n1} This letter was originally addressed to Lucie Leiciague
-- at that time member of the Central Committee of the French Communist
Party and the representative of the French CP in the ECCI in 1922.

[2.](#f2){#n2} *Dissidents* -- the name given to the followers of
Longuet who, finding themselves in the minority at the Tours Congress in
1919, split from the French party to form a party of their own.

[3.](#f3){#n3} Leon Blum -- a prominent figure in the French Socialist
Party. Blum was a wealthy man, a "*boulevardier*" who went into labor
politics. Champion of the Left Bloc -- and later of its Stalinist
version, the People's Front, under which he became premier -- and of
participation in the bourgeois government. A typical French
reformist-traitor.

[4.](#f4){#n4} Méric -- a former anarchist. During the First World War
he held an internationalist position inside the French Socialist Party.
In 1919 took active part in the split at the Tours Congress. In 1920-23
he traveled the same road as Frossard and found himself shortly outside
the ranks of the Communist movement.

[5.](#f5){#n5} H.-P. Gassier -- a very witty cartoonist who worked for a
long time on *l'Humanité*, central organ of the French Communist
movement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### [*First 5 Years of the Comintern (Vol.1)* Index](index.htm)

#### [History of the Communist International Section](../../../../history/international/comintern/1st-congress/index.htm)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ![return](../../works/return2.jpg){border="1" width="400" height="139" usemap="#return2B298067E"} 

Last updated on: 19.1.2007
