![woodcut: freedom](index1.gif){.left}

The Peasant War in Germany

# Notes [First appended to the Russian edition of 1926]{.term}

[[1.]{.term}](ch0a.htm#note1ref){#1} **Wilhelm Zimmermann** -- German
historian and poet. Born January 2, 1807, in Stuttgart, in the family of
an artisan. Graduated gymnasium in Stuttgart, studied in the University
of Tuebingen together with F. Strauss. Was first pastor, then professor
in the Polytechnic School of Stuttgart, occupying the chair of history,
German language and literature. On April 23, 1848, he was elected
representative of the National Assembly (Frankfurt). In St. Paul's
Cathedral he joined the extreme left group of representatives. In 1850,
he was deprived of the University chair for actively participating in
the March revolution. In 1854, he renewed his activities as pastor in
Zabergau. He died September 22, 1888.

As a historian, Wilhelm Zimmermann is known by his book, *The History of
the Great Peasant War* (1841, 2nd ed., 1856, 3rd ed., 1891). Zimmermann
left a series of works on history, history of literature, and poetry:
*The History of the Hohenstaufens* (2nd ed., 1865), *Illustrated History
of the German People, History of Poetry of All Nations* (1947), etc.

*The History of the Great Peasant War*, Zimmermann's chief historic
work, was written with astonishing mastery and objectivity. The author
utilised documents and materials mainly of the Stuttgart archive.
Generally speaking, Zimmermann's work remains the fullest presentation
of the facts relating to the Peasant War. The objectivity of his
presentation and "the revolutionary instinct which makes him an advocate
of the oppressed classes" gives the book a special interest. But even in
this book the radical bourgeois makes himself felt. Zimmermann's
negative attitude toward socialism and communism does not allow him
correctly to appreciate the conflict of classes in the history of the
peasant wars.

Kautsky's book, *Forerunners of Socialism*, supplements that of Engels
and corrects some inaccuracies in his presentation. The excerpts from
Muenzer's speech which are quoted by Engels as parts of the sermon given
before the princes of Saxony after the destruction by the people of St.
Mary's Chapel in Moellerbach, were written by Muenzer on an entirely
different occasion in a polemic work against Luther. Engels here depends
on Zimmermann.

Kautsky corrected Zimmermann in another more important question.
Zimmermann depicts Muenzer as a man towering above his epoch. In his
book, Kautsky proved this standpoint to be unfounded:

"Muenzer was superior to his communist followers, not by philosophical
gifts and organisational talents, but by his revolutionary energy, and,
first of all, by his statesmanlike mind."

Even some of the facts in the history of Muenzer's dictatorship in
Muehlhausen, as given by Engels, need correction in some details.
Muenzer was not at the head of the Muehlhausen council. Pfeifer was not
his disciple, but a representative of a middle-class faction.

[[2.]{.term}](ch01.htm#note2ref){#2} **Louis XI** -- King of France, son
of Charles VII. Born 1423, reigned 1461--1483. He founded the absolute
monarchy on the ruins of feudalism in France, and extended the
boundaries of his country to the Jura, the Alps, and the Pyrenees. In
his youth, as dauphin, Louis participated in the uprising of the
nobility against Charles VII. Having ascended the throne after the death
of his father, he started a fight against the feudal lords but was
opposed by the Common Welfare League which united the big and small
feudal lords of France. In his wars against the League, Louis, instead
of using the crude methods of feudal policies, practised not only force
but cunning, a diplomatic system of lies, deception and caution. Louis
XI was defeated and compelled to sign a peace pact with the feudal lords
on October 29, 1461. But peace with the feudal lords was not achieved.
Aided by the commercial class, he started a new war in November, 1470.
All of western France rose against him, but this time he was victorious.
In order to be able more successfully to oppose the feudal lords, Louis
XI decided to reform the army by freeing the cities from military
duties, and to create an army of 50,000. His infantry consisted of Swiss
hirelings. In 1481, he added Provence and Liége to his domains and
subdued the whole of France outside of Navarre and the duchy of Breton.
The absolute power of Louis XI could establish itself in France only
through the support of the commercial elements. Louis XI in his turn
protected commerce, industry and agriculture. Under his reign the old
institution of the Roman empire, the mail, was restored.

[[3.]{.term}](ch01.htm#note3ref){#3} **Carolina** -- A criminal code of
the Sixteenth Century, published in 1532 under Emperor Charles V. In the
Sixteenth Century, Germany counted over 300 states, each having its own
criminal laws with its own methods of cruelty. Justice at that time
aimed at extorting a confession from the prisoner by means of torture.
The prevailing Roman law, in the hands of the princes, was a cruel tool
for the exploitation of the people. The development of a money economy,
however, and the growth of absolutism, demanded a uniform criminal
legislation and a reform of the existing laws. Attempts at reform had
been made in Germany as early as the end of the Fifteenth and the
beginning of the Sixteenth Century. The Reichstag, meeting in Augsburg
and Regensburg in 1532, finally adopted a draft of a criminal code known
as Carolina ('Emperor Charles V's and the Holy Roman Empire's order of
Penal Law'). This code did not abolish the Roman law, but was an attempt
only to combine the prevailing Roman with the local law. Neither did the
Carolina abolish the codes of the separate states, the new code serving
only as a sort of guide for the princes and electors. The new code
brought insignificant changes in the court procedure. It mitigated the
inquisitional order of investigation and defined the right of defense.
But torture as a means of examination of the defendant was retained in
the new code. The chapters concerning the 'cutting of ears,' 'cutting of
noses,' 'burning,' 'quartering,' adorned the new code as well. The code
retained its great importance, however, up to the Eighteenth Century.

[[4.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note4ref){#4} **Waldenses** -- A religious sect
which sprang up in the cities of southern France in the middle of the
Twelfth Century. The cities of northern Italy and southern France of
that time represented very favourable ground for the development of a
religious reformist movement. Commerce and industry had developed here
earlier than in the west; the bourgeoisie had come into existence, the
crafts flourished. But while the cities of northern Italy, which were
partly interested in the exploitation of Rome, since they derived from
it no small profits, began to show spiritual independence only in
relation to the doctrines of the Catholic Church, the cities of southern
France, which were no less developed economically but at the same time
less dependent upon Rome, started the first serious upheaval against the
pope's domination.

According to the legend, the sect of the Waldenses was founded by a rich
merchant of Lyons called Petrus Waldus. It is possible, however, that it
existed prior to that time. Petrus Waldus decided to follow the law of
the Gospel. He distributed his possessions among the poor, gathered
around himself a considerable number of followers, and began preaching
(1176). Soon the Waldenses combined in Lombardy with the sect of the
Humiliates, who also called themselves the paupers of Lyons. The
Waldenses did not confine their preachings to southern France. We find
them also in Italy, Germany and Bohemia. In southern France, as
elsewhere, they recruited their followers from among the artisans,
particularly the weavers.

Originally, the Waldenses did not plan to secede from the church. But
their free reading of the Gospel and their lay preachings, their
disagreement with Catholicism in understanding the mysteries of
transubstantiation, as well as their militant character, compelled the
official authorities, the clergy, to start a campaign of cruel
persecution against them. Pope Sixtus IV even declared a crusade against
them in 1477. Those persecutions continued down to the Eighteenth
Century. In 1685, French and Italian armies killed 3,000 Waldenses and
captured 1,000. Only in 1848 did they attain civil rights and religious
freedom in Piedmont and Savoy. Italian Waldenses are to be found even at
present in the Alpine valleys, Val-Martino, Val-Angrona. The Twentieth
Century finds 46 communities of Waldenses with 6,276 parishioners.

The Evangelist communism of the Waldenses in the Middle Ages was of a
monklike character. For the 'perfect' members of their community they
made communism and celibacy obligatory. The 'disciples,' however, were
allowed to marry and to possess property. The Waldenses rejected
military service and the oath. They devoted their attention to the
education of the masses. In those communities of the Waldenses where the
peasants and the middle-class prevailed, they turned into a
bourgeois--democratic sect. Where the proletarian elements prevailed,
the Waldenses became communist 'dreamers.'

[[5.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note5ref){#5} **Arnold of Brescia** -- Made the
first serious attempt to reform the Catholic Church as early as the
middle of the Twelfth Century. Arnold of Brescia was born between 1100
and 1110 in Brescia, Italy. A disciple of the theologian and
philosopher, Abélard, he adopted his critical attitude towards the
religious dogmas and the teachings of the fathers. In 1136, he
participated, with his native city, Brescia, in its struggle against its
lord, the bishop. Arnold of Brescia strove to bring the clergy back to
the real Christianity of the Gospel. He demanded that the clergy should
relinquish lay authority and should hand over its possessions to the lay
rulers. The clergymen who preached must content themselves with the
tithe and voluntary contributions, he said. At the second Lateran church
council (1139), the Bishop of Brescia accused him of heresy. Arnold of
Brescia was compelled to flee to Paris. In 1146, he returned to Rome,
where he participated in the struggle between the city democracy and the
pope.

Rome in the middle of the Twelfth Century was a spiritual and political
centre whither material wealth was flowing from all sections of the
Christian world. The popes ably exploited the favourable situation of
the Christian capital. Arnold of Brescia appealed to the people to
depose the pope and to restore the ancient Roman republic. Pope Hadrian
IV, however, succeeded in expelling him from the city. He was taken
prisoner by Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and extradited to the
authorities of Rome. He was hanged as a rabid heretic, and his body was
burned (1155).

[[6.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note6ref){#6} **The Albigenses** -- A religious
sect of southern France, were widespread in the Eleventh and Twelfth
Centuries. Their name was derived from the city of Albi in Languedoc,
one of the most important centres of the movement. The Albigenses
preached apostolic Christianity and simple life according to the Gospel.
They were called the 'good men.' The pope and the councils of the church
claimed that they denied the Trinity doctrine, the Holy Communion and
marriage, as well as the doctrine of the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. At the council of Toulouse (1119), Pope Calixtus II, and
subsequently in 1139 Pope Innocent II, excommunicated them. Finally, in
1209, Pope Innocent III organised a crusade against them. The war
covered twenty years.

The stubbornness of the bloody fight against the Albigenses is explained
partly by the fact that the Albigenses were aided in their war against
the pope by the local feudal lords of southern France. When a papal
legate and inquisitor was killed on the territory of Count Raymond VI of
Toulouse, Pope Innocent III decided to use this occurrence as the
occasion for taking away the lands from Count Raymond, who maintained a
tolerant attitude towards the heretics. A struggle ensued between the
lords of southern France and the pope, who was supported by the lords of
the north. Northern France was in conflict with the south, which being
economically more developed, was, therefore, a menace to it. The
northern armies were headed by Count Simon de Montfort and papal
legates. When the armies of the north took the city of Béziers, they
killed 20,000 Albigenses. In the course of the ensuing struggle hundreds
of thousands fell. The provinces of Provence and Languedoc were
devastated. Peace was concluded only as late as 1229. In consequence of
the wars against the Albigenses the wealthy south was destroyed and the
territories of the French crown were expanded.

[[7.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note7ref){#7} **John Wycliffe** (Born October
1320, died 1384) -- An English reformer. One of those ideologists who,
even prior to the Reformation (Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries), drew
an outline of the coming reforms. John Wycliffe was a professor of
Oxford University. Prior to his appearance on the social and political
arena, he devoted himself entirely to research work in the fields of
physics, logic and philosophy. The Fourteenth Century was an epoch of
stubborn fighting between the royal power of England and the pope. The
pope exploited England cruelly. In the Thirteenth Century, the English
kingdom paid to the pope a yearly tribute of 1,000 pounds of silver.
Under Edward III (Fourteenth Century), Parliament complained that the
country was paying the pope a sum five times the amount of the taxes
paid to the king. The development of industry and commerce increased the
resisting power of England. The struggle between Rome and England was
deepened by the Hundred Years' War between England and France
(1339--1456). This war affected the interests of all classes of the
English people. The governing classes of England sought possession of
the treasuries of Netherland, and they also looked with a covetous eye
on the riches of the French nobility. The middle-class saw in this war a
means of enrichment. The burden of the war fell primarily upon the
peasantry. It is not surprising, therefore, that the pope, having become
an ally of France, aroused universal hatred in England. In 1336,
Parliament abolished the tribute to the pope. Heresies persecuted in
Italy and France now spread to England. Wycliffe's preachings were
popular among all the strata of the people. He taught that in case of
necessity the State had a right to deprive the Church of its
possessions, that power was based upon service, and that consequently
only service could justify the levying of taxes and duties by the
clergy. In 1374, in disputes with the representatives of the Roman
court, Wycliffe disclosed also the abuses of the Roman Church in
appointing candidates to ecclesiastical posts in England. He was
severely persecuted by the clergy, and only the interference of the
court, and the intervention of the university and the cities, saved him.

In his doctrines, Wycliffe never overstepped the boundaries laid down by
the ruling classes. He preached poverty and equality in Christ, but only
for the clergy. He proposed that their lands should be expropriated; but
this was entirely in the interests of the landowners and the king. The
relations between man and God, Wycliffe pictured in the image of the
feudal relations of his time. Man holds all his possessions, he said,
from God. God's mercy is the condition of this vassalage. Mortal sin
deprives man, he preached, of his right to hold possessions by the mercy
of God. Therefore, he said, the clergy should have common property, and
should submit to civil jurisdiction. The supreme judge of the human
conscience, he said, was not the pope, but God.

After the peasant insurrection of 1381, a general sympathy for Wycliffe
in his struggle against the pope changed into a hatred on the part of
the propertied classes. Oxford University condemned his *Twelve
Articles*, which rejected the doctrine of transubstantiation. Wycliffe
died in peace, but his doctrines were cruelly persecuted.

In 1415, the church council at Constance decided to burn his remains.

[[8.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note8ref){#8} With the name of **John Huss** is
connected the struggle against the Catholic Church in Bohemia, the
so-called Hussite movement of the Fifteenth Century. During the
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, the Roman Catholic Church had lost
its authority among the masses of the people. The Roman pope was, in the
eyes of all peoples, an exploiter who deprived them of earthly goods in
the name of God and heavenly life. In England, France and Spain, the
Church was assuming a national character, severing its relations with
Rome. The exception was Germany, which became the object of the
avaricious appetite of the pope. If the other countries were in a more
favourable condition, if they were earlier in a position to free
themselves from under the papal yoke, it is to be explained only by the
development of capitalism, the growth of wealth, and the power of the
middle-class and the princes. Of all Germany, only Bohemia was, in this
respect, in an exceptional situation. Bohemia developed economically in
the Fourteenth Century with incredible rapidity because of its silver
mines. The Church and the king with his court, as well as the merchants
and the artisans, received enormous profits. The pope and the emperor
were keenly watching Bohemia lest it free itself from their dependence.
Dissatisfaction had begun to gather in the country. The lower nobility,
the peasantry and the middle-class were dissatisfied. A price
revolution, due to the abundance of silver, caused a general dearth.
Besides, the masses of the people in Bohemia were Czechs, while the
exploiting upper layer, the lay and ecclesiastical authorities, were
Germans. Therefore the class struggle here assumed the character of a
religious and national struggle of the Bohemians against the Germans and
the pope. In this revolutionary medium, the ideas of the English
reformist, Wycliffe, penetrated into Bohemia. Jan Huss was the literary
defender and propounder of Wycliffe's ideas.

Huss was born in 1369, in a well-to-do peasant family. He was professor,
and at one time rector, in the then famous Prague University, and also
preacher in the Chapel of Bethlehem, where services were held in the
Czech language. When the Prague University took a stand against the
forty-five theses of Wycliffe, Huss came to their defence (1409). In
1412, Pope John XXIII, being in need of money, organised the sale of
indulgences in Prague. Huss came forth with a heated sermon against the
corruption of the Church, and demanded the termination of the traffic.
He also opposed 'miracles.' In a special treatise, Huss proved that true
Christians needed no miracles, and that true faith was contained only in
the Holy Scriptures. Huss asserted that the Church was only an assembly
of the faithful destined for Heaven, whereby he provoked the hatred of
the ruling clique, who saw in the Church the dominance of the higher
clergy.

On June 6, 1410, the books of Huss were burned, and he was
excommunicated. In 1414, the Church council at Constance accused him of
heresy, and though Huss declared that he wished to receive guidance and
instruction from the princes of the Church as to wherein his opinions
differed from the Word of God, he was turned over to the authorities and
burned at the stake (June 6, 1415). His ashes were thrown into the
Rhine.

[[9.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note9ref){#9} **Hussites** (Taborites and
Calixtines). The execution of Jan Huss set a revolution afoot in
Bohemia. All the classes of the Bohemian people arrayed themselves
against the power of the pope -- for a church reform, and against the
Germans -- for national independence. In this nationalist religious
struggle the masses of the people revealed their social hatred for the
propertied classes. At the beginning, however, all classes of Bohemia
acted in unison. The slogan of the struggle was the demand for communion
under two forms. The rites of the Catholic Church gave to the layman in
communion bread alone, and to the priests bread and wine. The masses
rising against the privileges of the Church demanded equality in
communion. 'A chalice for the layman!' -- that was the slogan of the
movement. The nobility which joined the movement used this struggle to
annex the lands of the Church; and the clergy held no less than
one-quarter of the kingdom's territory. The rich bourgeoisie saw in the
Hussite war also a means of gaining more riches from the clergy and the
possessions of the German Catholic cities (Kuttenberg, with its famous
silver mines was the most desirable of all). The nobility and the rich
Bohemian bourgeoisie that joined the Hussite movement formed the
moderate party of the *Calixtines* or *Utraquists.* Their centre was the
city of Prague. Side by side with this moderate movement, however, there
existed also a democratic one. Its bulk was formed by the peasants who
wished to be free owners of the land, especially after the nobility had
appropriated the land of the clergy. The lower middle-class of the
cities and the proletarians were with the peasants. They were
concentrated in the smaller cities of Bohemia. The democratic elements
later began to call themselves Taborites after the name of their
military and political centre, the communist city of Tabor. The Hussite
movement was now headed by a group of communists.

In 1414, the people drove King Wenceslaus out of Prague, after which
heretics began to flow into Bohemia from all parts of Europe.

The Beghards and the Waldenses found in Bohemia a refuge from
persecution. The communists fortified themselves in Tabor where they
started their propaganda. They declared that the Millennium of Christ
had come, that there would be no more servants and masters, and that the
people would return to the state of pristine innocence. In various
cities, particularly in Tabor, the insurgents began to organise
communist centres. Tabor was located in the vicinity of gold mines.
Commerce and industry flourished there. When the communists became
strong in Tabor they attracted large masses of the people. It is said
that one gathering numbered 42,000 (July 22, 1419). The inhabitants of
Tabor called each other brother and sister, and recognised no difference
between 'thine' and 'mine.' The Taborites taught that 'there should be
no kings, no masters, no subjects on earth, and that taxes and duties
should be abolished.' According to their doctrine there was to be no
coercion, everything was to belong to all, and therefore, they said, he
who possesses property commits a mortal sin. This communism, however,
was of a Christian nature. It was a communism of consumption, not
production. Every family worked for itself, contributing its surplus to
the general treasury. There were among the Taborites the most extreme
communists, who allowed no concessions, and denied the family. Those
'brothers and sisters of the free spirit' called themselves Adamites.
The majority of the inhabitants of Tabor and the knights, under the
leadership of Zizka, launched a struggle against the Adamites.

The communist community of Tabor was surprisingly well organised. As a
military community it alarmed the German princes for a long while. The
Taborites represented the first regular army, and they were the first to
use artillery in battle. That the Taborites could hold their own for
almost a generation is explained by their attention to education, by the
order and discipline in their community. Tabor fell, due, mainly, to a
split among the Hussites. The moderate Calixtines, having appropriated
the land of the clergy, did not wish to recognise the supremacy of
Tabor. The war of the Taborites against the king, the pope, and all of
Europe, was not in the interests of the nobility. After the victory of
the Taborites at Tauss (1431), it seemed that there was no enemy capable
of coping with them. But the Calixtines started negotiations with the
enemy. They decided to call to a Diet all barons, knights, and
representatives of the cities, to discuss a plan for a state
organization. Tabor itself was divided. The lower middle-class and the
peasantry were indifferent to the communist programme. They wanted
peace. Tabor's communism was not stable. It had not the foundation of
communist production, therefore equality of the means of subsistence
soon disappeared. There were both rich and poor in Tabor.

The army of Tabor was being overcrowded by 'crooks and riff-raff of all
nations.' As soon as the nobility began to recruit soldiers for a war
against Tabor, offering better conditions than the communist community,
treason crept into the ranks of the Taborite army, and wholesale
desertion began. This explains the fall of Tabor. On May 30, 1434, the
Taborites suffered a crushing defeat near Czeski Brod. Out of 18,000
Taborite soldiers, 13,000 were killed. In 1437, they were compelled to
conclude a treaty with Sigismund, who guaranteed them the independence
of Tabor. But in spite of this the communist community of Tabor soon
disappeared.

[[10.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note10ref){#10} **Scourging Friars**
(Flagellants) -- A sect of people who whip themselves. It appeared in
Europe as early as the Eleventh Century, and became widespread in the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries. From Italy, the movement
spread through southern France, Netherlands, Alsace and Lorraine. The
Flagellants taught that it was possible to obtain absolution from sin by
inflicting sufferings on one's body. One of the first ecclesiastical
theorists of this sect, George VII, taught that in this way the faithful
emulated Christ, laboured to obtain a martyr's crown, deadened and
castigated their flesh, and expiated their sins. This doctrine was in
line with the prevailing asceticism of the Middle Ages, which demanded
of the faithful to harden and torture their bodies by fasting, poor
clothing, etc., in the name of Christ. The Flagellant movement, however,
assumed the character of an epidemic, of a mass psychosis. Thus, in the
Thirteenth Century, bands of people marched through the cities of Italy,
whipping themselves with straps and lashes, and praying for absolution.
After the devastating epidemic of the 'Black Death,' the movement
assumed a dangerous character. In many localities of Germany, France and
Flanders, Flagellants in mortal terror, imagining that Christ was about
to destroy the world for the sins of mankind, inflicted cruel punishment
upon themselves. In German cities, Flagellant communities began to come
into existence. 'Those desirous of partaking of self-castigation had to
pay a small fee, and this was all demanded of proselytes.' In the
Fifteenth Century, the movement weakened, but it did not disappear. The
Flagellants of the Fifteenth Century spoke evil of the monks and
demanded a series of church reforms. The Roman Church, which at the
beginning had not opposed the movement since, in Italy, it was
anti-imperial and therefore a means of strengthening the Church, began
to persecute the Flagellants. In the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries, the movement became fashionable at court. Sex elements began
to dominate in it. Traces of this sect can be found even in the
Nineteenth Century.

[[11.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note11ref){#11} **The Lollards** -- A religious
sect widespread among the working populations of England in the
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries. The heresies of those times found
favourable ground not only among the master classes. As a matter of
fact, every class formulated its demands through the reform movement.
Thus, among the poorest weavers of England the sect of *Beghards*, or,
as they were commonly called in England, Lollards, came into existence.
(The Lollards were funeral chanters.) The Beghards first appeared in the
Netherlands (Flanders and Brabant), in a country where commerce and
industry had progressed earlier than in the rest of Europe and where
sheep-breeding and the woollen industry were highly developed. The sect
of Beghards was in most cases a fraternity of weavers. Unmarried
artisans belonging to the sect lived in common houses, where they kept a
communist household. The movement started in England when the weavers of
Flanders migrated into that country. Norfolk, the centre of the woollen
industry, became also the centre of the movement of the English
Beghards, the Lollards. The Lollard propagandists, called 'poor
brothers,' spread the new doctrine over the country. Errant 'poor
ministers' preached to the people that lay and ecclesiastical
possessions should be common property. They urged the people to pay
neither dues nor tithes to the clergy, and appealed to the servants to
refuse to work for the masters. In 1395, the Lollards petitioned
Parliament, demanding a reform of the Anglican Church, abolition of its
worldly possessions and celibacy. The petition was rejected.

The most outstanding representative of the Lollards was John Ball, the
mad minister of Kent. Coming from the ranks of the Franciscan monks who
sympathised with the Lollard movement, he became one of the leaders of
the peasant uprising of 1381 in England. Beginning with 1356, John Ball
preached mainly in Essex and in Norfolk, delivering his sermons in city
squares and cemeteries. They became very popular. He preached common
property, and urged the people to exterminate the nobility. Only then,
he said, would people be equal, and the masters would be no higher than
the rest. All men originated from Adam and Eve, he said. 'When Adam dolf
and Eve span, who was then the gentleman?' he queried. He was killed
during the suppression of the revolt in 1381.

The Lollard movement gained in importance when it became connected with
the peasant uprising and with the opposition movement of the
middle-class in the cities, After 1381, the Lollards found themselves in
a precarious situation. Every Lollard was considered a criminal and
treated accordingly. Terrorist acts against the sect continued for a
long while, but it did not disappear from the lower strata of the
working population, as is proven by pamphlets appearing even at the end
of the Fourteenth and the beginning of the Fifteenth Century: *The
Ploughman's Prayer* and *The Lanthorne of Light*. The Lollards spread
among the people a knowledge of the Bible in the English language.

[[12.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note12ref){#12} **Chiliastic dreams, Chiliasm**
-- The doctrine of the second coming of Christ and the Millennium on
earth. This Millennium was pictured as one thousand years of joy and
happiness. All sufferings and privations, the adherents of this doctrine
said, would disappear, and perfect harmony between mankind and
rejuvenated nature would be re-established. The dreams of a Millennium
became widespread in the Middle Ages, in years of elemental sufferings
and socio-political cataclysms; in more quiet epochs, Chiliasm was the
doctrine of small insignificant sects. Large masses of people were fired
with Chiliastic dreams during the persecutions of the Christians in the
Tenth Century, because the end of the world was expected to come in the
year of Christ 1000. More widespread, however, were the Chiliastic
dreams in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, in the Reformation
period. A back-to-the-Gospel movement, religious unrest, coupled with an
increasing exploitation of the working population, were fertile soil for
Chiliastic visions. Thomas Muenzer, the Anabaptists, and the Taborites,
all paid tribute to the mystic doctrine of the Millennium.

Social conditions prevailing in the Middle Ages created an atmosphere
favourable for mysticism. The ignorance of the masses nurtured it.
Besides, Chiliasm, belief in miracles, and mystic visions were an outlet
at a time when the masses saw no way of improving their condition by
their own efforts. Only a miracle could, in their opinion, overthrow all
oppressors and exploiters. The masses were driven to believe in the
miracle of the second coming of Christ, in order that they should not
sink into despair.

[[13.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note13ref){#13} With the name of **Martin
Luther** is connected the history of the religious and socio-political
transformation of the Germany of the Sixteenth Century, the history of
the so-called Reformation. Luther was not the initiator of that
movement. His activities and doctrines by no means cover the social
history of the Reformation. In the revolutionary movement of the
Sixteenth Century, he was the representative of the coalition of the
middle-class and the nobility.

From the Fourteenth to the Sixteenth Century, trade capital transformed
the old natural economy of the European peoples, and rendered
superfluous the political system of feudalism. The victory of absolutism
became an economic necessity. On the other hand, development of
commercial capital induced the masters to increase the exploitation of
the peasants. Freeing the peasants from the feudal yoke, the masters
increased their burdens, substituting cash payments for manual labour
and payments in kind. The peasants were being driven off the land, and
thus the nucleus of the future proletarian class was formed. This
incipient proletariat was utilised by the army commanders and the
merchants, by the former as material for the armies, by the latter as
workers in their manufactories. In a period of economic revolution,
feudal nobility became a hindrance to historic development. The lower
nobility, the knights, took an intermediary position between the
peasantry and the high nobility. The knighthood attempted to halt its
own imminent ruin. In Germany, the struggle of these two class groupings
was complicated by the peculiarities of German economic development. At
the beginning of the Sixteenth Century, Germany, because of its mines
and commerce, was still a powerful country economically. But the
economic centre of Europe soon moved from the Mediterranean basin to the
coast of the Atlantic. The development of Germany, as of all Eastern
Europe, became stagnant. Under these circumstances well-established
social and political conditions were either breaking down or changing
radically. For a century Europe was shaken by terrific wars and
revolutions. The exploitation on the part of the Roman Church was most
keenly felt in Germany. The monasteries and the princes of the Church
exploited the peasantry and the cities to the point of ruin. The
middle-classes protested against the aid that the monasteries gave to
the poor, because it limited them in their exploitation of the masses.

The Roman Church found a lucrative source of income in the sale of
church offices and especially in the sale of the so-called indulgences
-- absolution for cash. The princes of the Church exploited the people
in their own realm, as did the feudal land owners and the capitalist
merchants in theirs. A struggle against the Roman Church became
inevitable. But while England and France, economically more advanced
than Germany, soon succeeded in freeing themselves from papal rule,
Germany required a long and stubborn struggle.

In Germany, all classes of the population suffered gravely under papal
exploitation, but each formulated its own programme. Luther's propaganda
was the centre which originally united, first, the knighthood struggling
against the princes, second, the lower clergy and the peasantry
struggling against the princes of the Church and the feudal barons, and,
third, the city middle-class chafing under the rule of the city
aristocracy, the patricians.

Luther was born November 10, 1483, in a peasant family. His father
worked in the mines. In 1501, he entered Erfurt University, where he led
a very gay life in the circles of the Humanists, those advocates of
radical ideas. In 1505, he entered a monastery, and, as every good
Catholic, went to see the pope. In 1509, Luther gave a course of
lectures in the Wittenberg University. In 1517, when Tetzel, the
representative of Pope Leo X, opened a sale of indulgences in Saxony,
Luther hung out on the doors of the Wittenberg chapel, his ninety-five
theses against indulgences. His first protest against the Roman Church
was very timid. Luther protested against corruption. Thesis 21 read:
'Advocates of indulgences are mistaken when they say that through papal
absolution a man is freed of all punishment.' Thesis 27: 'It is nonsense
to preach that as soon as the penny jingles in the box, the soul leaves
purgatory.' Luther was surprised at the effect of his theses. He gave
impetus to a movement which had started before him, and it engulfed all
classes of Germany. Three groups became engaged in the struggle: the
Catholic conservatives, the middle-class reformists, and the plebeian
revolutionists. As a leader of the middle-class reformist movement,
Luther at first appealed to violence, to the use of fire and iron for
the extermination of the cancer that, he said, was destroying the world.
He called for a decisive struggle against the lay and clerical princes.
Between 1517 and 1522, Luther was ready to enter an alliance with the
democratic factions. Between 1522 and 1525, however, he betrayed his
allies, the peasantry and the lower clergy. His change was due to the
Anabaptists in Zwickau and the peasant movement. He was also influenced
by the uprising of the knighthood (Autumn, 1522).

At the head of the uprising of the knighthood were *Franz von Sickingen*
and *Ulrich von Hutten*. The former was the commander, and the latter
the ideologist of the movement. Their hatred for the pope and the
princes and their striving for the reconstruction of a united Germany
made them, by the middle of the Sixteenth Century, the heroes of the
German bourgeoisie. In substance, however, the movement of united
knighthood in a society where capitalism had begun to develop, was
reactionary. Sickingen and Hutten dreamed of a renewed mediaeval state
where power was in the hands of the nobles and the emperor was their
subject. They never aimed at freeing the cities or the peasantry, though
they were compelled to appeal to them for aid. In the summer of 1522,
Franz von Sickingen led troops against the 'priestly nest' of Trier. But
the armies of the united Rhenish and Suabian princes dealt him a
decisive blow. Many castles were destroyed and many knights perished.
Luther did not support that movement, but condemned it as well as that
of the peasants.

In his first works, where he called the princes 'the greatest fools on
earth and the most heinous scoundrels,' and in his first appeals
relative to the Peasant War, Luther defended the insurgents. He wrote,
for instance, 'It is not the peasants who arose against you masters, but
God himself, who wishes to punish you for your evil doings.' Luther
hoped to find in the peasant movement a support for his struggle against
Rome. But when, in April and May, the peasantry revolted all over the
country, burning and destroying castles, the movement assuming a
communist character, Luther defended the princes against the insurgent
peasants. He attributed the movement to the peasants' easy life. He
urged the princes to 'strangle them as you would mad dogs.' When the
insurrection was quelled, he bragged that he 'had killed the peasants
because he had given the orders to kill.' 'All their blood is upon me,'
he said.

An alliance was established between Luther and the princes, who were
well satisfied with the acquisition of the church estates. The
Reformation was profitable both to them and to the insurgents of the big
cities. In 1526, at a Diet session in Speyer, it was for the first time
decreed that the subject must follow the faith of his master. This saved
the princes, who openly joined Luther. It is true that in 1529 Catholic
services were reinstated and the confiscation of the lands of the clergy
was halted in the provinces of the Lutheran princes, but the Lutheran
minority protested against this decision -- hence the name
*Protestants.* In 1530, at a Diet session in Augsburg, the Protestant
princes submitted to Emperor Charles V the so-called *Augsburg
Confession* of the Lutherans. It consisted of two parts, the first
giving an exposition of the new faith, and the second condemning the
corruption of the Roman Church and outlining the necessary reforms.

'We reject those,' says the *Augsburg Confession*, 'who preach that
absolution can be reached, not by faith, but by good deeds.' Man can
find favour in the eyes of God, says the document, only by the word of
God and by the guidance of the Holy Spirit. We must not, it says,
confuse the authority of the State with the authority of the pope; the
Church has the power to preach the Gospel and to perform rites, but it
should not participate in the affairs of the State.

The publication of the *Augsburg Confession* was not the end of the
struggle. In September, 1555, at the Augsburg Diet, the so-called
Augsburg Religious Peace confirmed the decision of 1526 relative to the
obligation of the subjects to follow the faith of their masters. This
decision made it obvious that Germany was to remain dismembered, under
the rule of the princes.

Lutherism became the religion of the economically backward countries. It
spread in northern and western Germany, Denmark and Sweden, where the
princes, the bishops and the landlords became the protectors of the
Lutheran Church. But even this partial reform could succeed only as a
result of the revolutionary movement of the peasantry, the cities and
the knighthood.

[[14.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note14ref){#14} **Joachim of Floris** (of
Calabria) -- An Italian mystic of the Twelfth Century. His doctrine of
the *eternal gospel* is known under the name of Joachimism. In his
conception, the Apocalypse teaches us that the world passes through
three ages, the age of the Law, or of the Father, the age of the Gospel,
or of the Son, and the age of the Spirit, which will bring the ages to
an end. The first age, he said, corresponds to the Old Testament, the
rule of lay authority, of external law and the preponderance of the
flesh. The second age marks the predominance of the clergy, and the
combination of spiritual and material interests. This, he said, was the
age he lived in. The third age, he prophesied, would soon come and would
be marked by a dominance of the spirit over the flesh, the monks
becoming the ruling power, and the eternal gospel being the law of the
world. Joachim denied that humanity was saved by Christ.

Joachim was of an urban family. Stricken by the horrors of the plague
epidemic, he became a monk and founded the monastery of San Giovanni in
Fiore. He wrote two books: *The Concordance Between the New and the Old
Testaments* and *Commentary on the Apocalypse*. Several decades later
(1260), the Joachimites were cursed by the pope and severely persecuted.

[[15.]{.term}](ch02.htm#note15ref){#15} **Nicolas Storch** -- A
cloth-maker in Zwickau, where he became famous by preaching religious
communism. Thomas Muenzer was under his influence and asserted that he
knew the Bible better than all priests combined. In a short time, a
whole community, which counted twelve apostles in its midst, gathered
around Storch. His disciples believed that the truth was given to him in
holy revelations. On May 16, 1521, the community of Zwickau invited a
new preacher, Nicolas Hausmann of Schneeberg, a devoted friend of
Luther's, and thus Storch's activities met with a stubborn opposition.
He was expelled from the city, and went to the city of Wittenberg, where
the 'Zwickau prophets' hoped to find support in Carlstadt, a former
co-worker of Luther. But they were compelled to flee to southern Germany
where Storch dreamed of establishing the kingdom of God on earth. A holy
revelation, he said, made clear to him the true paths of social
reformation. In 1522, Storch settled in Thuringia, where he became one
of the initiators and leaders of the Peasant War. In collaboration with
Muenzer, Pfeifer and others, he composed a programme of demands, which
declared property to belong to all alike, since God had created all men
equally bare and had given to them everything on the land, in the water
and under the sky. All officers, lay and ecclesiastical alike, the
programme said, must be removed from their offices, or killed. Every man
could freely preach the law of God, as every one had a free will and was
able to accept the good and reject the evil. Storch died in Munich in
1525.

[[16.]{.term}](ch03.htm#note16ref){#16} **György Dózsa** -- Leader of
the peasant insurrection of the Sixteenth Century in Hungary. At that
time, the struggle between the absolute power of the king and the feudal
lords of Hungary still continued. After the death of King Matthias, who,
supported by the people, had conducted a successful struggle against the
feudal lords, the latter regained the upper hand under Uladislaus, and
abolished all the reforms of King Matthias including the standing army.
The country was suffering under the struggles of the feudal lords. In
1514, the pope declared a new crusade against the Mohammedans. György
Dózsa, who had become famous as a warrior in the fight against the
Turks, was offered the post of commander. Within twenty days he gathered
a people's militia numbering 60,000 men. Dózsa was the head of military
operations. He was accompanied by two priests, who aroused the soldiers,
peasants and city folk by their sermons. The feudal lords were loath to
let their servants join the crusade, and, as harvest time was
approaching, they demanded their return. In reply, Dózsa and the priests
appealed to the people to rebel. The peasants arose all over Hungary,
and the war with the feudal barons began. The situation of the peasantry
in Hungary of that time was less intolerable than it was in the other
countries, but having a little more freedom in Hungary, the peasants
felt more keenly the yoke of serfdom. Incessant wars with the Turks were
ruining the country, the population was being enormously depleted, and
the peasants found themselves in a position to force upon the feudal
lords a number of concessions. The peasants, however, being skilled in
the art of war, hoped for full liberation. The lower clergy of the
villages, hating the princes of the Church, joined the peasants. But
they, along with the city middle-class, which also joined the peasant
movement, soon betrayed it.

The leaders of the peasant uprising (1514) preached that the nobles were
a criminal class which had enslaved the body and the soul of the
peasant. They encouraged the destruction of the houses and the castles
of the lords. György Dózsa, who had taught the peasants the use of arms,
called them to rise all over the country. An army of feudal barons under
John Zápolya moved against him. This army, aided by the city
middle-class and the nobility, the former allies of the peasants,
suppressed the movement cruelly. György Dózsa offered long and stubborn
resistance. He proclaimed a republic declaring the power of the king and
the privileged classes abolished. Notwithstanding the sympathy of the
peasant masses throughout the country, György Dózsa was defeated at
Temesvár. His execution was a refined torture. He was placed on a red
hot iron throne, his head was adorned with a red hot iron crown, and a
red hot iron sceptre was forced into his hand. Dózsa's only exclamation
was: 'These hounds!' No less than 60,000 peasants were killed in this
uprising. The lords in Diet assembled, decided to increase the burden of
the peasantry and declared serfdom a perpetual institution.

[[17.]{.term}](ch04.htm#note17ref){#17} **The War of the Roses**
(1455--1485) -- After the termination of the Hundred Years' War between
England and France (1339--1450) and after the English armies were
compelled to evacuate France, a bloody war started between the two
dynasties, Lancaster and York, which lasted over thirty years. The
Lancaster dynasty, with a red rose as its emblem, represented the
interests of the large feudal masters in Wales and in the north where
their large estates were located. The York dynasty, with a white rose as
its emblem, depended on the commercial southeast, the city population,
the peasants and the House of Commons. The stubborn feud between the two
dynasties was to decide whether England would become an absolute
monarchy in case of the victory of the York dynasty, or whether it would
be divided among the feudal masters with the victory of the Lancaster
dynasty.

As early as the Fourteenth Century, large land possessions concentrated
in the hands of a few noble families. In the Fifteenth Century, the
House of Lords counted only one-third of its old members. The surviving
dynasties annexed the land of those families that had disappeared. When
the Hundred Years' War was over, the army was disbanded and the former
soldiers taken into the service of the feudal masters. In the second
half of the Fifteenth Century, the war between the two dynasties began.
In the battle of Northampton (1460), York captured the king and
compelled the House of Lords to recognise him as the protector of the
state and the heir to the throne. He was defeated by the army of the
hostile dynasty, but his son Edward returned to London victorious
(1451). Edward's armies dealt mercilessly with the nobility. In the
Taunton battle, forty-two knights and two lords were executed, while
Warwick, one of Edward's commanders, saw to it that little harm was done
to the Commoners.

The ascension to the throne of Edward IV, that is, the victory of the
White Rose, marked the beginning of the period of absolutism. Edward IV
did not raise the question of his election by the English Parliament. He
expelled all feudal masters, even his closest friends who opposed his
will (his fight against Warwick, 'the maker of kings'). In his struggle
against the feudal masters he used hired armies, thus making the feudal
militia superfluous. He cruelly annihilated the adherents of the
Lancaster dynasty. To make his victory secure, he refused to make new
compulsory loans, and to secure the aid of the peasantry he demanded of
Parliament laws prohibiting the dispossession of peasants. Thus the War
of the Roses strengthened absolutism in England.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Contents](index.htm) \| [Marx/Engels Archive](../../../index.htm)

Last updated on 15 July 2020
