---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Our "American Mission"

### (August 1902)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Workers' Republic**, August 1902.\
Reprinted in **Red Banner**, No.17 (PO Box 6587, Dublin 6).\
Transcribed by Aindrias Ó Cathasaigh.\
Marked up by [Einde
O'Callaghan](../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/eocallaghan.htm){target="new"}
for the **Marxists' Internet Archive**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We are pleased to be in a position to state that arrangements have been
made between the Socialist Labour Party of America and the Socialist
Republican Party of Ireland for Mr James Connolly, the editor of this
paper, to proceed to the States on a lecturing tour on behalf of both
organisations. Our comrade leaves Liverpool on the fourth of September,
and will probably remain in America until the first week of December.
Meetings are being organised already in many of the great industrial
centres where Irishmen have made their home; the Cooper Union, the
largest hall in New York, has been secured for his first meeting on the
15th September, and every effort will be made to enable our
representative to place his message before the largest number possible
of Irish-American workers.

The fact that our comrade has spent so much of his own life (20 years)
amongst the Irish exiles of Great Britain fits him in a peculiar manner
for the task of understanding and speaking to those other exiles in
America, while the thorough knowledge of Irish history and politics he
has so well demonstrated in all his speeches and writings qualifies him
for the position he now occupies as an exponent of that phenomenon in
Irish politics -- the revolt of the working class -- seeking its
independent political expression through the Socialist Republican Party.

We would direct our reader's attention to the great underlying
significance of this visit to the States. All other Irish agitators have
gone to America to beg funds for the support of agitations at home on
the express or implied understanding that the desire of the agitation in
Ireland was to erect in this country the political and economic
institutions which prevail in America. Therefore every such agitator had
praise of all things American on his tongue as part of his poor stock in
trade. But this agitator knows that the misery of Ireland springs from
an economic cause operating equally malignantly \[in America\] as it
does in Ireland to the majority of the population; he knows that the
comparative comfort of the more fortunate of the American workers is due
primarily to the state of the economic development of their country
relatively to Ireland, and he knows also that the very nature of that
economic development, its very power and insatiableness, will prevent
all possibility of creating in Ireland industrial conditions at all
similar to those in America. In other words, he knows well that to-day
the very success of American enterprise in agriculture and industry
strikes a death blow to the hopes of industry and agriculture on a grand
scale *under capitalism* in Ireland, as the Americans are now our
greatest competitors. He also knows and it will be his duty to preach
that the terms "American Success", "American Domination", "American
Control" mean Success, Domination and Control by the American Capitalist
Class, and that exercised not only against producers on this side of the
Atlantic, but quite as relentlessly against the working class on the
American side.

And whilst telling the workers of America of the new hope which has
arisen in the breasts of the more intelligent of the working class of
Ireland -- the hope of a Socialist Republic in which our land will be
purged of the contaminating presence of the foreign and native tyrants
alike, a freedom for which the workers are learning to rely on
themselves and on themselves alone -- he will not fail to remind them
that the progress of capitalism brings for the American worker a slavery
as grinding and merciless as that we groan under to-day, even if many of
the slaves be better fed and housed than are ours.

This campaign which our comrade Connolly is undertaking in America is,
then, for the miscreants at home and abroad who have so long traded on
our kindly sentiment to the undoing of the Irish workers, an ominous
portent indeed. But to those who value truth, the facts which our
comrade will lay before his audience upon the condition of that long
neglected portion of the Irish nation, the working class, and the truths
he will tell of the inwardness of the political position in Ireland,
will make this visit a welcome relief from those of the attitudinising
politicians who in the past have sold themselves to every American
grinder-of-the-faces-of-the-poor who desired to parade an Irish leader
on his platform as a catch for Irish votes.

A few words apropos of the party under whose auspices our representative
will travel to the States will not be amiss. Shortly after the
establishment of the Irish Socialist Republican Party in 1896 we opened
up communications with the Socialist Labour Party of America. An
interchange of views took place between the two bodies, and we then
discovered that our ideas upon policy and tactics generally were
practically identical, a discovery that immediately led to a friendship
lasting to the present time. Since then both parties have gone through
severe struggles, the SLP have been subjected to a revolt within and to
a malevolent misrepresentation from without unequalled in the socialist
movement for bitterness, and the ISRP has undergone a period of
financial strain which has left its mark deep on the character and
spirits of many of its members [\[1\]](#n1){#f1}, but neither party has
faltered, and both are as a result stronger than ever before. Our
confidence in our SLP friends is still unabated, and we can challenge
the world to investigate our conduct, our policy, or our history. The
SLP has the only Socialist daily newspaper in the English language, and
we intend on the return of our editor from America to permanently
re-establish the **Workers' Republic** on a weekly basis.

Verily, Labour Conquers All.

 

### Footnote

[1.](#f1){#n1} A group had just left the SLP and joined with the party's
competitor the Social Democratic Party to form the Socialist Party of
America. The ISRP had gone through serious financial troubles, leading
to a degree of internal tension

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 27.10.2005
