---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1907

### Joseph Dietzgen

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 100-16.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The article was published in the journal
*Sovremenny Mir*, nos 7-8, 1907. *Sovremenny Mir* (*Contemporary World*)
-- a literary, scientific and political monthly published in St
Petersburg from 1906 to 1918.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ernest Unterman, *Antonio Labriola and Joseph Dietzgen: A Comparison of
Historical Materialism and Monistic Materialism* (translated from the
German by I Naumov, edited by P Dauge, St Petersburg, 1907, published by
P Dauge).

Joseph Dietzgen, *The Positive Outcome of Philosophy: Letters on Logic*,
*Especially Democratic Proletarian Logic* (translated from the German by
P Dauge and A Orlov, with a Preface to the Russian Edition by Eugene
Dietzgen, and a portrait of the author, St Petersburg, 1906).

A section of the reading public in Germany, Holland and Russia is now
very much interested in Joseph Dietzgen. His philosophical works, which
until recently were known only to a few, have begun to exert an
influence on the development of philosophical thought among the
enlightened European proletariat. That is why we consider it useful to
discuss the books mentioned above.

The first of these is from the pen of the American Socialist Ernest
Unterman in the form of a postscript to the English translation of the
famous work by Antonio Labriola, *Discorrendo di socialismo e di
filosofia* (the translation was published in Chicago in 1906).

Mr Dauge thought it would be worthwhile to publish Unterman's work in
the Russian translation by I Naumov. But he was wrong. This book will
not and cannot bring anything of value to Russian readers. The author
knows too little of the subject which his book, or more correctly, his
pamphlet, professes to explain. Anyone who does understand it -- true,
there are few now in Russia, and abroad too, unfortunately -- may assure
himself of this by reading the following -- *in its own way* valuable --
passage from Unterman's pamphlet:

The founders of scientific socialism inverted Hegelian dialectics and
transformed it into a practical method of historical research. They had,
indeed, squared their own accounts with German classical philosophy and
eighteenth and nineteenth century bourgeois materialism. But they
limited themselves from the outset to the practical social implications
of their new theory. They had to specialise in order to accomplish
something great, and they selected with keen insight those specialties
which bore most directly upon the practical problems of their time. To
what extent they had penetrated independently into the problem of
cognition before they made this choice, no one can know but those
comrades who have charge of the unpublished joint manuscript of Marx and
Engels written in 1845-46. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ But it is safe to say that
this manuscript would have been published by this time, if it contained
such a contribution to historical materialism as that supplied by Joseph
Dietzgen. This assumption is further strengthened by the fact that Marx
and Engels acknowledged Dietzgen's merit and called him 'the philosopher
of the proletariat'. And it is further borne out by the fact that even
the latest writings of Engels, such as *Anti-Dühring* and *Feuerbach*,
in the passages dealing directly with the problems of cognition, free
will, moral consciousness, do not contain anything which materially
modifies the original conception of human consciousness formulated by
Marx. (p 9)

What then was this 'original conception of human consciousness
formulated by Marx\'? Mr Unterman admits frankly that he does not know.
But on the other hand he knows very well that the founders of scientific
socialism inverted dialectics, placing it on its feet. But what is meant
by placing dialectics on its feet? Mr Unterman says nothing about that,
so let us turn to the original. Marx says:

To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, that is, the process of
thinking, which, under the name of 'the Idea', he even transforms into
an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real world, and the real
world is only the external, phenomenal form of 'the Idea'. With me, on
the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought.
^[\[2\]](#n2)^

What is that? It is a *theory of cognition* and, besides, a theory of a
definite type, *a materialist theory of cognition*. Consequently, Mr
Unterman had every opportunity to form some idea of the 'conception of
human consciousness formulated by Marx' without waiting for the
publication of the philosophical work of Marx and Engels, which has not
been published to this day. But, evidently, he did not even realise that
this opportunity was there for him to take. Like others before him, he
repeated that 'Marx and Engels inverted dialectics', but it seems to
have escaped his notice that it would have been impossible for them to
have done so without the aid of a definite theory of cognition. A most
penetrating writer is Mr Unterman! True, it looks as though he can plead
an extenuating circumstance; the Marxist theory of cognition is still
unelaborated. But he could have helped in this misfortune by exercising
his own powers\... if he had had any. In the lines quoted from Marx that
to Hegel the process of thinking is transformed into a subject, there is
an idea taken wholly from *Feuerbach*. This should have reminded even Mr
Unterman of the generally known fact that Marx's theory emerged *by way
of criticism* from Feuerbach's philosophy, just as Feuerbach's
philosophy emerged *by the same way* from Hegel's philosophy. If Mr
Unterman had taken the trouble to acquaint himself with Feuerbach's
philosophy he would have had plenty of data at his disposal on which to
judge Marx's theory of cognition. Unfortunately, he did not take that
trouble. Further. Marx's well-known -- *long since published* -- theses
on Feuerbach's philosophy would have revealed to our learned author
precisely in what respects Marx considered Feuerbach's philosophy
*unsatisfactory*.

This would have furnished him with new facts upon which to judge Marx's
gnosiology. And if he had only put all these facts to use, he would not
have found the perusal of Engels' *Anti-Dühring* and *Feuerbach* so
fruitless, and would have understood in the end that it is out of the
question to use Dietzgen to 'supplement' Marx.

But Mr Unterman has a very superficial knowledge of Marx's theory and
knows nothing at all of its philosophical origin. Finally, and almost
the most important point, E Unterman is not even a dilettante in
philosophy, but simply an\... ignorant philistine.

We are not surprised that he finds it necessary to '*supplement*' Marx.
It is a well-established custom nowadays that as soon as some
self-professed Marxist finds rents and gaps in his own world-outlook he
at once says to himself anxiously: 'Marx's theory needs correcting and
supplementing.'

Mr Unterman tells us also that Marx and Engels 'squared accounts' with
classical German philosophy and French bourgeois materialism. Good. But
*how* did they do that? By utilising what had been acquired by both
German philosophy and materialism. German philosophy, while keeping to
the dialectical method, was saturated with idealism; 'bourgeois'
materialism, ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ on the other hand, ignored dialectics almost
completely. *In making materialism dialectical*, Marx and Engels
*rejected idealism for all time*. But this does not mean that by *making
materialism dialectical* they rejected materialism, just as to place
dialectics on its feet is not to finish with dialectics. Of course, the
dialectical materialism of Engels and Marx differs in many respects
from, say, eighteenth-century French materialism. But this difference is
the simple and inevitable *result* of the historical development of
materialism.

After all eighteenth-century French materialism in its turn differed not
only from the materialism of Democritus and Epicurus but even from the
materialism of Hobbes and Gassendi. It is plain from one of Engels'
articles in the newspaper *Volksstaat*, in which he recommended the
French socialists to popularise 'the splendid materialist literature of
the eighteenth century' ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ among the French working class,
that the founders of scientific socialism were not by any means as
scornful of this 'bourgeois' materialism as is the erudite Mr Unterman.

But Mr Unterman knows nothing at all of all this and very proudly
considers himself, thanks to Joseph Dietzgen, as being farther advanced
in comparison with Marx and Engels.

However that may be, our author is firmly convinced that Marx's original
(and to him, Unterman, quite unknown, as may be seen even more clearly
from his pamphlet than from his own admission) understanding of human
consciousness has been considerably supplemented by Joseph Dietzgen.

What arguments did he use to substantiate this conviction in lecturing
the 'narrow Marxists\'? Some excerpts from Joseph Dietzgen's works which
prove unquestionably that this highly gifted German workman -- Joseph
Dietzgen was actually a manual worker -- had great philosophical talent,
but which do not contain a *single theoretical principle that could be
acknowledged as new in comparison with those enunciated in the works of
Marx, Engels and Feuerbach*.

Mr Unterman is naive enough to believe that his excerpts throw new light
on the 'problem of cognition'. Comparing them with some quotations from
the works of the late Antonio Labriola, he takes great satisfaction in
pointing out to us that this comparison 'reveals at a glance their
characteristic theoretical difference. Historical materialism takes its
departure from human society', proletarian monism from the 'natural
universe (*Weltall*)' (p 24). This strange man, who has read both
*Ludwig Feuerbach* and *Anti-Dühring*, has nevertheless not understood
that historical materialism was only the application to sociology of the
method of materialist dialectics, whose starting point is precisely the
'*Weltall*'. It would seem as if he had not really read that part of
Engels' preface to *Anti-Dühring* where the author says that Marx and he
*applied materialism to history*. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ What is the point of
'*departure*' of the materialism which *explains* social development?
Society. The earth rests on whales, the whales rest on water, water on
the earth. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ Clear?

All this does not stop Mr Dauge from thinking of Mr Unterman as a
serious writer and warmly recommending him to Russian readers. But Mr
Dauge appears even more naive than the quite naive Mr Unterman. He says:
'Joseph Dietzgen discovered dialectical materialism simultaneously with
Marx and Engels and -- as the latter openly acknowledged --
independently and apart from them.' (p iv). One might conclude from this
that Joseph Dietzgen was a dialectical materialist. But further on in
the same work of Dauge's we read:

We indeed find many points of similarity between Bogdanov and Dietzgen
and we are certain that the former, by developing and extending the
philosophical work he has begun, will arrive finally and by the logic of
things -- 'independently' of Dietzgen, as Dietzgen did 'independently'
of Marx -- at *proletarian natur-monism*, to which, perhaps, he may give
another name, but which will have the same philosophical content. (p
viii)

So Mr Bogdanov's 'philosophical' thinking is developing naturally in the
direction of dialectical materialism\... You have no fear of God, Mr
Dauge! Conclusion: the reader will lose exactly nothing even if Mr
Unterman's pamphlet never came into his hands. Productions like these
are instructive only in one sense. The very fact that they can appear at
all shows to what a low level philosophical education in the
international socialist movement of our day has sunk. But there is
little need to emphasise anew this most distressing truth. Suffice it to
recall that in 'the land of thinkers' Mr Bernstein's 'critical' remarks
on materialism and dialectics did not get their deserts by being laughed
out of court by the Social-Democrats. ^[\[7\]](#n7)^

Now to Joseph Dietzgen. His son, Eugene Dietzgen, in a preface to the
Russian translation, also describes his father's philosophical teaching
as an important supplement to Marxism (p iv). He says:

If the founders of historical materialism, and their followers, in a
whole series of convincing historical investigations, proved the
connection between economic and spiritual development, and the
dependence of the latter, in the final analysis, on economic relations,
nevertheless they did not prove that this dependence of the spirit is
rooted in its nature and in the nature of the universe. Marx and Engels
thought that they had ousted the last spectres of idealism from the
understanding of history. This was a mistake, for the metaphysical
spectres found a niche for themselves in the unexplained essence of the
human spirit and in the universal whole which is closely associated with
the latter. Only a scientifically verified criticism of cognition could
eject idealism from here. (p iv)

Despite all our respect for the noble memory of the German
worker-philosopher, and despite our personal sympathy for his son, we
find ourselves compelled to protest resolutely against the main idea of
the preface from which we have just quoted. In it, the relationship of
Joseph Dietzgen to Marx and Engels is quite wrongly stated. If Engels
wrote that historical materialism had driven idealism from its last
refuge, that is to say, from the science of human society, he believed
that the triumph of materialism over idealism, as regards both 'the
nature of the universe' and the human spirit, was an incontestable fact.
Engels was a convinced materialist. Of course, one may dispute his
materialism, but he ought not to have reproaches hurled at him which he
does not at all deserve. Evidently, Eugene Dietzgen thinks that
materialism does not have its own 'criticism of cognition'. But that too
is an error that could only have been committed by someone ill-informed
on the history of materialism. Marx's words about materialist dialectics
which I referred to earlier contain the basic foundation of historical
materialism and at the same time, *even in the first place*, a very
definite 'criticism of cognition'. It could be argued that this
'criticism' is expounded there much too briefly, but even if that is the
case, we are still confronted with the question of how this -- perhaps
indeed too briefly expounded -- 'criticism of cognition' stands in
relation to the 'criticism' set forth by the author of *The Positive
Outcome of Philosophy*. If these two 'criticisms' *contradict* each
other, we have to *choose between them, not supplement one by the
other*. If, on the other hand, Joseph Dietzgen's 'criticism of
cognition' *does not contradict* the criticism elaborated much earlier
by the founders of scientific socialism, but is simply a more detailed
and more or less successful exposition of it, then, surely, it is at
least strange to talk of Joseph Dietzgen *supplementing* Marx, and
supplementing in the sense meant by Eugene Dietzgen, viz, of giving a
new philosophical *substantiation* of historical materialism. We must
add that the '*criticism of cognition*' contained in Marx's
characterisation of materialist dialectics is set out in much greater
detail in Engels' works, especially in Part I of *Anti-Dühring*
(Philosophy). ^[\[8\]](#n8)^

True, it is expounded there in a polemical rather than a systematic
form. However, *if* this is a shortcoming, then it is a purely *formal*
one, in no way affecting the *content* of the philosophical ideas
enunciated by Engels in his controversy with Dühring. Moreover the
polemical form might, perhaps, make it difficult for some *novice in
philosophy* to understand Engels correctly. But for people who venture
to talk about the extent to which Marx's theory requires to be
supplemented, such a formal difficulty should not be an obstacle to
understanding the philosophical section of *Anti-Dühring*. But Eugene
Dietzgen does not even mention these philosophical views of Marx and
Engels. It is as if he had not even heard of them, which is very
strange! After this, what value can be placed on his indication that
Marx's theory is '*incomplete*\'? Eugene Dietzgen says:

In our opinion, four main phases of dialectics can be distinguished in
the nineteenth century: Hegelian, or purely reflective; Darwinian, or
biological; Marxist, or historico-economic; and Dietzgenian, or
universal natur-monistic. (p vi)

In view of what we have said, it is clear that to describe *materialist*
dialectics as *historico-economic* dialectics is to commit a serious
blunder. And this blunder clearly proves by its very existence that
Eugene Dietzgen completely fails to understand the place of Marx's
theory in the history of philosophy and its relation to the philosophy
of Feuerbach, whose views were also, without any doubt,
'*natur-monistic*'.

Since he fails to master this highly important fact it would have been
better if Eugene Dietzgen had refrained from trying to show just what is
'lacking' in Marx's theory.

It will be useful to note here one more point, that Eugene Dietzgen
describes Hegel's dialectics as *purely reflective*.

We need only ponder the following lines written by the same Eugene
Dietzgen to understand just how naive this is.

According to him, his father's dialectics furnishes us with the
cognitive-critical key to:

1\) The solution of all riddles \[sic!\] by the consistent application
of the dialectical-productive method of investigation which, proceeding
consciously from sensuous or concrete reality, and basing itself on the
organic unity of being, is able to reconcile all contradictions and at
the same time sharply to distinguish temporally or spatially limited,
relative opposites.

2\) The more fundamental understanding of historical materialism and the
Marxist analysis of the capitalist mode of production, clearly showing
to the proletariat the means and aim of its economic emancipation in
socialism.

3\) Solving the problem of beginning and end, the relationship between
form and content, appearance and essence, might and right, the
individual in contrast to society and nature, the subject and the
object, freedom and dependence, equality and distinction, the temporary
and the eternal, the relative and the absolute, the particular and the
general.

4\) The knowledge of the essence of things and phenomena, or the
criterion of relative truth.

5\) Abolishing the opposition between materialism and idealism. (p vi)

As regards a more thorough understanding of historical materialism and
analysis of capitalism, we shall wait till these are disclosed in the
collected works of Eugene Dietzgen himself, or those of Pannekoek or any
of the other writers who prefer Joseph Dietzgen's '*key*' to Karl Marx's
*method*. In regard to the solution of 'all riddles' concerning the
questions of beginning and end, relation of form to content, etc, etc,
we would ask Eugene Dietzgen: Is that not just '*purely reflective
dialectics*', and did Hegel's philosophy not deal with all that? He will
tell us, perhaps, that Hegel resolved those reflective questions (*that
is to say, questions concerning the mutual relations of concepts*) in an
idealist sense, whereas the author of *The Positive Outcome of
Philosophy* gives them a 'natur-monistic' solution. But this can only
mean that Hegel's dialectics has an *idealist* basis, while Joseph
Dietzgen's dialectics has its basis in a '*natur-monistic*'
world-outlook. From this it inevitably follows that Hegel's dialectics
has as its main distinguishing feature its idealist basis. Why then does
Eugene Dietzgen not call it idealist, instead of conjuring up a new,
very inexact and very clumsy title for it? Inexact philosophical
terminology leads to unclarity of philosophical concepts and sometimes,
incidentally, the latter gives rise to the former and is evidence of it.
But Eugene Dietzgen is reluctant to use the terms '*idealism*' and
'*materialism*'. They remind him of 'one-sided' conceptions, the
opposition between which was 'abolished' by his father's monism. Let us
see exactly how Joseph Dietzgen 'abolishes' the opposition between
idealism and materialism.

To abolish the opposition between two given concepts, it is essential to
have at least an accurate idea of the one and the other. What idea did
Joseph Dietzgen have, say, of materialism?

On pages 62-63 of the book we are analysing, *The Positive Outcome of
Philosophy*, we read:

In order to explain the process of thought, we must elucidate it as a
part of the universal process. It is not the cause which created the
world, either in the theological or in the idealist sense, nor is it a
mere act of the brain substance, as the materialists of the last century
present it. The process of thought and its cognition are a particularity
in the general cosmos.

Thus the materialists of the last, that is to say, the eighteenth
century, did not understand that the process of thought is a
particularity in the general cosmos. They thought it was 'a mere act of
the brain substance'. However, we can distinguish three or even four
shades in the materialism of the eighteenth century: the materialism of
La Mettrie and Diderot; the materialism of Helvétius; the materialism of
Holbach; and the materialism of the Englishmen Hartley and Priestley.
Which of these shades of materialism has Joseph Dietzgen in mind? No one
knows. And what is meant by *not a 'mere act* of the brain substance\'?
Again, nobody knows. But to proceed. Maybe the matter will be cleared up
in the following exposition.

On page 97, in the *Letters on Logic*, Joseph Dietzgen says:

The human skull performs the function of thinking as involuntarily as
the chest does that of breathing. However, we can, by our will, stop
breathing for a while\... In the same way, the will can control the
thoughts.

We shall not dwell here on the question of the extent to which thought
can be controlled by will, but shall ask our reader to pay attention to
the words: 'The human skull performs the function of thinking\... as the
chest does that of breathing.' That, according to our author, is exactly
what the eighteenth-century materialists said. Why then does Joseph
Dietzgen declare them to be one-sided? And what, *in his opinion*, is
the difference between *function* and *action*? This, too, remains
unknown.

On page 72 of the same book, it says:

The old logic could not lay down any valid laws of thought, because it
had too high an idea of thinking itself. For it thought was not only an
attribute, a mode, a particle of true nature, but the nature of truth
was spiritualised by it into a mystical substance. Instead of forming
the concept of spirit out of flesh and blood, it tries to resolve
\[explain -- GP\] flesh and blood by means of the concept.

There is something very wrong said here about the 'old logic'.
^[\[9\]](#n9)^ It is quite true that not '*flesh*' must be explained by
*concept* but *concept* by '*flesh*'. However, this is precisely what
the eighteenth-century materialists said and what Feuerbach repeated
after them in the nineteenth century, when he rebelled against Hegel.
Why then does Joseph Dietzgen declare that materialism is one-sided?
This also remains his secret.

On the following page, Joseph Dietzgen reproaches the 'old logic' that
'it elevates the spirit to the first place and \[but? -- GP\] relegates
flesh and blood to the last'. Here, too, is a clumsy expression,
probably the work of Messrs the Translators (*traduttori traditori*!)
but the clumsily expressed idea is quite correct, and again it proves to
be a completely *materialist* one. Once more: Why does Joseph Dietzgen
declare that materialism is one-sided?

To put the matter bluntly, Joseph Dietzgen had only a vague idea of
materialism. He says of himself (p 169):

As a rule, I acquaint myself with philosophical works of the second and
third order merely by glancing over the preface, the introduction and
perhaps the first chapter. Then I am approximately informed as to what I
may expect further on.

It is our view that Joseph Dietzgen, because of the extremely widespread
contempt for French materialism which prevailed in Germany, '*acquainted
himself*' in just that way with the works of the French materialists
too, and, having acquainted himself with them in such a superficial and
totally unsatisfactory manner, he concluded that materialism was really
one-sided, as all the German pastors kept on repeating, and undertook to
'abolish' its one-sidedness, to 'reconcile' it with idealism. Such a
method of 'abolishing opposites' was, of course, doomed to utter failure
from the start. And we must add that though Joseph Dietzgen had a much
more correct conception of idealism than he had of materialism, he was
not fully correct even in that. For instance, what he had to say about
Kant was often far from true, although it did conform, we agree, to the
widespread current opinions on that philosopher. Even Hegel's philosophy
he obviously knew only in *general outline*. We get this impression
because Joseph Dietzgen often seems to be knocking at an open door and
solving with incredible effort contradictions that were long ago
resolved incomparably better, more fully and deeply, in Hegel's *Logik*.
Why should he have knocked at an open door if he knew that the door was
already open? But that was just the trouble -- he didn't know.

Marx and Engels, who were thoroughly familiar with both *idealism* and
*materialism*, did not 'abolish' the opposition between these two
concepts, but firmly declared themselves to be materialists. Dietzgen
son will probably tell us that this is what constitutes their
one-sidedness.

But we take a different view of the matter, and to substantiate this we
invite the reader to examine with us Joseph Dietzgen's key 'to the
solution of all \[*excusez du peu!*\] riddles'.

The philosophical significance of this remarkable 'key' could be
characterised by a very brief sentence from Joseph Dietzgen himself:
'Nature comprises all.' (p 12) But that is comprehensible only to people
well-versed in the history of philosophy, and there are few such people.
Consequently a more detailed exposition is needed:

The red thread winding through all these letters \[Joseph Dietzgen says
in his Thirteenth Letter on Logic (p 154)\] refers to the following
point: the thinking apparatus is a thing like all other things, a part
or attribute of the universe. It belongs in the first place to the most
general category of being, and is an apparatus which produces a detailed
picture of human experience by classification or distinction into
categories. In order to use this apparatus correctly, one must clearly
recognise that world unity is multiform and that all multiformity is a
monist whole.

The same thought is expressed in different words in the Fifth Letter:

The zoologists have always known that all species of animals belong to
the animal kingdom; but this order was, with them, more of a mechanical
affair\... The grouping of all animals, from the minutest to the
biggest, in one kingdom, appeared before the time of Darwin to be an
order which had been accomplished by thought alone, as an order of
thought, while since Darwin it has been known as an order of nature.

What the zoologist did to the animal kingdom, must be done by the
logician to being in general, to the infinite cosmos. He must show that
the whole world, all forms of its being, including the spirit, are
logically connected, related and welded together.

A certain narrow materialism asserts that everything is done when it has
pointed out the interconnection between thought and brain. A good many
things may still be discovered with the help of the dissecting knife,
microscope and experiment; but this does not make the function of logic
superfluous.

True, thought and brain are connected just as intimately as the brain
and the blood, the blood and oxygen, etc; but thought in general is
connected quite as intimately with all being as is the whole of physics.

That the apple is not dependent only on the stem which attaches it to
the tree, but also on the sunshine and rain, that these things are not
one-sidedly but universally connected, this is what logic shall
especially teach you in regard to the spirit, to thought. (p 110)

We shall not stop here to prove what was well known to all, even to the
'narrowest' of materialists of all times: that 'thought' is connected
not only with the 'brain', but also with all being in general.

Here again Joseph Dietzgen is knocking at an open door, and again he
need not have done so had he known better the subject he undertook to
expound. He would have found many pages in Holbach's *Syst me de la
Nature* explaining the connection between 'thought' and 'being'.

The fallaciousness of Joseph Dietzgen's charge against materialism is at
once plain to anyone familiar with eighteenth-century materialism.
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ We shall not enlarge on the point that it is awkward to
oppose the classification *by 'thought*' to classification *by
'nature*', since the latter is certainly at one and the same time
*reflective*. We have already said something about this. Now we are not
*arguing* with Joseph Dietzgen, but trying to *understand* him. To do
this we must pay the greatest attention to that part of the extract
quoted where it says that the whole world, all forms of being, are
logically connected, related and welded together.

*This idea is the basis of all Joseph Dietzgen*'s *logic, or* -- since
his logic embraces his theory of cognition, ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ -- *his
gnosiology*. And this idea, in the most varied ways -- with endless,
wearisome, inessential and often lumbering repetition -- is set forth
both in his *The Positive Outcome of Philosophy* and *Letters on Logic*.
And it is, of course, a correct but badly expounded idea, which was
developed by Heraclitus in ancient times (and he had nothing in common
either with the proletariat or with a 'proletarian logic' of some
special kind) and in the nineteenth century by Hegel and the Hegelians,
including the materialists Feuerbach, Marx and Engels. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^
*In Anti-Dühring and Ludwig Feuerbach and in the extract from
Anti-Dühring published as a pamphlet entitled Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific, this idea is a great deal better expounded, is more simply
and lucidly explained than in Joseph Dietzgen*'s *Letters on Logic and
The Positive Outcome of Philosophy*. *This idea is the basis of all
dialectics*. And since it is the basis of *all* dialectics, it alone is
insufficient to characterise a *particular* dialectical method. We know
of the *idealist* dialectics of Hegel and the *materialist* dialectics
of Marx. What was Joseph Dietzgen's dialectics? We know that his son
calls it 'natur-monist'. What variety of dialectics is this? Well,
listen.

On page 45 of the book we are analysing, *The Positive Outcome of
Philosophy*, Joseph Dietzgen says:

I have thus explained that logic has as yet not been conscious that the
knowledge it produces with its basic principles does not offer us truth
itself, but only a more or less accurate picture of it. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^
I have, furthermore asserted that the positive outcome of philosophy has
substantially added to the clearness of the portrait of the human mind.
Logic seeks to be 'the science of the forms and laws of thought'.
Dialectics, the legacy of philosophy, aims to be the same, and its first
paragraph runs: not thinking produces being, but being produces
thinking, of which (being) thinking is the part which is engaged in
*portraying* truth. From this follows a fact which can easily obscure
the meaning of the theory, viz, that the philosophy which has bequeathed
to us logical \[?\] dialectics or dialectic logic, must explain not only
thinking, but also, at the same time, the original, of which thinking
furnishes copies.

Without stopping to consider some *awkward and inaccurate expressions*,
we shall observe that the *principal idea* in this passage is *purely
materialistic*. Even Engels' words are used, although according to
Engels it is not that being *produces* thinking, but that it
*determines* thinking. This is a substantial difference, but we shall
not dwell on it since it is obviously a *slip of the pen* on Joseph
Dietzgen's part. It is sufficient for us to know that our author is here
a *materialist*, one who is convinced that thought is 'engaged'
^[\[14\]](#n14)^ *in portraying truth*, that is, *being*.

So the 'first paragraph' of Joseph Dietzgen's 'natur-monist' dialectics
'proclaims' what had been proclaimed much earlier by Marx's materialist
dialectics: 'The ideal is nothing else than the material world reflected
by the human mind, and translated into terms of thought.' Where is the
difference? There is none. How then did Joseph Dietzgen 'supplement'
Marx? In no way! True, the 'first paragraph' of dialectics is set out in
the book of Joseph Dietzgen -- *whose main works were published much
later than the main works of Marx and Engels* -- much more wordily than
in Marx and Engels. But although more lengthy, Joseph Dietzgen's
exposition is so very haphazard, in places so ineffectual and so
frequently befogged by the imperfect lucidity of the author's
philosophical thinking, that sometimes it not only does not explain the
meaning of the 'first paragraph' but rather obscures it. What then is
the matter? Why then did he undertake to 'supplement' Karl Marx with
Joseph Dietzgen? It is precisely because -- and only because --
Dietzgen's philosophical thinking is not distinguished by complete
lucidity. This seems to be paradoxical, but, unfortunately, it is true.

In the passage we have just quoted, there is one strange proposition:
Being 'produces' thought, which however is part of being. If the words
'being produces thought' mean the same as Marx's 'the ideal is nothing
else than the material world reflected by the human mind, and translated
into terms of thought', then the words 'thought is\... a part of\...
being' compel us to doubt whether Joseph Dietzgen's philosophy is
identical to Marx's. And it is just this possible doubt which attracts
to Joseph Dietzgen people who are influenced by contemporary idealism
and wish at any cost to place an *idealist* head on historical
*materialism*.

In his exposition, Joseph Dietzgen is partly loyal to materialism, and
then he reiterates that metaphysical logic 'has overlooked the fact that
knowledge which is produced with its own rules, is not the truth, not
the real world, but only an ideal, that is, more or less apt picture of
it' (p 44).

Here, the *ideal* world is only the *reflection* of the material world.
But sometimes Joseph Dietzgen gets himself entangled in his own
addition: 'thinking is part of being', that is, the ideal world is part
of the material world. Then he writes in all seriousness: 'Is not the
air, or the scent an ethereal body?' (p 22) And on page 122 we read:
'being or the universe, spirit and matter, embraces all forces,
including heaven and hell \[sic!\], in a single circle, a monistic
whole'. It is such a great muddle, so ambiguous, that here, indeed,
Joseph Dietzgen's philosophy does begin to resemble the very 'original'
philosophy of Mr Bogdanov. It is known that anything distinguished by
muddled thinking is at home in this philosophy. Here, Mr P Dauge, *in
his own way*, is right but he is mistaken when he takes this for
*dialectical materialism*. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^

Space does not permit us to follow up all the regrettable logical
consequences of the muddle that has crept into Joseph Dietzgen's
understanding of the 'first paragraph' of materialist dialectics; his
completely erroneous views of the criterion of truth, and so on. We
shall restrict ourselves, therefore, to the remark that, in spite of his
son's opinion, Joseph Dietzgen was *unable to solve the problem of the
relation of the subject to the object*, and that it was this that
brought about his logical downfall. We shall add that Joseph Dietzgen's
error arose, apparently, from a highly praiseworthy endeavour to pull
the theoretical ground from under the feet of speculative philosophy,
which placed spirit -- in one or other of its conceptions -- *outside*
and *above* the world. In opposition to this philosophy, Joseph Dietzgen
put the proposition that 'being is everything; it is the essential
content of everything, outside it there is nothing and can be nothing,
because it is the cosmos, that is, the infinite' (p 26). It goes without
saying that as an argument against speculative philosophy, this has
absolutely no value, since to repudiate the existence of extra-universal
spirit by a simple recital of the proposition that the world contains in
itself *all being*, is to base oneself on a *tautology*, fully identical
with that which Eugene Dühring once placed as the cornerstone of *his*
philosophy and which Engels ridiculed so scathingly in the first part of
*Anti-Dühring*: 'All-embracing being is one.' ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ But
Joseph Dietzgen thought this tautological expression was almost the most
important 'outcome' of philosophy. With its aid, he attempted to solve
all contradictions. Thus on pages 127-28, in the Eighth Letter on Logic,
addressed, as all these letters were, to his son, he says:

The most vivid, and, perhaps, the most instructive illustration of the
correct meaning of contradictions, is given by the contrast between
truth and untruth. These two poles are\... more widely separated than
the North Pole and the South Pole, and yet they are as intimately
connected as these two. Generally accepted logic will hardly listen to
the demonstration of such a senseless unity as that of truth and
untruth. Therefore you will pardon me, if I illustrate this example by
other opposites, if you like, by the contrast between day and night. Let
us assume that the day lasts twelve hours and the night likewise. Here
day and night are opposites; where it is day it cannot be night, and yet
day and night constitute one single day of twenty-four hours, in which
they both dwell harmoniously. It is exactly the same with truth and
untruth. The world is the truth, and error, the appearance and lies,
embodied in it, are parts of the true world, just as night is part of
day, without violation of logic.

We may honestly speak of appearance *real* and *true* lies, without any
contradiction. Just as unreason contains reason, so also untruth lives
constantly and inevitably in truth, because the latter is all-embracing,
it is the universe.

But in what way is day here reconciled with night? *Firstly*, it is
assumed that a day is equal to *twelve* hours, *and then* it is
postulated that a day stretches out to *twenty-four* hours, that is to
say, *there is now no place for night*, the duration of which was
formerly twelve hours. When there is no place for *night*, it is clear
that *there can be no place either for opposition* between night and
day. By means of such naive methods, based on the fact that *one and the
same* expression is used in *different* senses, one may indeed with the
greatest ease reconcile anything, solve all 'riddles', and 'abolish' all
the oppositions in the world. But\... is that really an answer?

Joseph Dietzgen had to choose between Hegel's idealist dialectics and
Marx's materialist dialectics, and he was strongly inclined towards the
latter. But since he had not studied the question adequately, and was
even insufficiently acquainted with it, he got himself *mixed up* in his
own arguments against speculative philosophy and imagined that he had
succeeded in '*reconciling*' the opposition between idealism and
materialism. To say nothing of the fact that this inability to cope with
his own philosophical thinking was not a sign of strength but of
*weakness* on Joseph Dietzgen's part. To Dietzgen himself, however, and
just because he was unable to contend with his own philosophical
thinking, this manifestation of *weakness* seemed, on the contrary, to
be a manifestation of his *superiority* over 'one-sided' materialism.

And those who are now trying to 'supplement' Karl Marx and Frederick
Engels with Joseph Dietzgen view this weakness of Dietzgen's in the same
way as he did. We well understand what the Germans mean when they talk
of *piety* in the relationship of children to parents. So that it does
not enter our head to ridicule the undoubtedly exaggerated opinion which
Eugene Dietzgen has of his father's philosophy. But Eugene Dietzgen must
also, for his part, understand piety in the relationship of pupil to
teacher. Therefore he must not complain because we have firmly rejected
his attempt to 'supplement' Marx. As for the Untermans, Dauges, Orlovs,
etc, *their* inclination to 'supplement' in the way mentioned appears to
us the simple product of ignorance, weakness of philosophical thinking,
and downright literary carelessness. These people have no other
extenuating circumstances while those we have just enumerated hardly
attenuate anything.

In no 2 of *Rus* ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ for the present year (1907) there is a
feature by GV Kolomiitsev, entitled 'Music of Today (Richard Wagner and
the Search for New Gods)'. We were interested in the following passage:

Here I should like to dwell on one phenomenon which seems to me very
typical of our harassing and impetuous times. I refer to the strongly
developed fear of being found 'backward' in questions of musical art, a
fear aroused by falsely acquired snatches of the past. In connection
with the search for something new at any cost, this fear prompts us to
find 'novelty' and 'genius' far too often where at most there is
something a good deal less 'significant', and above all, in its essence,
anything but 'new'.

Such a fear is also noticeable in our Marxist literature. It explains --
*in the first instance* -- very much, including the constant efforts to
'supplement' Marx: now with Kant, now with Mach, and now, finally, with
Joseph Dietzgen.

In conclusion, we beg our readers not to think that we attach no
importance to the philosophical works of the author of *Letters on
Logic*. No, no, and no again! That is not at all our attitude to them.
In our view, they merely have no significance *as supplementing Marx*,
but in themselves they are sufficiently interesting and in places
instructive; although Joseph Dietzgen's *Letters on Logic* are
strikingly, awfully poor in comparison with Hegel's *Science of Logic*
(*Wissenschaft der Logik*.)

Joseph Dietzgen's too fervent admirers do him the most harm; when they
contrast him with giants like Hegel and Marx, they make him appear a lot
smaller than he really was.

We advise *reading Joseph Dietzgen only after the most careful study of
Marx*'s *philosophy*. It will then be easier to see how he
*approximates* in his teaching to the founders of scientific socialism,
and where he has to *yield ground* to them, *lags behind* them.
Otherwise, reading Joseph Dietzgen will give the reader, together with
not unimportant and not uninteresting, *but in no way new*, details,
much and harmful confusion.

Looking at the matter from another angle, it would be a great deal less
awkward to study Joseph Dietzgen if someone at last took pity on Russian
readers and retranslated the most important works of the German
worker-philosopher from the barbarian language of Dauge and Orlov into
literary Russian. That would be a great boon, indeed!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. The reference is apparently to *The German Ideology*
-- Editor.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 29
-- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Evidently Mr Unterman thinks that the materialism of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was 'bourgeois' in character,
but the idealism of the same period was not. Why he should think so is
something he himself cannot explain.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. The reference is to Frederick Engels' statement in
his article 'Programme of the Blanquist Commune Emigrants' from the
series *Flüchtlingsliteratur* (*Emigrant Literature*). See Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1973), p 383 --
Editor.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. Frederick Engels, *Anti-Dühring* (Moscow, 1975), p 15
-- Editor.

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. In Russian folklore there is a saying that the earth
rests on three whales -- Editor.

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. Plekhanov reminds the reader that Eduard Bernstein's
revision of Marxism had not been decisively rebuffed by German
Social-Democracy -- Editor.

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. Note from the collection *From Defence to Attack*:
Feuerbach's criticism of Hegel's speculative philosophy served as the
basis for this very criticism. (See my pamphlet *Fundamental Problems of
Marxism*.) \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), p 125 et seq -- Editor. Available at
[*Fundamental Problems of Marxism*](../1907/fundamental-problems.htm) --
MIA.\]

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. It is possible, though, that the incorrectness is the
fault of the translators. They did not translate Joseph Dietzgen into
Russian literary language, but into some kind of special one of their
own, which is more worthy of the title *barbarian*. I am sorry not to
have at hand the original works of Joseph Dietzgen, which were so kindly
sent to me by his son, with whom I now have to cross philosophical
swords.

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. It is interesting to note, by the way, that
Feuerbach also advanced the same fallacious charge against materialism.
And this, too, is explained by the fact that Feuerbach, in keeping with
the good old German custom, had only a very vague idea of the history of
materialism. He shunned 'La Mettrie's truffle pie' in the self-same work
where he (Feuerbach) fully agreed with the views of the author of
*L*\'*Homme-machine*.

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. 'Our logic', says Joseph Dietzgen, 'is a theory of
cognition.'

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. Feuerbach was most undoubtedly a materialist,
although he liked to attack the 'limited' materialists, so great was the
strength of this much honoured custom in Germany, from whose influence
many, many German Social-Democrats, including the most 'radical', have
still not freed themselves.

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. J Dietzgen is not responsible for the style: we
have already mentioned that Messrs Dauge and Orlov have translated his
book not into Russian but into a ponderous, barbarous language of their
own which Herzen would have called 'bird language'.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. Again, an unfortunate expression, but we do not
intend to waste time on expressions.

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. At best -- any resemblance with Mr Bogdanov could,
of course, only be at the worst possible -- this confusion of thought
includes an obscure allusion to Spinozism. But even with the aid of the
most clear Spinozism, one cannot '*excel*' materialism. The materialists
La Mettrie, Diderot, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels were Spinozists who had
merely ceased to identify God with Nature (see *A Critique of Our
Critics*, pp 154-66). \[See Plekhanov's article 'Bernstein and
Materialism' in Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume
2 (Moscow, 1974), pp 326-39 -- Editor. Available at [Bernstein and
Materialism](../1898/07/bernsteinmat.html) -- MIA.\] Feuerbach has
already explained Spinoza's relation to materialism.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. '\"All-embracing being is one." If tautology, the
simple repetition in the predicate of what is already expressed in the
subject -- if that makes an axiom, then we have here one of the purest
water, Herr Dühring tells us in the subject that being embraces
everything, and in the predicate he intrepidly declares that in that
case there is nothing outside it. What colossal, "system-creating
thought\"!' (Frederick Engels, *Philosophy*. *Political Economy*.
*Socialism (Anti-Dühring*) (translated from the German, Fourth Edition,
St Petersburg, 1907), p 30). \[Frederick Engels, *Anti-Dühring* (Moscow,
1975), p 52 -- Editor.\]

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. *Rus* (*Russia*) -- a liberal bourgeois daily,
published in St Petersburg in 1903-05 -- Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
