---
layout: default
title: 
---
Georgi Plekhanov 1907

### Fundamental Problems of Marxism

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3, Progress Publishers (Moscow, 1976), pp. 117-83;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

According to the Soviet editors: 'This work was written in November and
December 1907 for the collection of articles which was being prepared
for the twenty-fifth anniversary of Marx's death. For a number of
reasons this collection never came out, but the article was published in
pamphlet form in 1908.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Marxism is an integral world-outlook. Expressed in a nutshell, it is
*contemporary materialism*, at present the highest stage in the
development of that *view upon the world* whose foundations were laid
down in ancient Greece by Democritus, ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ and in part by the
Ionian thinkers who preceded that philosopher. What was known as
*hylozoism* was nothing but a naive *materialism*. It is to Karl Marx
and his friend Frederick Engels that the main credit for the development
of present-day materialism must no doubt go. The historical and economic
aspects of this world-outlook, that is, what is known as *historical
materialism* and the closely related sum of views on the *tasks, method
and categories of political economy, and on the economic development of
society, especially capitalist society*, are in their fundamentals
almost entirely the work of Marx and Engels. That which was introduced
into these fields by their *precursors* should be regarded merely as the
preparatory work of amassing material, often copious and valuable, but
not as yet systematised or illuminated by a single fundamental idea, and
therefore not appraised or utilised in its real significance. What Marx
and Engels' *followers* in Europe and America have done in these fields
is merely a more or less successful elaboration of specific problems,
sometimes, it is true, of the utmost importance. That is why the term
'Marxism' is often used to signify only these two aspects of the
present-day materialist world-outlook not only among the 'general
public', who have not yet achieved a deep understanding of philosophical
theories, but even among people, both in Russia and the entire civilised
world, who consider themselves faithful followers of Marx and Engels. In
such cases these two aspects are looked upon as something independent of
'philosophical materialism', and at times as something almost opposed to
it. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ And since these two aspects cannot but hang in
mid-air when they are torn out of the general context of cognate views
constituting their theoretical foundation, those who perform that
tearing-out operation naturally feel an urge to 'substantiate Marxism'
anew by joining it -- again quite arbitrarily and most frequently under
the influence of philosophical moods prevalent at the time among
*ideologists of the bourgeoisie --* with some philosopher or another:
with Kant, Mach, Avenarius or Ostwald, and of late with Joseph Dietzgen.
^[\[3\]](#n3)^ True, the philosophical views of J Dietzgen have arisen
quite independently of bourgeois influences and are in considerable
measure related to the philosophical views of Marx and Engels. The
latter views, however, possess an incomparably more consistent and rich
content, and for that reason alone cannot be *supplemented* by
Dietzgen's teachings but can only be *popularised* by them. No attempts
have yet been made to 'supplement Marx' with Thomas Aquinas. It is
however quite feasible that, despite the Pope's recent encyclical
against the Modernists, the Catholic world will at some time produce
from its midst a thinker capable of performing this feat in the sphere
of theory. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

### I

Attempts to show that Marxism must be 'supplemented' by one philosopher
or another are usually backed up with reference to the fact that Marx
and Engels did not anywhere set forth their philosophical views. This
reasoning is hardly convincing, however, apart from the consideration
that, even if these views were indeed not set forth anywhere, that could
provide no logical reason to have them replaced by the views of any
random thinker who, in the main, holds an entirely different point of
view. It should be remembered that we have sufficient literary material
at our disposal to form a correct idea of the philosophical views of
Marx and Engels. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

In their *final* shape, these views were *fairly fully* set forth,
although in a polemical form, in the first part of Engels' book *Herrn
Eugen Dühring's Umwälzung der Wissenschaft* (of which there are several
Russian translations). Then there is a splendid booklet by the same
author, *Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen
Philosophie* (which I have translated into Russian and supplied with a
preface and explanatory notes; it has been published by Mr Lvovich), in
which the views constituting the philosophical foundation of Marxism are
expounded in a positive form. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^ A brief but vivid account
of the same views, related to *agnosticism*, was given by Engels in his
preface to the English translation of the pamphlet *The Development of
Scientific Socialism* (translated into German, and published under the
title of *Über den historischen Materialismus* in *Neue Zeit*, nos 1 and
2, 1892-93). As for Marx, I will mention as important for an
understanding of the *philosophical aspect* of his teachings, in the
first place, the characterisation of *materialist dialectic --* as
distinct from Hegel's *idealist* dialectic -- given in the afterword to
the Second German edition of Volume 1 of *Capital*, and, secondly, the
numerous remarks made *en passant* in the same volume. Also significant
in certain respects are some of the pages in *La Misère de la
philosophie* (which has been translated into Russian). Finally, *the
process of the development* of Marx and Engels' philosophical views is
revealed with sufficient clarity in their early writings, republished by
F Mehring under the title of *Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Karl
Marx*, etc (Stuttgart, 1902).

In his dissertation *Differenz der demokritischen und epikureischen
Naturphilosophie*, as well as in several articles republished by Mehring
in Volume 1 of the publication just mentioned, the young Marx appears
before us as an idealist *pur sang* of the Hegelian school. However, in
the articles which have now been included in the same volume and which
first appeared in the *Deutsch-französische Jahrbücher*, ^[\[7\]](#n7)^
Marx -- like Engels, who also collaborated in the *Jahrbücher --* was a
firm adherent of Feuerbachian '*humanism*'.^[\[8\]](#n8)^ *Die heilige
Familie, order Kritik der kritischen Kritik*, which appeared in 1845 and
has been republished in Volume 2 of the Mehring publication, shows us
our two authors, that is, both Marx and Engels, as having made several
important steps in the *further development* of Feuerbach's philosophy.
The direction they gave to this elaboration can be seen from the eleven
*Theses on Feuerbach* written by Marx in the spring of 1845, and
published by Engels as an appendix to the aforementioned pamphlet
*Ludwig Feuerbach*. In short, there is no lack of material here; the
only thing needed is the ability to make use of it, that is, the need to
have the proper training for its understanding. Present-day readers,
however, do not have the training required for that understanding, and
consequently do not know how to make use of it.

Why is that so? For a variety of reasons. One of the principal reasons
is that nowadays there is, in the first place, little *knowledge of
Hegelian philosophy*, without which it is difficult to learn Marx's
method, and, in the second place, little *knowledge of the history of
materialism*, the absence of which does not permit present-day readers
to form a clear idea of the doctrine of Feuerbach, who was Marx's
immediate precursor in the field of philosophy, and in considerable
measure worked out the philosophical foundation of what can be called
the world-outlook of Marx and Engels.

Nowadays Feuerbach's 'humanism' is usually described as something very
vague and indefinite. FA Lange, who has done so much to spread, both
among the 'general public' and in the learned world, an absolutely false
view of the essence of materialism and of its history, refused to
recognise Feuerbach's 'humanism' as a materialist teaching. FA Lange's
example is being followed, in this respect, by almost all who have
written on Feuerbach in Russia and other countries. PA Berlin too seems
to have been affected by this influence, since he depicts Feuerbach's
'humanism' as a kind of materialism that is not quite 'pure'.
^[\[9\]](#n9)^ I must admit that I do not know for certain how this
question is regarded by Franz Mehring, whose knowledge of philosophy is
the best, and probably unique, among German Social-Democrats. But it is
perfectly clear to me that it was the materialist that Marx and Engels
saw in Feuerbach. True, Engels speaks of Feuerbach's inconsistency, but
that does not in the least prevent him from recognising the *fundamental
propositions* of his philosophy as *purely materialist*.
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ But then these propositions cannot be viewed otherwise
by anybody who has gone to the trouble of making a study of them.

### II

I am well aware that in saying all this I risk surprising very many of
my readers. I am not afraid to do so; the ancient thinker was right in
saying that astonishment is the mother of philosophy. For the reader not
to remain at the stage, so to say, of astonishment, I shall first of all
recommend that he ask himself what Feuerbach meant when, while giving a
terse but vivid outline of his philosophical *curriculum vitae*, he
wrote: 'God was my first thought, Reason the second, and Man the third
and last thought.' I contend that this question is conclusively answered
in the following meaningful words of Feuerbach himself:

In the controversy between materialism and spiritualism\... the human
head is under discussion\... once we have learnt what kind of matter the
brain is made up of, we shall soon arrive at a clear view upon all other
matter as well, matter in general. ^[\[11\]](#n11)^

Elsewhere he says that his '*anthropology*', that is, his 'humanism',
merely means that man takes for God that which is his own essence, his
own spirit. ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ He goes on to say that Descartes did not
eschew this 'anthropological' point of view. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ How is all
this to be understood? It means that Feuerbach made 'Man' the point of
departure of his philosophical reasoning *only because* it was from that
point of departure that he hoped the sooner to achieve his aim -- to
bring forth a correct view upon matter in general and its relation to
the 'spirit'. Consequently what we have here is a *methodological
device*, whose value was conditioned by circumstances of time and place,
that is, by the thinking habits of the learned, or simply educated,
Germans of the time, ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ *and not by any specificity of
world-outlook*.^[\[15\]](#n15)^

The above quotation from Feuerbach regarding the 'human head' shows that
when he wrote these words the problem of 'the kind of matter the brain
is made up of' was solved by him in a 'purely' materialistic sense. This
solution was also accepted by Marx and Engels. It provided the
foundation of their own philosophy, as can be seen with the utmost
clarity from Engels' works, so often quoted here -- *Ludwig Feuerbach*
and *Anti-Dühring*. That is why we must make a closer study of this
solution; in doing so, we shall at the same time be studying the
*philosophical aspect of Marxism*.

In an article entitled 'Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie',
which came out in 1842 and, judging by the facts, had a strong influence
on Marx, Feuerbach said that 'the real relation of thinking to being is
only as follows: being is the *subject*; thinking, the *predicate*.
Thinking is conditioned by being, and not being by thinking. Being is
conditioned by itself\... has its foundation in itself.'
^[\[16\]](#n16)^

This view on the relation of being to thinking, which Marx and Engels
made the foundation of the *materialistic explanation of history*, is a
most important outcome of the criticism of Hegel's idealism already
completed in its main features by Feuerbach, a criticism whose
conclusions can be set forth in a few words.

Feuerbach considered that Hegel's philosophy had removed the
contradiction between being and thinking, a contradiction that had
expressed itself in particular relief in Kant. However, as Feuerbach
thought, it removed that contradiction, *while continuing to remain
within the latter*, that is*,* within *one of its elements*, namely,
*thinking*. With Hegel, *thinking is being*: *'*Thinking is the subject;
being, the predicate.' ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ It follows that Hegel, and
idealism in general, eliminated the contradiction only *by removing one
of its component elements, that is, being, matter, nature*. However,
removing one of the component elements in a contradiction does not at
all mean doing away with that contradiction. 'Hegel's doctrine that
reality is "*postulated*" by the Idea is merely a translation into
rationalistic terms of the theological doctrine that Nature was created
by God -- and reality, matter, by an abstract, non-material being.'
^[\[18\]](#n18)^ This does not apply only to Hegel's absolute idealism.
Kant's transcendental idealism, according to which the external world
receives its laws from Reason instead of Reason receiving them from the
external world, is closely akin to the theological concept that the
world's laws were dictated to it by divine Reason. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^
*Idealism does not establish the unity of being and thinking*, nor can
it do so; *it tears that unity asunder*. Idealistic philosophy's point
of departure -- the '*I*' as the fundamental philosophical principle --
is totally erroneous. It is not the '*I*' that must be the
starting-point of genuine philosophy, but the '*I*' and the '*you*'. It
is such a point of departure that makes it possible to arrive at a
proper understanding of the relation between thinking and being, between
the subject and the object. I am '*I*' to myself, and at the same time I
am '*you*' to others. The '*I*' is the *subject*, and at the same time
the *object*. It must at the same time be noted that I am not the
abstract being idealistic philosophy operates with. I am an *actual*
being; my *body* belongs to my *essence*; moreover, my body, as a whole,
is my *I*, my genuine essence. It is not an abstract being that thinks,
but that actual being, that body. Thus, contrary to what the idealists
assert, an actual and material being proves to be the subject, and
thinking -- the predicate. Herein lies the only possible solution of the
contradiction between being and thinking, a contradiction that idealism
sought so vainly to resolve. None of the elements in the contradiction
is *removed*; both are *preserved*, revealing their real *unity*.
*'*That which to me, or subjectively, is a purely spiritual,
non-material and non-sensuous act is in itself an objective, material
and sensuous act.' ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

Note that in saying this, *Feuerbach stands close to Spinoza*, whose
philosophy he was already setting forth with great sympathy at the time
his own breakaway from idealism was taking shape, that is, when he was
writing his history of modern philosophy. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^ In 1843 he
made the subtle observation, in his *Grundsätze*, that *pantheism is a
theological materialism*, a negation of theology but as yet on a
theological standpoint. This confusion of *materialism and theology*
constituted Spinoza's inconsistency, which, however, did not prevent him
from providing a 'correct -- at least for his time -- philosophical
expression for the materialist trend of modern times'. That was why
Feuerbach called Spinoza 'the Moses of the modern free-thinkers and
materialists'. ^[\[22\]](#n22)^ In 1847 Feuerbach asked: 'What then,
under careful examination, is that which Spinoza calls *Substance*, in
terms of logics or metaphysics, and *God* in terms of theology?' To this
question he replied categorically: 'Nothing else but Nature.' He saw
Spinozism's main shortcoming in the fact that 'in it the sensible,
anti-theological essence of Nature assumes the aspect of an abstract,
metaphysical being'. Spinoza eliminated the dualism of God and Nature,
since he declared that the acts of Nature were those of God. However, it
was just because he regarded the acts of Nature to be those of God, that
the latter remained, with Spinoza, a being distinct from Nature, but
forming its foundation. He regarded God as the subject and Nature as the
predicate. A philosophy that has completely liberated itself from
theological traditions must remove this important shortcoming in
Spinoza's philosophy, which in its essence is sound. 'Away with this
contradiction!', Feuerbach exclaimed. 'Not *Deus sive Natura* but *aut
Deus aut Natura* is the watchword of Truth.' ^[\[23\]](#n23)^

Thus, Feuerbach's 'humanism' proved to be nothing else but Spinozism
disencumbered of its theological pendant. And it was the standpoint of
this kind of Spinozism, which Feuerbach had freed of its theological
pendant, that Marx and Engels adopted when they broke with idealism.

However, disencumbering Spinozism of its theological appendage meant
revealing its true and *materialist* content. Consequently, *the
Spinozism of Marx and Engels was indeed materialism brought up to date*.
^[\[24\]](#n24)^

Further. Thinking is not the *cause* of being, but its *effect*, or
rather its *property*. Feuerbach says: *Folge und Eigenschaft*. *I* feel
and think, not as a subject contraposed to an object, but as a
*subject-object*, as an actual and material being. 'For us the object is
not merely the thing sensed, but also the basis, the indispensable
condition of my sensation.' The objective world is not only without me
but also within me, inside my own skin. ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ Man is only a
part of Nature, a part of being; there is therefore no room for any
contradiction between his thinking and his being. Space and time do not
exist only as forms of thinking. They are also forms of being, forms of
my contemplation. They are such, solely because I myself am a creature
that lives in time and space, and because I sense and feel as such a
creature. In general, the laws of being are at the same time laws of
thinking.

That is what Feuerbach said. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ And the same thing, though
in a different wording, was said by Engels in his polemic with Dühring.
^[\[27\]](#n27)^ This already shows what an important part of
Feuerbach's philosophy became an integral part of the philosophy of Marx
and Engels.

If Marx began to elaborate his materialist explanation of history by
criticising *Hegel's philosophy of law*, he could do so *only because*
Feuerbach had completed his criticism of *Hegel's speculative
philosophy*.

Even when *criticising* Feuerbach in his Theses, Marx often develops and
augments the former's ideas. Here is an instance from the sphere of
'epistemology'. Before *thinking* of an object, man, according to
Feuerbach, *experiences* its action *on himself*, *contemplates* and
*senses it*.

It was this thought that Marx had in mind when he wrote:

The chief defect of all previous materialism (that of Feuerbach
included) is that thing \[Gegenstand\], reality, sensuousness are
conceived only in the form of the *object* \[Objekt\], or of
*contemplation* \[Anschauung\], but not as *sensuous human activity*,
*practice*, not subjectively. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^

This shortcoming in materialism, Marx goes on to say, accounts for the
circumstance that, in his *Essence of Christianity*, Feuerbach regards
theoretical activity as the only genuine human activity. Expressed in
other words, this means that, according to Feuerbach, our *I* cognises
the *object by coming under its action*. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ Marx, however,
objects by saying: our *I* cognises the object, *while at the same time
acting upon that object*. Marx's thought is a perfectly correct one: as
*Faust already said*, '*Am Anfang war die Tat*.' It may of course be
objected, in defence of Feuerbach, that, in the process of *our acting*
upon objects, we cognise their properties only in the measure in which
they, for their part, act upon us. In both cases *sensation* precedes
*thinking*; in both cases we first *sense* their properties, and only
then *think* of them. But that is something that Marx did not deny. For
him the gist of the matter was not the indisputable fact that sensation
precedes thinking, but the fact that man is induced to think chiefly by
the sensations he experiences in the process of his acting upon the
outer world. Since this action on the outer world is prescribed to man
by the struggle for existence, the theory of knowledge is closely linked
up by Marx with his materialist view of the history of human
civilisation. It was not for nothing that the thinker who directed
against Feuerbach the thesis we are here discussing wrote in Volume 1 of
his *Capital*: 'By thus acting on the external world and changing it, he
at the same time changes his own nature.' ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ This
proposition fully reveals its profound meaning only in the light of
Marx's theory of knowledge. We shall see how well this theory is
confirmed by the history of cultural development and, incidentally, even
by the science of language. It must, however, be admitted that Marx's
epistemology stems directly from that of Feuerbach, or, if you will, it
is, properly speaking, the epistemology of Feuerbach, only rendered more
profound by the masterly correction brought into it by Marx.

I shall add, in passing, that this masterly correction was prompted by
the 'spirit of the times'. The striving to examine the interaction
between object and subject precisely from the point of view in which the
subject appears in an *active* role, derived from the public mood of the
period in which the world-outlook of Marx and Engels was taking shape.
^[\[31\]](#n31)^ The revolution of 1848 was in the offing\...

### III

The doctrine of the unity of subject and object, thinking and being,
which was shared in equal measure by Feuerbach, and by Marx and Engels,
was also held by the most outstanding materialists of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.

Elsewhere ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ I have shown that La Mettrie and Diderot --
each after his own fashion -- arrived at a world-outlook that was a
'brand of Spinozism', that is, a Spinozism without the theological
appendage that distorted its true content. It would also be easy to show
that, inasmuch as we are speaking of the unity of subject and object,
Hobbes too stood very close to Spinoza. That, however, would be taking
us too far afield, and, besides, there is no immediate need to do that.
Probably of greater interest to the reader is the fact that today any
naturalist who has delved even a little into the problem of the relation
of thinking to being arrives at that doctrine of their unity which we
have met in Feuerbach.

When Huxley wrote the following words: 'Surely no one who is cognisant
of the facts of the case, nowadays, doubts that the roots of psychology
lie in the physiology of the nervous system', and went on to say that
the operations of the mind 'are functions of the brain',
^[\[33\]](#n33)^ he was expressing just what Feuerbach had said, only
with these words he connected concepts that were far less clear. It was
precisely because the concepts connected with these words were far less
clear than with Feuerbach that he attempted to link up the view just
quoted with Hume's philosophical scepticism. ^[\[34\]](#n34)^

In just the same way, Haeckel's ^[\[35\]](#n35)^ 'monism', which created
such a stir, is nothing else but a purely materialist doctrine -- in
essence close to that of Feuerbach -- of the unity of subject and
object. Haeckel, however, is poorly versed in the history of
materialism, which is why he considers it necessary to struggle against
its 'one-sidedness'; he should have gone to the trouble of making a
study of its theory of knowledge in the form it took with Feuerbach and
Marx, something that would have preserved him from the many lapses and
one-sided assumptions that have made it easier for his opponents to wage
a struggle against him on philosophical grounds.

A very close approach to the most modern materialism -- that of
Feuerbach, Marx and Engels -- has been made by August Forel in various
of his writings, for instance in the paper *Gehirn und Seele*, which he
read to the Sixty-Sixth Congress of German Naturalists and Physicians
held in Vienna (26 September 1894). ^[\[36\]](#n36)^ In places Forel not
only expresses ideas resembling Feuerbach's but -- and this is amazing
-- marshals his arguments just as Feuerbach did his. According to Forel,
each new day brings us convincing proofs that the psychology and the
physiology of the brain are merely two ways of looking at 'one and the
same thing'. The reader will not have forgotten Feuerbach's identical
view, which I have quoted above and which pertains to the same problem.
This view can be supplemented here with the following statement: 'I am
the psychological object to myself', Feuerbach says, 'but a
physiological object to others.' ^[\[37\]](#n37)^ In the final analysis,
Forel's main idea boils down to the proposition that consciousness is
the 'inner reflex of cerebral activity'. ^[\[38\]](#n38)^ This view is
already materialist.

Objecting to the materialists, the idealists and Kantians of all kinds
and varieties claim that what we apprehend is only the *mental* aspect
of the phenomena that Forel and Feuerbach deal with. This objection was
excellently formulated by Schelling, who said that 'the Spirit will
always be an island which one cannot reach from the sphere of matter,
otherwise than by a leap'. Forel is well aware of this, but he provides
convincing proof that science would be an impossibility if we made up
our minds in earnest not to leave the bounds of that island. 'Every
man', he says, 'would have only the psychology of his own subjectivism
(*hätte nur die Psychologie seines Subjectivismus*)\... and would
positively be obliged to doubt the existence of the external world and
of other people.' ^[\[39\]](#n39)^ Such doubt is absurd, however.
^[\[40\]](#n40)^

Conclusions arrived at by analogy, natural-scientific induction, a
comparison of the evidence provided by our five senses, prove to us the
existence of the external world, of other people, and the psychology of
the latter. Likewise they prove to us that comparative psychology,
animal psychology and, finally, our own psychology would be
incomprehensible and full of contradictions if we considered it apart
from the activities of our brain; first and foremost, it would seem a
contradiction of the law of the conservation of energy. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^

Feuerbach not only reveals the contradictions that inevitably beset
those who reject the materialist standpoint, but also shows how the
idealists reach their 'island'.

I am *I* to myself \[he says\], and *you* to another. But I am such an
*I* only as a sensible \[that is, material -- GP\] being. The abstract
intellect isolates this being-for-oneself as Substance, the atom, ego,
God; that is why, to it, the connection between being-for-oneself and
being-for-another is arbitrary. That which I think of as extra-sensuous
(*ohne Sinnlichkeit*), I think of as without and outside any connection.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^

This most significant consideration is accompanied by an analysis of
that process of abstraction which led to the appearance of Hegelian
logic as an *ontological* doctrine. ^[\[43\]](#n43)^

Had Feuerbach possessed the information provided by present-day
ethnology, he would have been able to add that *philosophical idealism*
descends, in the historical sense, from the *animism* of primitive
peoples. This was already pointed out by Edward Tylor, ^[\[44\]](#n44)^
and certain historians of philosophy are beginning to take it, in part,
into consideration, though for the time being more as a curiosity than a
fact from the history of culture, and of tremendous theoretical and
cognitive significance. ^[\[45\]](#n45)^

These ideas and arguments of Feuerbach's were not only well known to
Marx and Engels and given careful thought by them, but indubitably and
in considerable measure helped in the evolution of their world-outlook.
If Engels later had the greatest contempt for post-Feuerbachian German
philosophy, it was because that philosophy, in his opinion, merely
resuscitated the old philosophical errors already revealed by Feuerbach.
That, indeed, was the case. Not one of the latest critics of materialism
has brought forward a single argument that was not refuted either by
Feuerbach himself or, before him, by the French materialists,
^[\[46\]](#n46)^ but to the 'critics of Marx' -- to E Bernstein, C
Schmidt, B Croce and the like -- 'the pauper's broth of eclecticism'
^[\[47\]](#n47)^ of the most up-to-date German so-called philosophy
seems a perfectly new dish; they have fed on it, and, seeing that Engels
did not see fit to address himself to it, they imagined that he was
'*evading*' any analysis of an argumentation he had long ago considered
and found absolutely worthless. That is an old story, but one that is
always new. Rats will never stop thinking that the cat is far *stronger*
than the lion.

In recognising the striking similarity -- and, in part, also the
identity -- in the views of Feuerbach and A Forel, we shall, however,
note that while the latter is far better informed in natural science,
Feuerbach had the advantage of a thorough knowledge of philosophy. That
is why Forel makes mistakes we do not find in Feuerbach. Forel calls his
theory the *psycho-physiological theory of identity*. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^
To this no objection of any significance can be raised, because all
terminology is conventional. However, since the theory of identity once
formed the foundation of an absolutely definite *idealist* philosophy,
Forel would have done well to have straightforwardly, boldly and simply
declared his theory to be *materialist*. He seems to have preserved
certain prejudices against materialism, and therefore chose another
name. That is why I think it necessary to note that *identity in the
Forelian sense* has nothing in common with *identity in the idealist
sense*.

The 'critics of Marx' do not know even this. In his polemic with me, C
Schmidt ascribed to the materialists precisely the idealist doctrine of
identity. In actual fact, materialism recognises the *unity* of subject
and object, not their identity. This was well shown by the selfsame
Feuerbach.

According to Feuerbach, the unity of subject and object, of thinking and
being, makes sense only when man is taken as the basis of that unity.
This has a special kind of 'humanist' sound to it, and most students of
Feuerbach have not found it necessary to give deeper thought to *how*
man serves as the basis of the unity of the opposites just mentioned. In
actual fact, this is how Feuerbach understood the matter: 'It is only
when thinking is not a *subject for itself*, but the predicate of a real
\[that is, material -- GP\] being that thought is not something
separated from being.' ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ The question now is: where, in
which philosophical systems, is thinking a 'subject for itself', that is
to say, something independent of the bodily existence of a thinking
individual? The answer is clear: in systems that are *idealist*. The
idealists first convert thinking into a self-contained essence,
independent of man ('the subject for itself'), and then assert that it
is in that essence that the contradiction between being and thinking is
resolved, for the very reason that separate and independent being is a
property of that independent-of-matter essence. ^[\[50\]](#n50)^ Indeed,
the contradiction is resolved in that essence. In that case, what is
that essence? It is *thinking*, and this thinking exists -- *is* --
independently of anything else. Such a resolution of the contradiction
is a purely formal one, which, as we have already pointed out, is
achieved only by eliminating one of its elements, namely, being, as
something independent of thinking. Being proves to be a simple property
of thinking, so that when we say that a given object exists, we mean
that it exists only in our thinking. That is how the matter was
understood by Schelling, for example. To him, thinking was the absolute
principle from which the real world, that is, Nature and the 'finite'
spirit, followed of necessity. But *how* did it follow? What was meant
by the existence of the real world? Nothing but existence in thinking.
To Schelling, *the Universe was merely the self-contemplation of the
Absolute Spirit*. We see the same thing in Hegel. Feuerbach, however,
was not satisfied with such a purely formal resolving of the
contradiction between thinking and being. He pointed out that there is
no -- there can be no -- *thinking independent of man*, that is, of an
actual and material creature. Thinking is activity of the brain. To
quote Feuerbach: 'But the brain is the organ of thinking only as long as
it is connected with the human head and body.' ^[\[51\]](#n51)^

We now see in what sense Feuerbach considers man the basis of the unity
of being and thinking. Man is that basis in the sense that he is nothing
but a material being that possesses the ability to think. If he is such
a being, then it is clear that none of the elements of the contradiction
is eliminated -- neither being nor thinking, 'matter' or 'spirit',
subject or object. They are all combined in him as the *subject-object*.
*'*I exist, and I think\... only as a subject-object', Feuerbach says.

To be does not mean to exist in thought. In this respect, Feuerbach's
philosophy is far clearer than that of J Dietzgen. As Feuerbach put it:
'To prove that something exists means to prove that it is not something
that exists only in thought.' ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ This is perfectly true,
but it means that *the unity of thinking and being does not and cannot
in any way mean their identity*.

This is one of the most important features distinguishing materialism
from idealism.

### IV

When people say that, for a certain period, Marx and Engels were
followers of Feuerbach, it is often inferred that, when that period
ended, Marx and Engels' world-outlook changed considerably, and became
quite different from Feuerbach's. That is how the matter is viewed by
Karl Diehl, who finds that Feuerbach's influence on Marx is usually
highly exaggerated. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^ This is a gross mistake. When they
ceased from being followers of Feuerbach, Marx and Engels did not at all
cease from sharing a very considerable part of his philosophical views.
The best proof of this is the Theses which Marx wrote in criticism of
Feuerbach. The Theses in no way eliminate the fundamental propositions
in Feuerbach's philosophy, but only correct them, and -- what is most
important -- call for an application more consistent (than Feuerbach's)
in explaining the reality that surrounds man, and in particular his own
activity. It is not thinking that determines being, but being that
determines thinking. That is the fundamental thought in all of
Feuerbach's philosophy. Marx and Engels made that thought the foundation
of the materialist explanation of history. The materialism of Marx and
Engels is a far more developed doctrine than Feuerbach's. The
materialist views of Marx and Engels, however, developed in the
direction indicated by the inner logic of Feuerbach's philosophy. That
is why these views will not always be fully clear -- especially in their
philosophical aspect -- to those who will not go to the trouble of
finding out just which part of the Feuerbachian philosophy became
incorporated in the world-outlook of the founders of scientific
socialism. And if the reader meets anyone who is much taken up with the
problem of finding 'philosophical substantiation' for historical
materialism, he may well be sure that this wise mortal is very much
deficient in the respect I have just mentioned.

But let us return to the subject. Already in his Third Thesis on
Feuerbach, Marx tackled the most difficult of all the problems he was to
resolve in the sphere of social man's historical 'practice', with the
aid of the correct concept of the unity of subject and object, which
Feuerbach had developed. The Thesis reads: 'The materialist doctrine
concerning the changing of circumstances and upbringing forgets that
circumstances are changed by men, and that the educator must himself be
educated.' ^[\[54\]](#n54)^ Once this problem is solved, the 'secret' of
the materialist explanation of history has been uncovered. But Feuerbach
was unable to solve it. In history, he -- like the French
eighteenth-century materialists he had so much in common with --
remained an *idealist*. ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ Here Marx and Engels had to
start from scratch, making use of the theoretical material that had been
accumulated by social science, chiefly by the French historians of the
Restoration period. But even here, Feuerbach's philosophy provided them
with some valuable pointers. 'Art, religion, philosophy and science',
Feuerbach says, 'are but the manifestation or revelation of genuine
human essence.' ^[\[56\]](#n56)^ Hence it follows that the 'human
essence' contains the explanation of all ideologies, that is, that the
development of the latter is conditioned by the development of the
'human essence'. What is that essence? 'Man's essence', Feuerbach
replies, 'is only in community, in Man's unity with Man.'
^[\[57\]](#n57)^ This is very vague, and here we see a border line that
Feuerbach did not cross. ^[\[58\]](#n58)^ However, it is beyond that
border line that the region of the materialist explanation of history, a
region discovered by Marx and Engels, begins; that explanation indicates
the causes which in the course of history determine the 'community\...,
Man's unity with Man', that is, the mutual relations that men enter
into. This border line not only *separates* Marx from Feuerbach, but
testifies to his *closeness* to the latter.

The sixth Thesis on Feuerbach says that *human essence is the ensemble
of the social relations*. This is far more definite than what Feuerbach
himself said, and the close genetic link between Marx's world-outlook
and Feuerbach's philosophy is here revealed with probably greater
clarity than anywhere else.

When Marx wrote this Thesis he already knew, not only the direction in
which the solution of the problem should be sought, but the solution
itself. In his *Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law* he showed that no
mutual relations of people in society:

\... neither legal relations nor political forms could be comprehended
whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general development
of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in the
material conditions of life, the totality of which Hegel, following the
example of English and French thinkers of the eighteenth century,
embraces within the term 'civil society'; that the anatomy of this civil
society, however, has to be sought in political economy.
^[\[59\]](#n59)^

It now remained only to explain the origin and development of the
*economy* to obtain a full solution of a problem that materialism had
been unable to cope with for centuries on end. That explanation was
provided by Marx and Engels.

It stands to reason that, when I speak of the *full solution* of that
great problem, I am referring only to its general or *algebraic
solution*, which materialism could not find in the course of centuries.
It stands to reason that, when I speak of a *full* solution, I am
referring, not to the *arithmetic* of social development, but to its
*algebra; not to the causes of individual phenomena, but to how the
discovery of those causes should be approached*. And that means that the
materialist explanation of history was primarily of a *methodological
significance*. Engels was fully aware of this when he wrote: 'It is not
the bare conclusions of which we are in such need, but rather study
\[das Studium\]; the conclusions are nothing without the reasoning that
has led up to them.' ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ This, however, is sometimes not
understood either by 'critics' of Marx, whom, as they say, may God
forgive, or by some of his 'followers', which is much worse.
Michelangelo once said of himself: 'My knowledge will engender a
multitude of ignoramuses.' These words have regrettably proved
prophetic. Today *Marx's knowledge* is engendering ignoramuses. The
fault lies, not with Marx, but with those who talk rubbish while
invoking his name. For such rubbish to be avoided, an understanding of
the *methodological significance of historical materialism* is
necessary.

### V

In general, one of the greatest services rendered to materialism by Marx
and Engels lies in their elaboration of a *correct method*. Feuerbach,
who concentrated his efforts on the struggle against the *speculative*
element in Hegel's philosophy, had little appreciation of its
*dialectical* element, and made little use of it. 'True dialectic', he
said, 'is no more monologue by a solitary thinker with himself; it is a
dialogue between the *ego* and the *tu*.' ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ In the first
place, however, Hegel's dialectic did not signify a 'monologue by a
solitary thinker with himself'; and, secondly, Feuerbach's remark gives
a correct definition of the *starting-point of philosophy*, *but not of
its method*. This gap was filled by Marx and Engels, who understood that
it would be mistaken, in waging a struggle against Hegel's speculative
philosophy, to ignore his dialectic. Some critics have declared that,
during the years immediately following his break with idealism, Marx was
highly indifferent to dialectic too. Though this opinion may seem to
have some semblance of plausibility, it is controverted by the
aforementioned fact that, in the *Deutsch-französische Jahrbücher*,
Engels was already speaking of the method as the soul of the new system
of views. ^[\[62\]](#n62)^

In any case, the second part of *La Misère de la philosophie* leaves no
room for doubt that, at the time of his polemic with Proudhon, Marx was
very well aware of the significance of the dialectical method and knew
how to make good use of it. Marx's victory in this controversy was one
by a man able to think dialectically, over one who had never been able
to understand the nature of dialectic, but was trying to apply its
method to an analysis of capitalist society. This same second part of
*La Misère de la philosophie* shows that dialectic, which with Hegel was
of a purely idealist nature and had remained so with Proudhon (so far as
he had assimilated it), was placed on a *materialist foundation* by
Marx. ^[\[63\]](#n63)^

'To Hegel \[Marx wrote subsequently, describing his own *materialist*
dialectic\], the life-process of the human brain, that is, the process
of thinking, which, under the name of 'the Idea', he even transforms
into an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real world, and the
real world is only the external, phenomenal form of 'the Idea'. With me,
on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world
reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought.'
^[\[64\]](#n64)^

This description implies full agreement with Feuerbach, firstly in the
attitude towards Hegel's 'Idea', and, secondly, in the relation of
thinking to being. The Hegelian dialectic could be 'turned right side
up' *only* by one who was convinced of the soundness of the basic
principle of Feuerbach's philosophy, viz, that it is not thinking that
determines being, but being that determines thinking.

Many people confuse dialectic with the doctrine of development;
dialectic is, in fact, such a doctrine. However, it differs
substantially from the vulgar 'theory of evolution', which is completely
based on the principle that *neither Nature nor history proceeds in
leaps and that all changes in the world take place by degrees*. Hegel
had already shown that, understood in such a way, the doctrine of
development was untenable and ridiculous.

When people want to understand the *rise* or *disappearance* of anything
\[he says in Volume 1 of his *Wissenschaft der Logik*\], they usually
imagine that they achieve comprehension through the medium of a
conception of the *gradual character* of that rise or disappearance.
However, changes in being take place, not only by a transition of one
quantity into another, but also by a transition of qualitative
differences into quantitative, and, on the contrary, by a transition
that *interrupts gradualness*, and substitutes one phenomenon for
another. ^[\[65\]](#n65)^

And every time *gradualness is interrupted*, *a leap* takes place. Hegel
goes on to show by a number of examples how often *leaps take place both
in Nature and in history*, and he exposes the ridiculous logical error
underlying the vulgar 'theory of evolution'.

Underlying the doctrine of gradualness \[he remarks\] is the conception
that what is arising already exists in reality, and remains unobserved
only because of its small dimensions. In like manner, people, when they
speak of gradual disappearance, imagine that the non-existence of the
phenomenon in question, or the phenomenon that is to take its place, is
an accomplished fact, although it is as yet imperceptible\... But this
can only suppress any notion of arising and destruction\... To explain
appearance or disappearance by the gradualness of the change means
reducing the whole matter to absurd tautology and to imagining in an
already complete state \[that is, as already arisen or already gone --
GP\] that which is in the course of appearing or disappearing.
^[\[66\]](#n66)^

This dialectical view of Hegel's as to the *inevitability of leaps in
the process of development* was adopted in full by Marx and Engels. It
was developed in detail by Engels in his polemic with Dühring, and here
he 'turned it right side up', that is to say, on a *materialist
foundation*.

Thus he indicated that the transition from one form of energy to another
cannot take place otherwise than by means of a *leap*. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^
Thus he sought, in modern chemistry, a confirmation of the dialectical
theorem of the transformation of quantity into quality. Generally
speaking, he found that the rights of *dialectical thinking* are
confirmed by the *dialectical properties of being*. Here, too, being
conditions thinking.

Without undertaking a more detailed characterisation of materialist
dialectic (its relation to what, by a parallel with elementary
mathematics, may be called elementary logic -- see my preface to my
translation of *Ludwig Feuerbach*), I shall remind the reader that,
during the last two decades, the theory that sees only gradual changes
in the process of development has begun to lose ground even in
*biology*, where it used to be recognised almost universally. In this
respect, the work of Armand Gautier and that of Hugo de Vries seem to
show promise of epoch-making importance. Suffice it to say that de
Vries' *theory of mutations* is *a doctrine that the development of
species takes place by leaps* (see his two-volume *Die
Mutations-Theorie*, Leipzig, 1901-03, his paper *Die Mutationen and die
Mutations-Perioden bei der Entstehung der Arten*, Leipzig, 1901, and the
lectures he delivered at the University of California, which appeared in
the German translation under the title of *Arten und Varietäten und ihre
Entstehung durch die Mutation*, Berlin, 1906).

In the opinion of this outstanding naturalist, *the weak point in
Darwin's theory of the origin of species is that this origin can be
explained by gradual changes*. ^[\[68\]](#n68)^ Also of interest, and
most apt, is de Vries' remark that the dominance of the theory of
gradual changes in the doctrine of the origin of species has had an
unfavourable influence on the *experimental* study of relevant problems.
^[\[69\]](#n69)^

I may add that, in present-day natural science and especially among the
*neo-Lamarckians*, there has been a fairly rapid spread of the theory of
the so-called *animism of matter*, that is, that matter in general, and
especially any *organised matter*, possesses a certain degree of
*sensibility*. This theory, which many regard as being diametrically
opposed to materialism (see, for instance, *Der heutige Stand der
Darwinschen Fragen*, by RH Francé, Leipzig, 1907), is in fact, when
properly understood, only a translation, into the language of
present-day natural science, of Feuerbach's materialist doctrine of the
unity of being and thinking, of object and subject. ^[\[70\]](#n70)^ It
may be confidently stated that Marx and Engels, who had assimilated this
doctrine, would have been keenly interested in this trend in natural
science, true, *far too little elaborated as yet*.

Herzen was right in saying that Hegel's philosophy, which many
considered conservative in the main, was a genuine algebra of
revolution. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^ With Hegel, however, this algebra remained
wholly unapplied to the burning problems of practical life. Of
necessity, the speculative element brought *a spirit of conservatism*
into the philosophy of this great absolute idealist. It is quite
different with Marx's materialist philosophy, in which revolutionary
'algebra' manifests itself with all the irresistible force of its
dialectical method.

In its mystified form \[Marx says\] dialectic became the fashion in
Germany, because it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing
state of things. In its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to
bourgeoisdom and its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its
comprehension and affirmative recognition of the existing state of
things, at the same time also, the recognition of the negation of that
state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards every
historically developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore
takes into account its transient nature not less than its momentary
existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence
critical and revolutionary. ^[\[72\]](#n72)^

If we regard materialist dialectic from the viewpoint of the history of
Russian literature, we may say that this dialectic was the first to
supply a method necessary and competent to solve the problem of *the
rationality of all that exists*, a problem that so greatly troubled our
brilliant thinker Belinsky. ^[\[73\]](#n73)^ It was only Marx's
dialectical method, as applied to the study of Russian life, that has
shown us how much *reality* and how much *semblance* of reality *there
was* in it.

### VI

When we set out to explain *history* from the materialist standpoint,
our first difficulty is, as we have seen, the question of the actual
causes of the development of social relations. We already know that the
'anatomy of civil society' is determined by its economy. But what is the
latter itself determined by?

Marx's answer is as follows:

In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into
definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely,
relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development
of their material forces of production. The totality of these relations
of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real
foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure\...
^[\[74\]](#n74)^

Marx's reply thus reduces the whole question of the development of the
economy to that of the causes determining the development of the
productive forces at the disposal of society. In this, its final form,
it is solved *first and foremost by the reference to the nature of the
geographic environment*.

In his philosophy of history Hegel already speaks of the important role
of '*the geographic foundation of world history*'. But since, in his
view, the *Idea* is the ultimate cause of all development, and since it
was only *en passant* and in instances of secondary importance, against
his will as it were, that he had recourse to *a materialist explanation
of phenomena*, the thoroughly sound view he expressed regarding the
historic significance of geographic environment could not lead him to
all the fruitful conclusions that follow therefrom. It was only by the
materialist Marx that these conclusions were drawn in their fullness.
^[\[75\]](#n75)^

The properties of the geographic environment determine the character
both of the natural products that serve to satisfy man's wants, and of
those objects *he himself produces* with the same purpose. Where there
were no metals, aboriginal tribes could not, unaided, emerge from what
we call the *Stone Age*. In exactly the same way, for *primitive fishers
and hunters* to go over *to cattle-breeding and agriculture*, the
appropriate conditions of geographic environment were needed, that is,
in this instance, suitable fauna and flora. Lewis Henry Morgan has shown
that the absence, in the New World, of animals capable of being
domesticated, and the specific differences between the flora of the two
hemispheres, brought about the considerable difference in the course of
their inhabitants' social development. ^[\[76\]](#n76)^ Of the redskins
of North America Waitz says: '\... they have no domesticated animals.
This is highly important, for in this circumstance lies the principal
reason that forced them to remain at a low stage of development.'
^[\[77\]](#n77)^ Schweinfurth reports that in Africa, when a given
locality is overpopulated, part of the inhabitants emigrate and
thereupon change their mode of life *in accordance with the new
geographic environment*: 'Tribes hitherto agricultural become hunters,
while tribes that have lived from their flocks will turn to
agriculture.' ^[\[78\]](#n78)^ He also points out that the inhabitants
of an area rich in iron, which seems to occupy a considerable part of
Central Africa, 'naturally began to smelt iron'. ^[\[79\]](#n79)^

Nor is that all. Already at the lower stages of development, tribes
enter into mutual intercourse and exchange some of their products. This
expands the boundaries of the geographic environment, influencing the
development of the productive forces of each of these tribes and
accelerating the *course* of that development. It is clear, however,
that the greater or lesser ease with which such intercourse arises and
is maintained also depends on the properties of the geographic
environment. Hegel said that seas and rivers bring men closer together,
whereas mountains keep them apart. Incidentally, seas bring men closer
together when the development of the productive forces has reached a
relatively high level; at lower levels, as Ratzel rightly points out,
the sea is a great *hindrance* to intercourse between the tribes it
separates. ^[\[80\]](#n80)^ However that may be, it is certain that the
more varied the properties of the geographic environment, the more they
favour the development of the productive forces. Marx writes:

It is not the mere fertility of the soil, but the differentiation of the
soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes of the seasons,
which form the physical basis for the social division of labour, and
which, by changes in the natural surroundings, spur man on to the
multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means and modes of
labour. ^[\[81\]](#n81)^

Using almost the same terms as Marx, Ratzel says: 'The main thing is not
that there is the greatest ease in procuring food, but that certain
inclinations, habits and finally wants are aroused in man.'
^[\[82\]](#n82)^

Thus, the properties of the geographical environment determine the
development of the productive forces, which, in its turn, determines the
development of the economic relations, and therefore of all other social
relations. Marx explains this in the following words:

These social relations into which the producers enter with one another,
the conditions under which they exchange their activities and
participate in the whole act of production, will naturally vary
according to the character of the means of production. With the
invention of a new instrument of warfare, firearms, the whole internal
organisation of the army necessarily changed; the relationships within
which individuals can constitute an army and act as an army were
transformed and the relations of different armies to one another also
changed. ^[\[83\]](#n83)^

To make this explanation still more graphic, I shall cite an instance.
The *Masai* of East Africa give their captives no quarter, the reason
being, as Ratzel points out, that this pastoral people have no
*technical possibility* of making use of slave labour. But the
neighbouring *Wakamba*, who are *agriculturists*, are able to make use
of that labour, and therefore spare their captives' lives and *turn them
into slaves*. The appearance of slavery therefore presupposes the
achievement of a definite degree in the development of the social
forces, a degree that permits the *exploitation* of slave labour.
^[\[84\]](#n84)^ But slavery is a *production relation* whose appearance
indicates the beginning of a division into *classes* in a society which
has hitherto known no other divisions but those of *sex and age*. When
slavery reaches full development, it puts its stamp on the entire
economy of society, and, through the economy, on all other social
relations, in the first place of the *political structure*. However much
the states of antiquity differed in political structure, their chief
distinctive feature was that every one of them was a political
organisation expressing and protecting the interests of freemen alone.

We now know that the development of the productive forces, which in the
final analysis determines the development of all social relations, is
determined by the *properties of the geographic environment*. But as
soon as they have arisen, the social relations *themselves exercise a
marked influence on the development of the productive forces*. Thus
*that which is initially an effect becomes in its turn a cause*; between
the development of the productive forces and the social structure there
arises an *interaction* which assumes the most varied forms in various
epochs.

It should also be remembered that while the *internal relations*
existing in a given society are determined by a given state of the
productive forces, it is on the latter that, in the final analysis, that
society's *external relations depend*. To every stage in the development
of the productive forces there corresponds a definite character of
*armaments*, *the art of war*, and, finally, of *international* law, or,
to be more precise, of *inter-social*, that is, inter alia, *of
inter-tribal* law. *Hunting tribes* cannot form large political
organisations precisely because the low level of their productive forces
*compels them to scatter* in small social groups, in search of means of
subsistence. But the more these social groups are scattered, the more
inevitable it is that even such disputes that, in a civilised society,
could easily be settled in a magistrate's court, are settled by means of
more or less sanguinary combats. Eyre says that when several Australian
tribes join forces for certain purposes in a particular place such
contacts are never lengthy; even before a shortage of food or the need
to hunt game has obliged the Australians to part company, hostile
clashes flare up among them, which very soon lead, as is well known, to
pitched battles. ^[\[85\]](#n85)^

It is obvious that such clashes may arise from a wide variety of causes.
It is, however, noteworthy that most travellers ascribe them to
*economic causes*. When Stanley asked several natives of Equatorial
Africa how their wars against neighbouring tribes arose, the answer was:
'Some of our young men go into the woods to hunt game and they are
surprised by our neighbours; then we go to them, and they come to fight
us until one party is tired, or one is beaten.' ^[\[86\]](#n86)^ In much
the same way Burton says: 'All African wars\... are for one of two
objects, cattle-lifting or kidnapping.' ^[\[87\]](#n87)^

Ratzel considers it probable that in New Zealand wars among the natives
were frequently caused simply by the desire to enjoy human flesh.
^[\[88\]](#n88)^ The natives' inclination towards cannibalism *is*
itself *to be explained* by the paucity of the New Zealand fauna.

All know to what great extent the outcome of a war depends on the
weapons used by each of the belligerents. But those weapons are
determined by the state of their productive forces, by their economy,
and by their social relations, which have arisen on the basis of that
economy. ^[\[89\]](#n89)^ To say that certain peoples or tribes have
been *subjugated* by other peoples does not yet mean explaining why the
social consequences of that subjugation have been exactly what they are,
and no other. The social consequences of the Roman conquest of Gaul were
not at all the same as those of the conquest of that country by the
Germans. The social consequences of the Norman conquest of England were
very different from those that resulted from the Mongol conquest of
Russia. In all these cases, the difference depended ultimately on the
difference between the *economic structure* of the subjugated society on
the one hand, and that of the conquering society on the other. The more
the productive forces of a given tribe or people are developed, the
greater are at least its *opportunities* to arm itself better to carry
on the struggle for existence.

There may, however, be many noteworthy exceptions to this general rule.
At lower levels of the development of the productive forces, the
difference in the weapons of tribes that are at very different stages of
economic development -- for instance, nomadic shepherds and settled
agriculturists -- cannot be so great as it subsequently becomes.
Besides, an advance in economic development, which exerts a considerable
influence on the character of a given people, sometimes reduces its
warlikeness to such a degree that it proves incapable of resisting an
enemy economically more backward but more accustomed to warfare. That is
why *peaceable tribes of agriculturists* are not infrequently conquered
by *warrior peoples*. Ratzel remarks that the most solid state
organisations are formed by 'semi-civilised peoples' as a result of the
unifying -- by means of conquest -- of both elements, the agricultural
and the pastoral. ^[\[90\]](#n90)^ However correct this remark may be on
the whole, it should, however, be remembered that even in such cases
(*China* is a good example) economically backward *conquerors* gradually
find themselves completely subjected to the influence of a *conquered*
but economically more advanced people.

The geographic environment exerts a considerable influence, not only on
primitive tribes, but also on so-called *civilised peoples*. As Marx
wrote:

It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under the control of
society, of economising, of appropriating or subduing it on a large
scale by the work of man's hand, that first plays the decisive part in
the history of industry. Examples are the irrigation works in Egypt,
Lombardy, Holland, or in India and Persia where irrigation by means of
artificial canals, not only supplies the soil with the water
indispensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the shape of
sediment from the hills, mineral fertilisers. The secret of the
flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion of
the Arabs lay in their irrigation works. ^[\[91\]](#n91)^

The doctrine of the influence of the geographic environment on mankind's
historical development has often been reduced to a recognition of the
*direct* influence of 'climate' on social man: it has been supposed that
under the influence of 'climate' one 'race' becomes freedom-loving,
another becomes inclined to submit patiently to the rule of a more or
less despotic monarch, and yet another race becomes superstitious and
therefore dependent upon a clergy, etc. This view already predominated,
for instance, with Buckle. ^[\[92\]](#n92)^ According to Marx, the
geographic environment affects man *through the medium of relations of
production*, *which arise in a given area on the basis of definite
productive forces*, *whose primary condition of development lies in the
properties of that environment*. Modern ethnology is more and more going
over to this point of view, and consequently attributes ever less
importance to 'race' in the history of civilisation. 'Race has nothing
to do with cultural achievement', says Ratzel. ^[\[93\]](#n93)^

But as soon as a certain 'cultural' level has been reached, it
indubitably influences the bodily and mental qualities of the 'race'.
^[\[94\]](#n94)^

The influence of geographic environment on social man is a *variable
magnitude*. Conditioned by the properties of that environment, the
development of the productive forces increases man's power over Nature,
*and thereby places him in a new relation towards the geographic
environment that surrounds him*; thus, the English of today react to
that environment in a manner which is not quite the same as that in
which the tribes that inhabited England in Julius Caesar's day reacted
to it. This finally removes the objection that the character of the
inhabitants of a given area can be substantially modified, although the
geographic characteristics of that area remain unchanged.

### VIII

The legal and political relations ^[\[95\]](#n95)^ engendered by a given
economic structure exert a decisive influence on social man's entire
mentality. 'Upon the different forms of property, upon the social
conditions of existence', says Marx, 'rises an entire superstructure of
distinct and peculiarly formed sentiments, illusions, modes of thought
and views of life.' ^[\[96\]](#n96)^ *Being* determines *thinking*. It
may be said that each new step made by science in explaining the process
of historical development is a fresh argument in favour of this
fundamental thesis of contemporary materialism.

Already in 1877, Ludwig Noiré wrote: 'It was joint activity directed
towards the achievement of a common aim, it was the primordial labour of
our ancestors, that produced language and the reasoning.'
^[\[97\]](#n97)^ Developing this notable thought, L Noiré pointed out
that language originally indicated the things of the objective world,
not as *possessing* a certain form, but as *having received that form*
(nicht als '*Gestalten*', sondern als '*gestaltete*'); not as *active
and exerting* a definite *action* but as passive and *subjected to that
action*.^[\[98\]](#n98)^ He went on to explain this with the sound
remark that 'all things enter man's field of vision, that is, become
*things* to him, solely in the measure in which they are *subjected* to
his action, and it is in conformity with this that they get their
designations, that is, names.' ^[\[99\]](#n99)^ In short, it is *human
activity* that, in Noiré's opinion, gives meaning to the initial roots
of language. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^ It is noteworthy that Noiré found the
first embryo of his theory in Feuerbach's idea that man's essence lies
in the community, in man's unity with man. He apparently knew nothing of
Marx, for otherwise he would have seen that his view on the role of
*activity* in the formation of language was closer to Marx, who, in his
epistemology, laid stress on human activity, unlike Feuerbach, who spoke
mostly of 'contemplation'.

In this connection, it is hardly necessary to remind the reader, with
reference to Noiré's theory, that the nature of man's activities in the
process of production is determined by the state of the productive
forces. That is obvious. It will be more useful to note that the
decisive influence of *being* upon *thinking* is seen with particular
clarity in primitive tribes, whose social and intellectual life is
incomparably simpler than that of civilised peoples. Karl von den
Steinen writes of the natives of Central Brazil that we shall understand
them only when we consider them as the outcome (Erzeugnis) of their
*life as hunters*. *'*Animals have been the chief source of their
experience', he goes on to say, 'and it is mainly with the aid of that
experience that they have interpreted Nature and formed their
world-outlook.' ^[\[101\]](#n101)^ The condition of their life as
hunters have determined not only the world-outlook of these tribes but
also their moral concepts, their sentiments, and even, the writer goes
on to say, their aesthetic tastes. We see exactly the same thing in
*pastoral* tribes. Among those whom Ratzel terms *exclusively herdsmen
'*the subject of at least 99 per cent of all conversations is cattle,
their origin, habits, merits and defects'. ^[\[102\]](#n102)^ For
instance, the unfortunate *Hereros*, whom the 'civilised' Germans
recently 'pacified' with such brutality, were such 'exclusively
herdsmen'. ^[\[103\]](#n103)^

If *beasts* are the primitive hunter's foremost source of experience,
and if his whole world-outlook was based on that experience, then it is
not surprising that the *mythology* of hunting tribes, which at that
stage takes the place of philosophy, theology and science, draws all its
content from the same source. 'The peculiarity of Bushman mythology',
Andrew Lang writes, 'is the almost absolute predominance of animals.
Except "an old woman" who appears now and then in these incoherent
legends, their myths have scarcely one human figure to show.'
^[\[104\]](#n104)^ According to Brough Smith, the Australian aborigines
-- like the Bushmen, who have not yet emerged from the *hunting stage
--* have as their gods mostly birds and beasts. ^[\[105\]](#n105)^

The religion of primitive tribes has not yet been adequately studied.
However, what we already know fully confirms the correctness of the
brief thesis of Feuerbach and Marx that 'it is not religion that makes
man, but man who makes religion'. As E Tylor says: 'Among nation after
nation it is still clear how, man being the type of deity, human society
and government became the model on which divine society and government
were shaped.' ^[\[106\]](#n106)^ This is unquestionably a materialist
view on religion: it is known that Saint-Simon held the opposite view,
explaining the social and political system of the ancient Greeks through
their religious beliefs. It is, however, far more important that science
has already begun to discover the causal link between the technical
level of primitive peoples and their world-outlook. ^[\[107\]](#n107)^
In this respect valuable discoveries evidently await science.
^[\[108\]](#n108)^

In the sphere of the *ideology* of primitive society, *art* has been
studied better than any other branch: an abundance of material has been
collected, testifying in the most unambiguous and convincing manner to
the soundness and, one might say, the *inevitability* of the materialist
explanation of history. So copious is this material that I can here
enumerate only the most important of the works dealing with the subject:
Schweinfurth, *Artes Africanae* (Leipzig, 1875); R Andrée,
*Ethnographische Parallelen*; the article entitled 'Das Zeichnen bei den
Naturvölkern'; Von den Steinen, *Unter den Naturvölkern
Zentral-Brasiliens* (Berlin, 1894); G Mallery, *Picture Writing of the
American Indians*, Tenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology
(Washington, 1893, reports for other years contain valuable material on
the influence of the mechanical arts, especially weaving, on ornamental
design); Hörnes, *Urgeschichte der bildenden Kunst in Europa* (Wien,
1898); Ernst Grosse, *Die Anfänge der Kunst*, also
*Kunstwissenschaftliche Studien* (Tübingen, 1900); Yrjö Hirn, *Der
Ursprung der Kunst* (Leipzig, 1904); Karl Bücher, *Arbeit und Rhythmus*
(third edition, 1902); Gabriel et Adrien de Mortillet, *Le
préhistorique* (Paris, 1900), pp 217-30; Hörnes, *Der diluviale Mensch
in Europa* (Braunschweig, 1903); Sophus Müller, *L'Europe préhistorique*
(trad du danois par E Philippot, Paris, 1907); Richard Wallaschek,
*Anfänge der Tonkunst* (Leipzig, 1903). ^[\[109\]](#n109)^

The conclusions arrived at by modern science as regards the question of
the beginnings of art will be shown by the following quotations from the
authors enumerated above.

'Decorative design', says Hörnes, 'can develop only from industrial
activity, which is its material precondition\... Peoples without any
industry\... have no ornamental design either.' ^[\[110\]](#n110)^

Von den Steinen thinks that *drawing* (Zeichnen) developed from
*designation of the object* (Zeichen), *used with the practical aim*.

Bücher has formed the conclusion that 'at the primitive stage of their
development, work, music and poetry were a fused whole, work being the
chief element in this trinity, and music and poetry of secondary
importance'. In his opinion, 'the origin of poetry is to be sought in
labour', and he goes on to remark that no language arranges in a
rhythmical pattern words making up a sentence. It is therefore
improbable that men arrived at measured, poetical speech through the use
of their everyday language -- the inner logic of that language operates
against that. How, then, is one to explain the origin of measured,
poetical speech? Bücher is of the opinion that the measured and
rhythmical movements of the body transmitted the laws of their
coordination to figurative, poetical speech. This is all the more
probable if one recalls that, at the lower stages of development,
rhythmical *movements* of the body are usually accompanied by *singing*.
But what is the explanation of the coordination of bodily movements? It
lies *in the nature of the processes of production*. Thus, '*the origin
of poetry is to be sought in productive activities*'. ^[\[111\]](#n111)^

R Wallaschek formulates his view on the origin of *dramatic
performances* among primitive tribes in the following way:
^[\[112\]](#n112)^

The subjects of these dramatic performances were:

1\. The chase, war, paddling (among hunters -- the life and habits of
animals; animal pantomimes; masks). ^[\[113\]](#n113)^

2\. The life and habits of cattle (among pastoral peoples).

3\. Work (among agriculturists: sowing, threshing, vine-dressing).

The entire tribe took part in the performance, all of them singing (in
chorus). The words sung were meaningless, the content being provided by
the performance itself (pantomime). Only actions of everyday life were
represented, such as were absolutely essential in the struggle for
existence.

Wallaschek says that in many primitive tribes, during such performances,
the chorus split into two opposite parts. 'Such', he adds, 'was the
origin of Greek drama, which was also an animal pantomime at the outset.
The goat was the animal that played the most important part in the
economy of the Greeks, which accounts for the word "tragedy" being
derived from "tragos," the Greek for "goat."'

It would be difficult to give a more striking illustration of the
proposition that it is not being that is determined by thinking, but
thinking that is determined by being.

### IX

But economic life develops under the influence of a growth in the
productive forces. Therefore the mutual relations of people engaged in
the process of production undergo changes, and, together with them,
changes take place in human mentality. As Marx puts it:

At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of
society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or
-- this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms -- with the
property relations within the framework of which they have operated
hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these
relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social
revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later
to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure\... No social
order is ever destroyed before all the productive forces for which it is
sufficient have been developed, and new superior relations of production
never replace older ones before the material conditions for their
existence have matured within the framework of the old society.
^[\[114\]](#n114)^ Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only such tasks
as it is able to solve, since closer examination will always show that
the problem itself arises only when the material conditions for its
solution are already present or at least in the course of formation.
^[\[115\]](#n115)^

Here we have before us a genuine 'algebra' -- and *purely materialist*
at that -- of social development. This algebra has room both for
'*leaps*' (of the epoch of social revolutions) and for *gradual
changes*. Gradual quantitative changes in the properties of a given
order of things lead ultimately to a *change in quality*, that is, to
the downfall of *the old mode of production --* or, as Marx expresses it
here, of the old social order -- and to its replacement by a new mode.
As Marx remarks, in broad outline, the Asiatic, ancient, feudal and
modern bourgeois modes of production may be designated as successive
epochs ('marking progress') in the economic development of society.
^[\[116\]](#n116)^ There is however reason to believe that later, when
he had read Morgan's book on primitive society, he modified his view as
to the relation of the mode of production in *antiquity* to that of the
*East*. Indeed, the logic of the economic development of the *feudal*
mode of production led to a social revolution that marked the triumph of
*capitalism*. But the logic of the economic development of *China* or
*ancient Egypt*, for example, did not at all lead to the appearance of
the *antique* mode of production. In the former instance we are speaking
of two phases of development, *one* of which *follows the other, and is
engendered by it*. The second instance, on the other hand, represents
rather *two coexisting types* of economic development. The *society of
antiquity* took the place of the *clan social organisation*, the latter
also preceding the appearance of the oriental *social system*. Each of
these two types of economic structure was the outcome of the growth in
the productive forces within the clan organisation, a process that
inevitably led to the latter's ultimate disintegration. If these two
types differed considerably from each other, their chief distinctive
features were evolved *under the influence of the geographic
environment*, which *in one case* prescribed *one kind* of aggregate
production relations to a society that had achieved a certain degree of
growth in the productive forces, and in the other case, *another kind*,
greatly differing from the first.

The discovery of the *clan type* of social organisation is evidently
destined to play the same part in social science as was played in
biology by the discovery of the *cell*. While Marx and Engels were
unfamiliar with this type of organisation, there could not but be
considerable gaps in their theory of social development, as Engels
himself subsequently acknowledged.

But the discovery of the clan type of organisation, which for the first
time provided a key to an understanding of the lower stages of social
development, was but a new and powerful argument *in favour* of the
materialist explanation of history, *not against that concept*. It
provided a closer insight into the way in which the first phases of
social being take shape, and social being then determines social
thinking. The discovery thereby gave amazing clarity to the truth that
social thinking is determined by social being.

I mention all this only in passing. The main thing deserving of
attention is Marx's remark that the property relations existing when the
productive forces reach a certain level *encourage the further growth of
those forces* for a time, and then begin to *hamper that growth*.
^[\[117\]](#n117)^ This is a reminder of the fact that, though a certain
state of the productive forces *is the cause* of the given production
relations, and in particular of the property relations, the latter (once
they have arisen *as a consequence of the aforementioned cause*) begin
themselves to influence that cause. Thus there arises an *interaction*
between the productive forces and the social economy. Since a whole
superstructure of social relations, sentiments and concepts grows on the
economic basis, that superstructure first fostering and then hindering
the economic development, there arises between the superstructure and
the basis an *interaction* which provides the key to an understanding of
all those phenomena which *at first glance* seem to contradict the
fundamental thesis of historical materialism.

Everything hitherto said by 'critics' of Marx concerning the supposed
one-sidedness of Marxism and its alleged disregard of all other
'factors' of social development but the economic, has been prompted by a
failure to understand the role assigned by Marx and Engels to the
*interaction between 'basis' and 'superstructure*'. To realise, for
instance, how little Marx and Engels ignored the significance of the
political factor, it is sufficient to read those pages of the *Communist
Manifesto* which make reference to the liberation movement of the
bourgeoisie. There we are told:

An oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and
self-governing association in the medieval commune; here independent
urban republic (as in Italy and Germany), there taxable 'third estate'
of the monarchy (as in France), afterwards, in the period of manufacture
proper, serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a
counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact, cornerstone of the
great monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has at last, since the
establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market, conquered for
itself, in the modern representative state, exclusive political sway.
The executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the
common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie. ^[\[118\]](#n118)^

The importance of the political 'factor' is so clearly revealed here
that some 'critics' consider it even unduly stressed. But the origin and
the force of this 'factor', as well as the mode of its operation in each
given period of the bourgeoisie's development, are themselves explained
in the *Manifesto* by the course of economic development, in consequence
of which the *variety of 'factors*' in no way disturbs the *unity of the
fundamental cause*.

Political relations indubitably influence the economic movement, but it
is also indisputable that *before they influence that movement they are
created by it*.

The same must be said of the *mentality* of man as a social being, of
that which Stammler ^[\[119\]](#n119)^ has somewhat one-sidedly called
*social concepts*. The *Manifesto* gives convincing proof that its
authors were well aware of the importance of the ideological 'factor'.
However, in the same *Manifesto* we see that, even if the ideological
'factor' plays an important part in the development of society, *it is
itself previously created by that development*.

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions
were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the
eighteenth century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death
battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. ^[\[120\]](#n120)^

In this connection, however, the concluding chapter of the *Manifesto*
is even more convincing. Its authors tell us that the Communists never
cease to instil into the minds of the workers the clearest possible
recognition of the hostile antagonism between the interests of the
bourgeoisie and of the proletariat. It is easy to understand that one
who attaches no importance to the ideological 'factor' has no logical
ground for trying to instil any such recognition whatsoever into the
minds of any social group.

### X

I have quoted from the *Manifesto*, in preference to other works by Marx
and Engels, because it belongs to the early period of their activities
when -- as some of their critics assure us -- they were especially
'one-sided' in their understanding of the relation between the 'factors'
of social development. We see clearly, however, that in that period too
they were distinguished, not by any '*one-sidedness*', but only by a
striving towards monism, an aversion for the *eclecticism*, so manifest
in the remarks of their 'critics'.

Reference is not infrequently made to two of Engels' letters, both
published in *Sozialistischer Akademiker*. One was written in 1890, the
other in 1894. There was a time when Herr Bernstein made much of these
letters which, he thought, contained plain testimony of the evolution
that had taken place in the course of time in the views of Marx's friend
and collaborator. He made two extracts from them, which he thought most
convincing in this respect, and which I consider necessary to reproduce
here, inasmuch as they prove the reverse of what Herr Bernstein was out
to prove.

Here is the first of these extracts:

Thus there are innumerable intersecting forces, an infinite series of
parallelograms of forces which give rise to one resultant -- the
historical event. This may in its turn again be regarded as the product
of a power which operates as a whole *unconsciously* and without
volition. For what each individual wills is obstructed by everyone else,
and what emerges is something that no one intended. \[Letter of 1890\]
^[\[121\]](#n121)^

Here is the second extract: 'Political, legal, philosophical, religious,
literary, artistic, etc, development is based on economic development.
But all these react upon one another and also upon the economic basis.'
\[Letter of 1894\] ^[\[122\]](#n122)^ Herr Bernstein finds that 'this
sounds somewhat different' than the preface to *Zur Kritik der
politischen Oekonomie*, which speaks of the links between the economic
'basis' and the 'superstructure' that rises above it. But in what way
does it sound different? Precisely what is said in the preface, is
repeated, viz, political and all other kinds of development rest on
economic development. Herr Bernstein seems to have been misled by the
following words, 'but all these react upon one another and also on the
economic basis'. Herr Bernstein himself seems to have understood the
preface to *Zur Kritik* differently, that is, in the sense that the
social and ideological 'superstructure' that grows on the economic
'basis' exerts no influence, in its turn, on that 'basis'. We already
know, however, that nothing can be more mistaken than such an
understanding of Marx's thought. Those who have observed Herr
Bernstein's 'critical' exercises can only shrug their shoulders when
they see a man who once undertook to popularise Marxism failing to go to
the trouble -- or, to be more accurate, proving incapable -- of first
getting an understanding of that doctrine.

The second of the letters quoted by Herr Bernstein contains passages
that are probably of greater importance for an understanding of the
causal significance of the historical theory of Marx and Engels, than
the lines I have quoted, which have been so poorly understood by Herr
Bernstein. One of these passages reads as follows:

The economic situation therefore does not produce an automatic effect as
people try here and there conveniently to imagine, but men make their
history themselves, they do so however in a given environment, which
conditions them, and on the basis of actual, already existing relations,
among which, the economic relations -- however much they may be
influenced by other, political and ideological, relations -- are still
ultimately the decisive ones, forming the keynote which alone leads to
understanding. ^[\[123\]](#n123)^

As we see, Herr Bernstein himself, in the days of his 'orthodox' mood,
was among the people 'here and there', who interpret the historical
doctrine of Marx and Engels in the sense that in history 'the economic
situation produces an automatic effect'. These also include very many
'critics' of Marx who have switched into reverse '*from Marxism to
idealism*'. These profound thinkers reveal great self-satisfaction when
they confront and reproach the 'one-sided' Marx and Engels with the
formula that history is made by men and not by the automatic movement of
the economy. They offer Marx what he himself gave, and in their
boundless simplicity of mind, do not even realise that *the 'Marx' they
are 'criticising*' has nothing except the name in common with the real
Marx, since he is the creation of their own and really many-sided
non-understanding of the subject. It is natural that 'critics' of such
calibre are utterly incapable of 'supplementing' or 'amending' anything
in historical materialism. Consequently, I shall not deal with them any
longer, and shall go over to the 'founders' of that theory.

It is of the utmost importance to note that when Engels, shortly before
his death, denied the 'automatic' understanding of the historical
operation of the economy, *he was only repeating* (almost in the same
words) *and explaining what Marx had written as far back as 1845*, *in
the third Thesis on Feuerbach*, *quoted above*. There Marx reproached
the earlier materialists with having forgotten that if 'men are products
of circumstances\... it is men who change circumstances'.
^[\[124\]](#n124)^ Consequently, the task of materialism in the sphere
of history lay, as Marx understood it, precisely in explaining *in what
manner 'circumstances' can be changed by those who are themselves
created by them*. This problem was solved by the reference to the
relations of production that develop under the influence of conditions
independent of the human will. Production relations are the *relations
among human beings* in the social process of production. Saying that
*production relations have changed* means saying that *the mutual
relations have changed among people* engaged in that process. A change
in these relations cannot take place 'automatically', that is,
*independently of human activity*, because they are *relations
established among men in the process of their activities*.

But these relations may undergo changes -- and indeed often do undergo
changes -- in a direction far from that in which people *would like*
them to change. The character of the 'economic structure' and the
direction in which that character changes depend, not upon human will
but on the state of the productive forces and on the specific changes in
production relations which take place and become necessary to society as
a result of the further development of those forces. Engels explains
this in the following words:

Men make their history themselves, but not as yet with a collective will
according to a collective plan or even in a clearly defined given
society. Their aspirations clash, and for that very reason all such
societies are governed by *necessity*, whose complement and
manifestation is *accident*. ^[\[125\]](#n125)^

Here human activity is itself defined as being not free, but
*necessary*, that is, as being *in conformity with a law*, and therefore
*capable of becoming an object of scientific study*. Thus, while always
pointing out that circumstances are changed by men, historical
materialism at the same time enables us, for the first time, *to examine
the process of this change from the standpoint of science*. That is why
we have every right to say that the materialist explanation of history
provides the necessary *prolegomena to any doctrine on human society
claiming to be a science*.

This is so true that at present the study of any aspect of social life
acquires *scientific significance* only in the measure in which it draws
closer to a *materialist* explanation of that life. Despite the so
vaunted 'revival of idealism' in the social sciences, that explanation
is becoming more and more common wherever researchers refrain from
indulging in edifying meditation and verbiage on the 'ideal', but set
themselves the scientific task of discovering the causal links between
phenomena. Today even people who not only do not adhere to the
materialist view on history, but have not the slightest idea of it, are
proving materialists in their historical researches. It is here that
their ignorance of this view, or their prejudice against it, which
hinders an understanding of all its aspects, does indeed lead to
one-sidedness and narrowness of concepts.

### XI

Here is a good illustration. Ten years ago Alfred Espinas,
^[\[126\]](#n126)^ the French scholar (and incidentally a bitter enemy
of the present-day socialists), published a highly interesting -- at
least in conception -- 'sociological study' entitled *Les origines de la
technologie*. In this book, the author, proceeding from the purely
materialist proposition that *practice* always precedes *theory* in the
history of mankind, examines the influence of *technology* on the
development of *ideology*, or to be more precise, on the development of
religion and philosophy in ancient Greece. He arrives at the conclusion
that, in each period of that development, the ancient Greeks'
world-outlook was determined by the state of their productive forces.
This is, of course, a highly interesting and important conclusion, but
anyone accustomed consciously to applying materialism to an explanation
of historical events may, on reading Espinas' 'study', find that the
view expressed therein is one-sided. That is so for the simple reason
that the French scholar has paid practically no attention to other
'factors' in the development of ideology, such as, for example, the
*class struggle*. Yet the latter 'factor' is of really exceptional
importance.

In primitive society, which knows no division into classes, man's
productive activities exert a *direct* influence on his world-outlook
and his aesthetic tastes. Decorative design draws its motifs from
technology, and dancing -- probably the most important of the arts in
such a society -- often merely imitates the process of production. That
is particularly to be seen in *hunting* tribes, which stand at the
lowest known level of economic development. ^[\[127\]](#n127)^ That is
why I referred chiefly to them when I was discussing the dependence of
primitive man's *mentality* on his *activities in the economy* he
conducts. However, in a society that is divided into classes the
*direct* impact of those activities on ideology becomes far less
discernible. That is understandable. If, for instance, one of the
Australian aboriginal women's dances reproduces the *work of
root-gathering*, it goes without saying that none of the graceful dances
with which, for instance, the fine ladies of eighteenth-century France
amused themselves could depict those ladies' productive work, since they
did not engage in such work, preferring in the main to devote themselves
to the 'science of tender passion'. To understand the Australian native
women's dance it is sufficient to know the part played in the life of
the Australian tribe by the gathering of wild roots by the womenfolk.
But to understand the minuet, for instance, it is absolutely
insufficient to have a knowledge of the economy of eighteenth-century
France. Here we have to do with a dance expressive of *the psychology of
a non-productive class*. A psychology of *this kind* accounts for the
vast majority of the 'customs and conventions' of so-called good
society. Consequently, in this case the *economic '*factor' is second to
the *psychological*. It should, however, not be forgotten that the
appearance of non-productive classes in a society is a product of the
latter's economic development. Hence, the economic 'factor' preserves
its predominant significance even when it is second to others. Moreover,
it is then that this significance makes itself felt, for it is then that
it determines the *possibility and the limits of the influence of other
'factors'.* ^[\[128\]](#n128)^

Nor is that all. Even when it participates in the productive process in
the capacity of leader, the upper class looks upon the lower class with
a disdain they do not trouble to conceal. This, too, is reflected in the
ideologies of the two classes. The French medieval *fabliaux*, and
particularly the *chansons de gestes* depict the peasant of the time in
a most unattractive way. If we are to believe them, then:

*Li vilains sont de laide forme\
Ainc si très laide ne vit home;\
Chaucuns a XV piez de granz;\
En auques ressemblent jâianz,\
Mais trop sont de laide manière\
Boçu sont devant et derrière*\... ^[\[129\]](#n129)^

The peasants, of course, saw themselves in a different light. Indignant
at the arrogance of the feudal seigneurs, they sang:

*Nous sommes des hommes, tous comme eux,\
Et capable de souffrir, tout autant qu'eux*. ^[\[130\]](#n130)^

And they asked:

*When Adam delved and Eve span*,*\
Who was then the gentleman?*

In a word, each of these two classes looked upon things from its own
point of view, which was determined by its position in society. The
psychology of the contending sides was coloured by the class struggle.
Such, of course, was the case, not only in the Middle Ages and not only
in France. The more acute the class struggle grew in a given country and
at a given time, the stronger was its influence on the psychology of the
conflicting classes. He who would study the history of ideologies in a
society divided into classes must give close consideration to this
influence; otherwise he will be all at sea. Try to give a *bluntly
economic* explanation of the fact of the appearance of the David school
of painting in eighteenth-century France: nothing will come of your
attempt except ridiculous and dull nonsense. But if you regard that
school as an ideological reflection of the class struggle in French
society on the eve of the Great Revolution, the matter will at once
assume an entirely different aspect: even such qualities in David's art
which, it would seem, were so far removed from the social economy that
they can in no way be linked up with it, will become fully
comprehensible.

The same has also to be said of the history of ideologies in ancient
Greece, a history that most profoundly experienced the impact of the
class struggle. That impact was insufficiently shown in Espinas'
interesting study, in consequence of which his important conclusions
were marked by a certain bias. Such instances might be quoted today in
no small number, and they would all show that the influence of Marx's
materialism on many present-day experts would be of the utmost value in
the sense that *it would teach them also to take into account 'factors'
other than the technical and the economic*. That sounds paradoxical, yet
it is an undeniable truth, which will no longer surprise us if we
remember that, though he explains any social movement as the outcome of
the economic development of society, Marx very often thus explains that
movement only as the *ultimate outcome*, that is, he takes it for
granted that a number of various other 'factors' will operate in the
interim.

### XII

Another trend, diametrically opposed to that which we have just seen in
Espinas, is beginning to reveal itself in present-day science -- a
tendency to explain the history of ideas exclusively by the influence of
the class struggle. This perfectly new and as yet inconspicuous trend
has arisen under the direct influence of Marxist historical materialism.
We see it in the writings of the Greek author A Eleutheropoulos,
^[\[131\]](#n131)^ whose principal work *Wirtschaft und Philosophie*,
Volume 1: *Die Philosophie und die Lebensauffassung des Griechentums auf
Grund der gesellschaftlichen Zustände*; and Volume 2: *Die Philosophie
und die Lebensauffassung der germanisch-romanischen Völker* was
published in Berlin in 1900. Eleutheropoulos is convinced that the
philosophy of any given period expresses the latter's specific
'world-outlook and views on life' (*Lebens*- and *Weltanschauung*).
Properly speaking, there is nothing new about this. Hegel already said
that every philosophy is merely the ideological expression of its time.
With Hegel, however, the features of the various epochs, and,
consequently, of the corresponding phases in the development of
philosophy, were determined by the movement of Absolute Idea, whereas
with Eleutheropoulos any given epoch is characterised primarily by its
economic condition. The economy of any particular people determines its
'life- and world-understanding', which is expressed, among other things,
in its philosophy. With a change in the economic basis of society, the
ideological superstructure changes too. Inasmuch as economic development
leads to the division of society into classes, and to a struggle between
the latter, the 'life- and world-understanding' peculiar to a particular
period is not uniform in character. It varies in the different classes
and undergoes modification in accordance with their position, their
needs and aspirations, and the course of their mutual struggle.

Such is the viewpoint from which Eleutheropoulos regards the entire
history of philosophy. It is self-evident that this point of view
deserves the closest attention and the utmost approval. For quite a
considerable period there has been discernible in philosophical
literature a dissatisfaction with the usual view on the history of
philosophy as merely a filiation of philosophical systems. In a pamphlet
published in the late 1880s and dealing with ways of studying the
history of philosophy, the well-known French writer Picavet declared
that, taken by itself, filiation of this kind can explain very little.
^[\[132\]](#n132)^ The appearance of Eleutheropoulos' work might have
been welcomed as a new step in the study of the history of philosophy,
and as a victory of historical materialism in its application to an
ideology far removed from economics. Alas, Eleutheropoulos has not
displayed much skill in making use of the dialectical method of that
materialism. He has *oversimplified* the problems confronting him, and
for that reason alone has failed to bring forward any solutions other
than the very one-sided and therefore most unsatisfactory. Let us cite
his appraisal of Xenophanes. According to Eleutheropoulos, Xenophanes
expressed, in the realm of philosophy, the aspirations of the Greek
proletariat. He was the Rousseau of his time. ^[\[133\]](#n133)^ He
wanted social reform in the meaning of the equality and unity of all
citizens, and his doctrine of the *unity of being* was merely the
theoretical foundation of his plans for reform. ^[\[134\]](#n134)^ It
was from this theoretical foundation of Xenophanes' reformational
aspirations that all the details of his philosophy developed, beginning
with his view on God, and ending with his doctrine of the illusoriness
of representations received through our senses. ^[\[135\]](#n135)^

The philosophy of Heraclitus, the 'Dark Philosopher', was engendered by
the reaction of the aristocracy against the revolutionary aspirations of
the Greek proletariat. According to that philosophy, universal equality
is impossible, for Nature herself has made men unequal. Each man should
be content with his lot. It is not the overthrow of the existing order
that should be aspired towards in the state, but the elimination of the
arbitrary use of power, which is possible both under the rule of a *few*
and under the rule of the *masses*. Power should belong to *Law*, which
is an expression of *divine law*. *Unity* is not precluded by divine law
but unity that is in accord with the latter is a *unity of opposites*.
The implementation of Xenophanes' plans would be a breach of the divine
law. Developing and substantiating this idea, Heraclitus created his
dialectical doctrine of Becoming (*Werden*). ^[\[136\]](#n136)^

That is what Eleutheropoulos says. Lack of space prevents me from
quoting more samples of his analysis of the causes determining the
development of philosophy. There is hardly any need to do so. The
reader, I hope, will see for himself that this analysis must be found
unsatisfactory. The process of the development of ideologies is, in
general, incomparably more complex than Eleutheropoulos imagines.
^[\[137\]](#n137)^ When you read his oversimplified notions on the
influence of the class struggle on the history of philosophy, you begin
to regret that he seems quite ignorant of the aforementioned book by
Espinas: the one-sidedness inherent in the latter work, if superimposed
on his own one-sidedness, might perhaps have corrected a good deal in
his analysis.

Nevertheless, Eleutheropoulos' unsuccessful attempt testifies anew to
the proposition -- unexpected to many -- that a more thorough
assimilation of Marx's historical materialism would be useful to many
contemporary investigators, precisely because *it will save them from
one-sidedness*. Eleutheropoulos is acquainted with that materialism, but
*poorly* so. That is borne out by the '*correction*' he has thought fit
to introduce into it.

He remarks that the economic relations of a given people determine only
'*the necessity of its development*'. The latter itself is a matter of
individuality, so that this people's 'life- and world-understanding' is
determined in its content, firstly, by its character and the character
of the country it inhabits; secondly, by its needs; and thirdly, by the
personal qualities of those who come forward from its midst as
reformers. It is only in this sense, according to Eleutheropoulos, that
we can speak of the relation of philosophy towards the economy.
Philosophy fulfils the demands of its time, and does so in conformity
with the personality of the philosopher. ^[\[138\]](#n138)^

Eleutheropoulos probably thinks that this view on the relation of
philosophy to the economy differs from the materialist view of Marx and
Engels. He deems it necessary to give a new name to his interpretation
of history, calling it *the Greek theory of Becoming* (*griechische
Theorie des Werdens*). ^[\[139\]](#n139)^ This is simply ridiculous, and
all one can say in this connection is that 'the Greek theory of
Becoming', which in fact is nothing but rather poorly digested and
clumsily expounded historical materialism, nevertheless *promises* far
more than is actually *given* by Eleutheropoulos when he proceeds from
describing his method to applying it, for then he departs completely
from Marx.

As for the 'personality of the philosopher' and, in general, of any
person who leaves an impress on the history of mankind, those who
imagine that the theory of Marx and Engels has no room for it are in
gross error. It has left room for that, but at the same time it has been
able to avoid the impermissible *contraposing of the activities of any
'personality' to the course of events*, *which is determined by economic
necessity*. Anybody who resorts to such contraposing thereby proves that
he has understood very little of the materialist explanation of history.
The fundamental thesis of historical materialism, as I have repeated
more than once, is that *history is made by men*. That being so, it is
manifest that it is made also by 'great men'. It only remains to
establish what the activities of such men are determined by. Here is
what Engels writes in this connection, in one of the two letters quoted
above:

That such and such a man and precisely that man arises at a particular
time in a particular country is, of course, pure chance. But if one
eliminates him there is a demand for a substitute, and this substitute
will be found, good or bad, but in the long run he will be found. That
Napoleon, just that particular Corsican, should have been the military
dictator whom the French Republic, exhausted by its own warfare, had
rendered necessary, was chance; but that, if Napoleon had been lacking,
another would have filled the place, is proved by the fact that a man
was always found as soon as he became necessary: Caesar, Augustus,
Cromwell, etc. While Marx discovered the materialist conception of
history, Thierry, Mignet, Guizot and all the English historians up to
1850 are evidence that it was being striven for, and the discovery of
the same conception by Morgan proves that the time was ripe for it and
that it simply *had* to be discovered.

So with all the other contingencies, and apparent contingencies, of
history. The further the particular sphere which we are investigating is
removed from the economic sphere and approaches that of pure abstract
ideology, the more shall we find it exhibiting accidents in its
development, the more will its curve run zigzag. But if you plot the
average axis of the curve, you will find that this axis will run more
and more nearly parallel to the axis of economic development the longer
the period considered and the wider the field dealt with.
^[\[140\]](#n140)^

The 'personality' of anyone who has won distinction in the spiritual or
social sphere is among those instances of *accident* whose appearance
does not prevent the 'average' axis of mankind's *intellectual*
development running parallel to that of its *economic* development.
^[\[141\]](#n141)^ Eleutheropoulos would have understood that better had
he given more careful thought to Marx's historical theory and been less
concerned with producing his *own '*Greek theory'. ^[\[142\]](#n142)^

It need hardly be added that we are still far from being always capable
of discovering the causal link between the appearance of a given
philosophical view and the economic situation of the period in question.
The reason is that we are only beginning to work in this direction; were
we in a position already to answer all the questions -- or at least most
of the questions -- that arise in this connection, that would mean that
our work was already completed, or approaching completion. What is of
decisive significance in this case is not the fact that *we cannot yet
cope with all* the difficulties facing us in this field; there is not,
neither can there be, such a method that can remove at one stroke all
the difficulties appearing in a science. The important thing is that it
is incomparably easier for the materialist explanation of history to
cope with them than it is for the idealist or the eclectic explanations.
That is borne out by the fact that scientific thought in the sphere of
history has been most strongly attracted towards the materialist
explanation of events, has, so to say, been persistently seeking for it,
since the Restoration period. ^[\[143\]](#n143)^ To this day, it has not
ceased from gravitating towards it and seeking it, despite the fine
indignation that comes over any self-respecting ideologist of the
bourgeoisie whenever he hears the word *materialism*.

A third illustration of the present *inevitability of attempts to find a
materialist explanation of all aspects of human culture* is provided by
Franz Feuerherd's book *Die Entstehung der Stile aus der politischen
Oekonomie*, Part 1 (Brunswick and Leipzig, 1902).

In conformity with the dominant mode of production and the form of state
thereby conditioned \[says Feuerherd\], the human intelligence moves in
certain directions, and is excluded from others. Therefore the existence
of any style \[in art -- GP\] presupposes the existence of people who
live in quite definite political conditions, are engaged in production
under quite definite production relations, and have quite definite
ideals. Given these conditions, men create the appropriate style with
the same natural necessity and inevitability as the way linen bleaches,
as bromide of silver turns black, and a rainbow appears in the clouds as
soon as the sun, as the cause, brings about all these effects.
^[\[144\]](#n144)^

All this is true, of course, and the circumstance that this is
acknowledged by an *historian of art* is of particular interest. When,
however, Feuerherd goes on to ascribe the origins of the various Greek
styles to economic conditions in ancient Greece, what he produces is
something that is too schematic. I do not know whether the second part
of his book has come out; I have not been interested in the matter,
because it is clear to me how poorly he has learnt the modern
materialist method. In their schematism, his arguments are reminiscent
of those of our native-bred but second-rate Friche and Rozhkovs,
^[\[145\]](#n145)^ who, like Feuerherd, may be well advised, first and
foremost, to *make a study of modern materialism*. Only *Marxism* can
save all of them from falling into *schematism*.

### XIII

In a controversy with me, the late Nikolai Mikhailovsky
^[\[146\]](#n146)^ once declared that Marx's historical theory would
never gain much acceptance in the scholarly world. We have just seen,
and will again see from what follows below, that this statement is not
quite correct. But first we must remove certain other misconceptions
which prevent a proper understanding of historical materialism.

If we wanted to express in a nutshell the view held by Marx and Engels
with regard to the relation between the now celebrated '*basis*' and the
no less celebrated '*superstructure*', we would get something like the
following:

1\. The *state of the productive forces*.

2\. The *economic relations* these forces condition.

3\. The *socio-political system* that has developed on the given
economic 'basis'.

4\. The *mentality of social man*, which is determined in part directly
by the economic conditions obtaining, and in part by the entire
socio-political system that has arisen on that foundation.

5\. The *various ideologies* that reflect the properties of that
mentality.

This formula is comprehensive enough to provide proper room for all
'forms' of historical development, and at the same time it contains
absolutely nothing of the eclecticism that is incapable of going beyond
the *interaction* between the various social forces, and does not even
suspect that *the fact* that these forces *do interact* has provided no
solution of *the problem of their origin*. This formula is a *monist*
one, and this *monist* formula is thoroughly imbued with *materialism*.
In his *Philosophy of the Spirit*, Hegel said that the Spirit is
history's only motive principle. It is impossible to think otherwise, if
one accepts the viewpoint of the *idealism* which claims that *being* is
determined by *thinking*. Marx's materialism shows in what way the
*history of thinking* is determined by the *history of being*. Hegel's
idealism, however, did not prevent him from recognising *economic
factors* as a cause 'conditioned by the development of the Spirit'. In
exactly the same way, materialism did not prevent Marx from recognising
the action, in history, of the 'Spirit' as a force whose direction is
determined at any given time and in the final analysis by the course of
*economic* development.

That all ideologies have one common root -- *the psychology of the epoch
in question --* is not hard to understand; anyone who makes even the
slightest study of the facts will realise that. As an example, we might
make reference to French romanticism. Victor Hugo, Eugène Delacroix and
Hector Berlioz worked in three entirely different spheres of art. All
three differed greatly from one another. Hugo, at least, did not like
music, while Delacroix had little regard for romanticist musicians. Yet
it is with good reason that these three outstanding men have been called
*the trinity of romanticism*; their works are a reflection of one and
the same psychology. It can be said that Delacroix's painting 'Dante and
Vergil' expresses the same temper as that which dictated his *Hernani*
to Victor Hugo, and his *Symphonie fantastique* to Berlioz. This was
sensed by their contemporaries, that is, by those of them who in general
were not indifferent to literature and art. A classicist in his tastes,
Ingres called Berlioz 'the abominable musician, monster, bandit and
antichrist'. ^[\[147\]](#n147)^ This is reminiscent of the flattering
opinions voiced by the classicists regarding Delacroix whose brush they
compared to a *drunken* besom. Like Hugo, Berlioz was the object of
fierce attacks. ^[\[148\]](#n148)^ It is common knowledge, too, that he
achieved victory with incomparably more effort and far later than Hugo
did. Why was that so, despite the fact that his music expressed the same
psychology as did romanticist poetry and drama? To answer this question,
it would be necessary to understand many details in the comparative
history of French music and literature, ^[\[149\]](#n149)^ details which
may remain uninterpreted for long, *if not for always*. What is beyond
doubt, however, is that the psychology of French romanticism will be
understood by us only if we come to regard it as the psychology of a
definite class that lives in definite social and historical conditions.
^[\[150\]](#n150)^ 'The movement of the thirties in literature and art',
Jean-Baptiste Tiersot says, 'was far from having the character of a
people's revolution.' ^[\[151\]](#n151)^ That is perfectly true. The
movement referred to was *bourgeois* in its essence. But that is not
all. The movement did not enjoy universal sympathy among the bourgeoisie
itself. In Tiersot's opinion, it expressed the strivings of a small
'élite' sufficiently far-sighted to be able to discern genius wherever
it lay in hiding. ^[\[152\]](#n152)^ These words are a superficial, that
is, idealist, expression of the fact that the French bourgeoisie of the
time did not understand much of what its own ideologists then aspired
towards and felt in the sphere of literature and art. Such dissonance
between ideologists and the class whose aspirations and tastes they
express is by no means rare in history, and explains the highly numerous
specific features in the intellectual and artistic development of
mankind. In the case we are discussing, this dissonance was the cause,
among other things, of the contemptuous attitude of the 'refined' élite
towards the 'obtuse bourgeois' -- an attitude which still misleads naive
people, and wholly prevents them from realising the arch-bourgeois
character of romanticism. ^[\[153\]](#n153)^ But here, as everywhere,
the origin and the character of this dissonance can be ultimately
explained only by the economic position, the economic role, of the
social class in whose midst it has appeared. Here, as everywhere, only
*being* sheds light on the 'secrets' of thinking. And that is why here
-- again as everywhere -- it is only materialism that is capable of
giving a *scientific* explanation of the 'course of ideas'.

### XIV

In their efforts to explain that course, the idealists have never proved
able to watch from the standpoint of the '*course of things*'. Thus,
Taine thinks that it is the properties of the artist's environment that
account for a work of art. But what properties is he referring to? To
the *psychological*, that is to say, the general psychology of the
period in question, whose properties themselves require explanation.
^[\[154\]](#n154)^ When it explains the psychology of a particular
society or a particular class, materialism addresses itself to the
social structure created by the economic development, and so on. But
Taine, who was an idealist, attempted to explain the origin of a *social
system* through the medium of *social psychology*, thereby getting
himself entangled in irresolvable contradictions. Idealists in all lands
show little liking for Taine nowadays. The reason is obvious: by
*environment* he understood the general *psychology of the masses*, the
*psychology of the 'man in the street*' at a particular time and in a
particular class. To him, this psychology was the court of last instance
to which the researcher could appeal. Consequently, he thought that a
'*great*' man always thinks and feels at the behest of the '*man in the
street*', at dictation from 'mediocrities'. Now this is wrong in point
of fact, and, besides, offends bourgeois 'intellectuals', who are always
prone, at least in some small measure, to count themselves in the
category of great men. Taine was a man who, after saying 'A', was unable
to carry on and say 'B', thus ruining his own case. The only escape from
the contradictions he got entangled in is through historical
materialism, which finds the right place for both the 'individual' and
the 'environment', for both '*the man in the street*' and 'the man of
destiny'.

It is noteworthy that, in France, where, from the Middle Ages right down
to 1871, the socio-political development and the struggle between social
classes assumed a form most typical of Western Europe, it is easier than
anywhere else to discover the causal nexus between that development and
that struggle, on the one hand, and the history of ideologies on the
other.

Speaking of the reason why, during the Restoration in France, the ideas
of the theocratic school of philosophy of history were so widespread,
Robert Flint has had the following to say:

The success of such a theory, indeed, would have been inexplicable, had
not the way for it been prepared by the sensationalism of Condillac, and
had it not been so obviously fitted to serve the interests of a party
which represented the opinions of large classes of French society before
and after the Restoration. ^[\[155\]](#n155)^

This is true, of course, and it is easy to realise which class it was
whose interests found ideological expression in the theocratic school.
Let us, however, delve further into French history and ask ourselves: is
it not also possible to discover the social causes of the success
achieved by sensationalism in *pre-revolutionary France?* Was not the
intellectual movement that produced the theoreticians of sensationalism
in its turn an expression of the aspirations of a particular social
class? It is known that this was the case: this movement expressed the
emancipatory aspirations of the French *tiers état*. ^[\[156\]](#n156)^
Were we to proceed in the same direction we would see that, for
instance, the philosophy of Descartes gave a clear reflection of the
requirements of the economic development and the alignment of social
forces of his time. ^[\[157\]](#n157)^ Finally, if we went back as far
as the fourteenth century and turned our attention, for instance, to the
romances of chivalry, which enjoyed such popularity at the French court
and among the French aristocracy of the period, we would have no
difficulty in discovering that these romances mirrored the life and the
tastes of the *état* referred to. ^[\[158\]](#n158)^ In a word, the
curve of the intellectual movement in this remarkable country, which but
recently had every right to claim that it 'marched at the head of the
nations', runs parallel to the curve of economic development, and that
of the socio-political development conditioned by the latter. In view of
this, the history of ideology in France is of particular interest to
sociology.

This is something that those who have 'criticised' Marx in various tones
and keys have not had the least idea of. They have never understood
that, though criticism is of course a splendid thing, a certain
prerequisite is needed when you undertake to criticise, that is, *an
understanding of what you are criticising*. Criticising a given method
of scientific investigation means determining in what measure it can
help discover the causal links existing between phenomena. That is
something that can be ascertained only through experience, that is,
through the application of that method. Criticising historical
materialism means making a trial of the method of Marx and Engels in a
study of the historical movement of mankind. Only then can the strong
and the weak points of the method be ascertained. 'The proof of the
pudding is in the eating', as Engels said when explaining his theory of
cognition. ^[\[159\]](#n159)^ This applies in full to historical
materialism as well. To *criticise* this dish, you must first have a
taste of it. To taste the method of Marx and Engels, you must first be
able to use it. To use it properly presupposes a far higher degree of
scientific grounding and far more sustained intellectual effort than are
revealed in pseudo-critical verbiage on the theme of the 'one-sidedness'
of Marxism.

The 'critics' of Marx declare, some with regret, some in reproach, and
some with malice, that to this day no *book* has appeared, containing a
theoretical substantiation of historical materialism. By a 'book' they
usually understand something like a brief manual on world history
written from the materialist viewpoint. At present, however, no such
guide can be written either by an individual scholar, however extensive
his knowledge, or by a whole group of scholars. A sufficiency of
material for that does not yet exist, nor will it exist for a long time.
Such material can be accumulated only by means of a lengthy series of
investigations carried out in the respective fields of science, with the
aid of the Marxist method. In other words, those 'critics' who demand a
'book' would like to have matters *started from the end*, that is, *they
want a preliminary explanation*, from the materialist viewpoint, *of
that very historical process which is to be explained*. In actual fact,
a 'book' in defence of historical materialism is being written in the
measure in which contemporary scholars -- mostly, as I have said,
without realising that they are doing so -- are forced by the
present-day state of social science to furnish a materialist explanation
of the phenomena they are studying. That such scholars are not so few in
number is shown convincingly enough by the examples I have quoted above.

It has been said by Laplace that about 50 years elapsed before Newton's
great discovery was supplemented in any significant degree. So long a
period was required for this great truth to be generally understood and
for those obstacles to be overcome which were placed in its way by the
vortex theory and also perhaps by the wounded pride of mathematicians of
Newton's times. ^[\[160\]](#n160)^

The obstacles met by present-day materialism as an harmonious and
consistent theory are incomparably greater than those that Newton's
theory came up against, on its appearance. Against it are directly and
decisively ranged the interests of the class now in power, to whose
influence most scholars subordinate themselves of necessity. Materialist
dialectic which 'regards every historically developed social form as in
fluid movement, and\... lets nothing impose upon it', ^[\[161\]](#n161)^
cannot have the sympathy of the *conservative class* that the Western
bourgeoisie today is. It stands in such contradiction to that class'
frame of mind that ideologists of that class naturally tend to look upon
it as something impermissible, improper and unworthy of the attention
both of 'respectable' people in general, and of 'esteemed' men of
learning in particular. ^[\[162\]](#n162)^ It is not surprising that
each of these pundits considers himself morally obliged to avert from
himself any suspicion of sympathy with materialism. Often enough such
pundits denounce materialism the more emphatically, the more insistently
they adhere to a materialist viewpoint in their *special* research.
^[\[163\]](#n163)^ The result is a kind of semi-subconscious
'conventional lie', which, of course, can have only a most injurious
effect on theoretical thinking.

### XV

The 'conventional lie' of a society divided into classes becomes ever
more enhanced, the more the existing order of things is shaken by the
impact of the economic development and the class struggle caused
thereby. Marx very truly said that the greater the development of the
contradiction between the growing productive forces and the existing
social order, the more does the ideology of the master class become
imbued with hypocrisy. The more the falseness of this ideology is
revealed by life, the more elevated and virtuous does the *language* of
that class become (*Sankt Max: Dokumente des Sozialismus*, August 1904,
pp 370-71). ^[\[164\]](#n164)^ The truth of this remark is being brought
home with particular force today, when, for instance, the spread of
loose morals in Germany, as revealed by the Harden-Moltke trial,
^[\[165\]](#n165)^ goes hand in hand with a 'renascence of idealism' in
social science. In our country, even among 'theorists of the
proletariat', people are to be found who do not understand the social
cause of this 'renascence', and have themselves succumbed to its
influence, such as the Bogdanovs, the Bazarovs, and their like\...
^[\[166\]](#n166)^

Incidentally, so immensely great are the advantages any researcher is
provided with by the Marxist method that even those who have willingly
submitted to the 'conventional lie' of our time are beginning publicly
to recognise them. Among such people, for instance, is the American
Edwin Seligman, author of a book published in 1902 under the title of
*The Economic Interpretation of History*. Seligman frankly admits that
scholars have shied away from the theory of historical materialism
because of the socialist conclusions drawn from it by Marx. However, he
thinks that you can eat your cake and yet have it: 'one can be an
economic materialist' and yet remain hostile to socialism. As he puts
it: 'The fact that Marx's economics may be defective has no bearing on
the truth or falsity of his philosophy of history.' ^[\[167\]](#n167)^
In actual fact, Marx's economic views were intimately bound up with his
historical views. A *proper* understanding of *Capital* absolutely
implies the *necessity* of previous and careful thought on the
celebrated preface to *Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*. However,
we are unable here either to set forth Marx's economic views or to
demonstrate the incontrovertible fact that they form *merely* an
indispensable component of the *doctrine* known as historical
materialism. ^[\[168\]](#n168)^ I shall add only that Seligman is
sufficiently a 'pundit' also to be scared of *materialism*. This
economic 'materialist' thinks it is going to intolerable extremes 'to
make religion itself depend on economic forces' or to 'seek the
explanation of Christianity itself in economic facts alone'.
^[\[169\]](#n169)^ All this goes to show clearly how deep are the roots
of those prejudices -- and consequently of the obstacles -- that Marxist
theory has to fight against. Yet the very fact of the appearance of
Seligman's book and even the very nature of the reservations he makes
give some reason to hope that historical materialism -- even in a
truncated or 'purified' form -- will in the end achieve recognition by
those ideologists of the bourgeoisie who have not given up the idea of
bringing order into their historical views. ^[\[170\]](#n170)^

But the struggle against socialism, materialism and other unpleasant
extremes presupposes possession of a 'spiritual weapon'. What is known
as subjective political economy, and more or less adroitly falsified
statistics at present constitute the spiritual weapon mainly used in the
struggle against socialism. All possible brands of Kantianism form the
main bulwark in the struggle against materialism. In the field of social
science, Kantianism is utilised for this purpose as a *dualist* doctrine
which *tears asunder the tie between being and thinking*. Since
consideration of *economic* questions does not come within the province
of this book, I shall confine myself to an appraisal of the
*philosophical* spiritual weapon employed by bourgeois reaction in the
ideological sphere.

Concluding his booklet, *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific*, Engels
remarks that when the mighty means of production created by the
capitalist epoch have become the property of society, and when
production is organised in conformity with social needs, men will at
last become masters of their social relations, and hence lords over
nature, and their own masters. Only then will they begin *consciously*
to make their own history; only then will the social causes they bring
into play produce, in ever greater measure, effects that are desirable
to them. 'It is the ascent of man from the kingdom of necessity to the
kingdom of freedom.' ^[\[171\]](#n171)^

These words of Engels' have evoked objections from those who, unable in
general to stomach the idea of 'leaps', have been either unable or
unwilling to understand any such 'leap' from the kingdom of necessity
into the kingdom of freedom. Such a 'leap' seemed to them to contradict
that view on freedom which Engels himself voiced in the first part of
his *Anti-Dühring*. Therefore, if we would see our way through the
confusion in the minds of such people, we must recall exactly what
Engels said in the book mentioned above.

And here is what he said. Explaining Hegel's words that 'necessity is
*blind* only *in so far as it is not understood*', Engels stated that
freedom consists in exercising 'control over ourselves and over external
nature, a control founded on knowledge of natural necessity'.
^[\[172\]](#n172)^ This idea is set forth by Engels with a clarity quite
sufficient for people familiar with the Hegelian doctrine referred to.
The trouble is that present-day Kantians only 'criticise' Hegel, but do
not study him. Since they have no knowledge of Hegel, they have been
unable to understand Engels. To the author of *Anti-Dühring* they have
made the objection that where there is submission to necessity, there is
no freedom. This is quite consistent on the part of people whose
philosophical views are imbued with a *dualism* that is incapable of
uniting thinking with being. From the viewpoint of this dualism, the
'leap' from necessity to freedom remains absolutely incomprehensible.
But Marx's philosophy, like that of Feuerbach, proclaims the unity of
being and thinking. Although, as we have already seen above, in the
section on Feuerbach, Marxist philosophy understands that unity quite
differently from the sense in which it is understood by absolute
idealism, it (Marxist philosophy) does not at all disagree with Hegelian
doctrine in the question we are concerned with; viz, the relation of
freedom to necessity.

The gist of the whole matter is: precisely what should be understood by
*necessity*. Aristotle ^[\[173\]](#n173)^ already pointed out that the
concept of necessity contains many shades of meaning: medicine is
necessary for a cure to be effected; breathing is necessary for life; a
trip to Aegina is necessary for a debt to be collected. All these are,
so to say, *conditional* necessities; we *must* breathe *if* we want to
live; we *must* take medicine *if* we want to get rid of an illness, and
so on. In the process of acting on the world about him, man has
constantly to do with necessity of this kind: he must *of necessity* sow
*if* he would reap, shoot an arrow *if* he would kill game, stock fuel
*if* he would get a steam-engine operating, and so on. From the
viewpoint of the neo-Kantian 'criticism of Marx', it has to be admitted
that there is an element of *submission* in this conditional necessity.
Man would be *freer* if he were able to satisfy his wants without
expending any labour at all. He always *submits* to nature, even *when
he forces her to serve him*. This submission, however, is a condition of
his becoming free: by submitting to nature, he thereby increases *his
power over her*, that is, *his freedom*. It would be the same under the
planned organisation of social production. By *submitting* to certain
demands of technical and economic necessity, men would put an end to
that preposterous order of things under which they are dominated by the
products of their own activities, that is to say, they would increase
their *freedom* to a tremendous degree. Here, too, their submission
would become a source of liberation to them.

Nor is that all. 'Critics' of Marx, who have become used to considering
that a gulf separates thinking and being, know of only one shade of
necessity; to use Aristotle's wording, they imagine necessity only as a
force that *prevents* us from acting *according* to our desires, and
*compels* us to do that which *is contrary* to them. Necessity of *this*
kind is indeed the opposite of freedom, and cannot but be irksome in
greater or lesser degree. But we must not forget that a force seen by
man as external coercion which is in conflict with his wishes may, in
other circumstances, be seen by him in an entirely different light. As
an illustration, let us take the agrarian question in Russia today. To
the intelligent *landowner* who is a Constitutional-Democrat, the
'forcible alienation of the land' ^[\[174\]](#n174)^ may seem more or
less sad historical necessity -- sad, that is to say, in reverse
proportion to the size of the 'fair compensation' given. But to the
*peasant* who yearns for land, the reverse is true: the 'fair
compensation' will present itself as a more or less sad necessity, while
'forcible alienation' is bound to be seen as an expression of his own
unfettered will, and the most precious security of his freedom.

In saying this, I am touching upon what is perhaps the most important
point in the doctrine of freedom -- a point not mentioned by Engels
only, of course, for its being self-evident to one who has gone through
the Hegelian school.

In his philosophy of religion Hegel says, '*Die Freiheit ist dies:
nichts zu wollen als sich*', ^[\[175\]](#n175)^ that is: *'*Freedom lies
in willing nothing but oneself.' ^[\[176\]](#n176)^ This observation
sheds a strong light on the entire question of freedom, insofar as that
question bears upon social psychology. The peasant who demands that the
landowner's land should be transferred to him wants 'nothing but
himself'; the Constitutional-Democratic landowner who agrees to give him
land no longer wants 'himself' but that which history *compels* him to
want. The former is *free*, while the latter wisely *submits to
necessity*.

It would be the same, as with the peasant, for the proletariat, which
converts the means of production into social property and organises
social production on a new foundation. It would wish nothing 'but
itself', and would feel *quite free*. As for the capitalists, they
would, of course, at best feel that they were in the position of the
landowner who has accepted the Constitutional-Democratic agrarian
programme; they could not but think that *freedom* is one thing, and
*historical necessity*, another.

As it seems to me, those 'critics' who have objected to Engels' stand
have failed to understand him also, incidentally, for the reason of
their being able to imagine themselves in the position of the
capitalist, but being totally unable to imagine themselves in the
proletarian's shoes. I hold the opinion that this, too, has its *social
--* and ultimately *economic* -- cause.

### XVI

Dualism, to which ideologists of the bourgeoisie are now so prone, has
another charge to make against historical materialism. Through Stammler,
it imputes that historical materialism fails to take *social teleology*
into account. This second imputation, which incidentally is highly akin
to the first, is equally groundless.

Marx says: 'In the social production of their existence, men inevitably
enter into definite relations.' ^[\[177\]](#n177)^ Stammler makes
reference to this formula as proof that, despite his theory, Marx was
unable to avoid teleological considerations; Marx's words, in Stammler's
opinion, mean that men *consciously* enter into the mutual relations
without which production is impossible. Consequently these relations are
the outcome of *expedient action*. ^[\[178\]](#n178)^

It is easy to see in which part of this argument Stammler makes a
logical error which leaves its impress on all his further critical
remarks.

Let us take an example. Savages who live by hunting are pursuing a
quarry, an elephant, let us say. For this they gather together and
organise their forces in a definite way. What is the *aim* of this, and
the *means?* The aim is obviously to catch or to kill the elephant, and
the means is to join forces to pursue the animal. *By what* is the aim
prompted? By the *wants* of the human *organism*. Now *by what* are the
means determined? *By the conditions of the chase*. Do the wants of the
human body depend on man's will? No, they do not; in general, that is
the department of *physiology*, not of *sociology*. What then can we at
present demand of sociology, in this connection? We can demand an
explanation of the reason *why* men, in seeking to satisfy their wants
-- for instance, the need for food -- sometimes enter into certain kinds
of mutual relations, and sometimes into quite other kinds. *Sociology
--* in the person of Marx -- *explains this circumstance as the outcome
of the state of their productive forces*. Now the question is: does the
state of these forces depend on human will, or on the *aims* pursued by
men? To this, sociology, again in the person of Marx, replies that it
does not. If there is no such dependence, then that signifies that these
forces are brought into being by virtue of a definite necessity, one
that is determined by given conditions external to man.

What is the inference to be made? It is that if hunting is an *expedient
activity* on the part of the savage, then this fact in no way detracts
from the significance of Marx's observation *that the production
relations arising among savages who are hunters* come into being by
virtue of conditions *that do not fully depend on that expedient
activity*. In other words, if the primitive hunter *consciously* strives
to kill as much game as possible, it does not follow therefrom that the
communism characteristic of that hunter's everyday life has evolved as
*the expedient outcome of his activities*. No, this communism has
arisen, or rather has been *preserved* of itself -- seeing that it came
into being long ago -- as the *unconscious*, that is, *necessary*,
result of an organisation of labour in a way quite independent of the
will of men. ^[\[179\]](#n179)^ It is this that the Kantian Stammler has
failed to grasp; it is here that he has lost his bearings, and led
astray our Struves, Bulgakovs and other *temporary* Marxists, whose
names are known to the Lord alone. ^[\[180\]](#n180)^

Continuing his critical observations, Stammler says, that if social
development were to take place exclusively in virtue of *causal
necessity*, it would be patently senseless consciously to try to further
it. The following is the alternative, in his opinion: either I consider
a given phenomenon a *necessity*, that is, inevitable, in which case
there is no need for me to help further it, *or else* my activity is
essential for that phenomenon *to take place*, in which case it cannot
be termed a necessity. Who would attempt to assist the necessary, that
is, inevitable, rising of the sun? ^[\[181\]](#n181)^

This is an amazingly vivid revelation of dualism characteristic of
people steeped in Kantianism: *with them*, *thinking is always divorced
from being*.

The rising of the sun is in no way connected with men's social
relations, either as cause or as effect. As a natural phenomenon, it can
therefore be contraposed to men's conscious aspirations, which, too,
have no causal tie with it. But it is quite different when we have to
deal with *social* phenomena, with history. We already know that history
is made by men; therefore, human aspirations cannot but be a factor of
the movement of history. But men make history in one way and not in
another, in consequence of a particular necessity which we have already
dealt with above. Once this necessity is given, *then given too*, *as
its effect*, *are those human aspirations which are an inevitable factor
of social development*. *Men's aspirations do not exclude necessity*,
*but are themselves determined by it*. It is therefore a grave logical
error to contrapose them to necessity.

When a social revolution is brought about by a class striving for its
liberation, that class acts in a way that is more or less expedient in
achieving the aim desired; in any case its activities are the *cause* of
that revolution. However, together with all the aspirations that have
brought them about, these activities are themselves a *consequence* of a
definite course of the economic development, and are therefore
themselves determined by *necessity*.

Sociology becomes a science only in the measure in which it succeeds in
understanding the appearance of aims in social man (social 'teleology'),
as a necessary consequence of a social process ultimately determined by
the course of economic development.

Highly characteristic is the circumstance that consistent antagonists of
the materialist explanation of history see themselves forced to prove
the *impossibility* of sociology *as a science*. This means that the
'*critical approach*' *is now becoming* an obstacle *to the further
scientific development of our times*. In this connection, an interesting
problem arises for those who are trying to find a scientific explanation
of the history of philosophical theories. That problem is: to determine
in what way this role of the 'critical approach' is linked up with the
struggle of the classes in present-day society.

If I endeavour to participate in a movement whose triumph I consider an
historical necessity, then that means that I look upon my own activities
as an indispensable link in the chain of conditions whose sum will
necessarily ensure the triumph of a movement that I hold dear. It means
nothing more nor less than that. A dualist will fail to understand, but
all this will be perfectly clear to anybody who has assimilated the
theory of *the unity of subject and object*, and has understood how that
unity reveals itself in social phenomena.

Highly noteworthy is the fact that theoreticians of Protestantism in the
United States of America seem unable to understand the contraposition of
freedom and necessity that has been exciting the minds of so many
ideologists of the European bourgeoisie. H Bargy says that 'in America
the most positive instructors in the field of energy (*professeurs
d'énergie*) are little prone to recognise freedom of the will'.
^[\[182\]](#n182)^ He ascribes this to their preference, as men of
action, for 'fatalist solutions'. He is wrong, however, since fatalism
has nothing to do with the matter. This is to be seen in his own remark
about the moralist Jonathan Edwards: 'Edwards' point of view\... is that
of any man of action. To anyone who has had an aim once in his lifetime
freedom is the faculty of putting all his soul in the service of that
aim.' ^[\[183\]](#n183)^ This is well put, and closely resembles Hegel's
'willing nothing but oneself'. But when a man 'wills nothing but
himself', he is in no way a fatalist: it is then that he is precisely a
*man of action*.

Kantianism is not a philosophy of struggle, or a philosophy of men of
action. It is a philosophy of half-hearted people, a philosophy of
compromise.

The means of removing the existing social evil, Engels says, must be
*discovered* in the existing material conditions of production, not
*invented* by one social reformer or another. ^[\[184\]](#n184)^
Stammler is in agreement with this, but accuses Engels of unclear
thinking, since in Stammler's opinion the gist of the matter lies in
ascertaining '*the method with the aid of which* this discovery must be
made'. ^[\[185\]](#n185)^ This objection, which merely reveals
Stammler's vague thinking, is eliminated by simply mentioning the fact
that though the nature of the 'method' is in such cases determined by a
great variety of 'factors', the latter can all be ultimately referred to
the course of the economic development. The very fact of the appearance
of *Marx's theory* was determined by the development of the capitalist
mode of production, whereas the predominance of utopianism in
pre-Marxist socialism is quite understandable in a society suffering not
only from the development of the aforementioned mode of production, but
also (and in greater degree) from the *insufficiency of that
development*.

It would be superfluous to dilate on the matter. The reader will perhaps
not complain if, in concluding this article, I will draw his attention
to the measure in which *the tactical 'method*' of Marx and Engels is
intimately bound up with the fundamental theses of their historical
theory.

This theory tells us, as we already know, that mankind always sets
itself only such tasks that it can solve, for 'the problem itself arises
only when the material conditions for its solution are already present
or at least in the course of formation'. ^[\[186\]](#n186)^ Where these
conditions *already exist*, the state of things is not quite the same as
it is where they are still '*in the course of formation*'. In the former
instance the time for a 'leap' *has already arrived*; in the latter
instance the '*leap*' *is*, for the time being, a *matter* of the more
or less distant *future*, *'*an ultimate aim' whose approach *is
prepared by a series of 'gradual changes*' in the mutual relations
between social classes. What role should be played by innovators during
the period in which a 'leap' is *still impossible?* It evidently remains
for them to contribute to the 'gradual changes', that is, they must, in
other words, try to bring about *reforms*. In this way, both the
'*ultimate aim*' and *reforms* find their place, and the very
contraposition of reform and 'ultimate aim' loses all meaning, is
relegated to the sphere of utopian legends. Those who would make such a
contraposition -- whether they are German 'revisionists' like Eduard
Bernstein, or Italian 'revolutionary syndicalists' ^[\[187\]](#n187)^
like those who took part in the latest syndicalist congress in Ferrara
-- will show themselves equally incapable of understanding the spirit
and the method of modern scientific socialism. This is a good thing to
remember at present, when reformism and syndicalism permit themselves to
speak for Marx.

And what healthy optimism breathes in the words that mankind always sets
itself only such tasks that it can solve. They do not, of course, mean
that any solution of mankind's great problems, as suggested by the first
utopian one meets, is a good one.

A utopian is one thing; mankind, or, more precisely, a social class
representative of mankind's highest interests in a given period, is
something else. As Marx has very well said: '*With the thoroughness of
the historical action*, *the size of the mass* whose action it is *will
therefore increase*.' ^[\[188\]](#n188)^ This is conclusive condemnation
of a utopian attitude towards great historical problems. If Marx
nevertheless thought that mankind never sets itself unachievable tasks,
then his words are, from the viewpoint of theory, only a new way of
expressing the idea of the unity of subject and object in its
application to the process of historical development; from the viewpoint
of practice they express that calm and courageous faith in the
achievement of the 'ultimate aim' which once prompted our unforgettable
NG Chernyshevsky to exclaim fervently: 'Come what may, we shall win.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or by the MIA, which are
marked as such. The biographical notes are those included in the index
to this volume.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} Democritus (c460-370BC) -- Greek materialist
philosopher.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} Note to the German edition of 1910: My friend Viktor
Adler was perfectly right when, in an article he published on the day of
Engels' funeral, he observed that socialism, as understood by Marx and
Engels, is not only an economic but a universal doctrine (I am quoting
from the Italian edition): Frederico Engels, *L'Economia politica*.
*Primi lineamenti di una critica dell'economia politica*. *Con
introduzione e notizia bio-bibliografiche di Filippo Turati, Vittorio
Adler e Carlo Kautsky e con appendice*. *Prima edizione italiana*,
*publicata in occasione della morte dell'autore (5 agosto 1895)*
(Milano, 1895), pp 12-17. However, the truer this appraisal of socialism
'as understood by Marx and Engels', the stranger the impression produced
when Adler conceives it possible to replace the *materialist* foundation
of this 'universal doctrine' by a *Kantian* foundation. What is one to
think of a universal doctrine whose philosophical foundation is in no
way connected with its entire structure? Engels wrote: 'Marx and I were
pretty well the only people to rescue conscious dialectics from German
idealistic philosophy and apply it in the materialist conception of
nature and history.' (See the preface to the third edition of
*Anti-Dühring*, p xiv.) \[F Engels, *Anti-Dühring* (Moscow, 1975), p 15
-- Editor\] Thus, despite the assertions of certain of their present-day
followers, the founders of scientific socialism were *conscious
materialists*, not only in the field of history, but in natural science
as well. \[Viktor Adler (1852-1918) -- reformist leader of the Austrian
Social Democratic Party and the Second International.\]

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) -- German philosopher,
founder of classical German idealism; Ernst Mach (1838-1916) -- Austrian
physicist and idealist philosopher, one of the founders of
empirio-criticism; Richard Avenarius (1843-1896) -- German idealist
philosopher, formulated the basic principles of empirio-criticism;
Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-1932) -- German chemist and idealist philosopher;
exponent of energism, a variety of Machism; Joseph Dietzgen (1828-1888)
-- German worker, social democrat, philosopher; arrived independently at
the fundamentals of dialectical materialism.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) -- Italian philosopher,
objective idealist. *On the Doctrine of the Modernists*, Encyclical of
Pope Pius X, 8 September 1907, a veritable broadside against the
influence of Modernism both outwith and, especially, within the Church,
available at \<
[http://www.papalencyclicals.net/Pius10/p10pasce.htm]{.underline} \> --
MIA.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} The philosophy of Marx and Engels is the subject of W
Weryho's book *Marx als Philosoph* (Bern and Leipzig, 1894). It would,
however, be difficult to imagine a less satisfactory work. Wladyslaw
Weryho (1868-1916) -- pioneer Polish philosopher, editor of *Przeglad
Filozoficzny* (*The Philosophical Review*) during 1898-1916 \[MIA\].

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), pp 64-83 -- Editor.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher* was published in
Paris and edited by Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge. Only one double number,
containing a number of works by Marx and Engels, was issued, in February
1844 -- Editor.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} Note to the German edition of 1910: Of considerable
importance for a characterisation of the evolution of Marx's
philosophical views is his letter of 20 October 1843 to Feuerbach.
Inviting Feuerbach to come out against Schelling, Marx wrote the
following: 'You are just the man for this because you are *Schelling in
reverse*. The *sincere thought --* we may believe the best of our
opponent -- of the *young* Schelling for the realisation of which
however he did not possess the necessary qualities except imagination,
he had no energy but vanity, no driving force but opium, no organ but
the irritability of a feminine perceptivity, this sincere thought of his
youth, which in his case remained a fantastic youthful dream, has become
truth, reality, manly seriousness in your case. Schelling is therefore
an *anticipated caricature* of you, and as soon as reality confronts the
caricature, the latter must dissolve into thin air. I therefore regard
you as the necessary, natural -- that is, nominated by Their Majesties
Nature and History -- opponent of Schelling. Your struggle with him is
the struggle of the imagination of philosophy with philosophy itself.'
(K Grün, *Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass*, Volume
1 (Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1874), p 361) \[Karl Marx and Frederick
Engels, Letter of 3 October 1843, *Collected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow,
1975), pp 350-51 -- Editor\] This seems to show that Marx understood
Schelling's youthful thought in the meaning of a materialist monism.
Feuerbach, however, did not share this opinion of Marx's, as will be
seen from his reply to the latter. He considered that already in his
first works Schelling 'merely converts the idealism of *thought* into
the idealism of the *imagination*, and attributes just as little reality
to things as to the 'Ich', with the only difference that it had a
different appearance, and that he replaced the determinate 'Ich' by the
non-determinate Absolute, and gave idealism a pantheistic colouring'
(ibid, p 402). Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach (1804-1872) -- German
materialist philosopher, atheist; Karl Grün (1817-1887) -- German
petit-bourgeois socialist, one of the theoreticians of 'true socialism';
Friedrich Wilhelm Schelling (1775-1854) -- German idealist philosopher,
representative of classical German philosophy.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} See his interesting book *Germany on the Eve of the
Revolution of 1848* (St Petersburg, 1906), pp 228-29. Friedrich Albert
Lange (1828-1875) -- German philosopher, neo-Kantian; Pavel Abramovich
Berlin (1877-?) -- Russian publicist, social democrat, Menshevik.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} Note to the German edition of 1910: F Engels wrote:
'The course of evolution of Feuerbach is that of an Hegelian -- a never
quite orthodox Hegelian, it is true -- into a materialist; an evolution
which at a definite stage necessitates a complete rupture with the
idealist system of his predecessor. With irresistible force Feuerbach is
finally driven to the realisation that the Hegelian premundane existence
of the "absolute idea," the "pre-existence of the logical categories"
before the world existed, is nothing more than the fantastic survival of
the belief in the existence of an extramundane creator; that the
material, sensuously perceptible world to which we ourselves belong is
the only reality; and that our consciousness and thinking, however
suprasensuous they may seem, are the product of a material, bodily
organ, the brain. Matter is not a product of mind, but mind itself is
merely the highest product of matter. This is, of course, pure
materialism.' (*Ludwig Feuerbach* (Stuttgart, 1907), pp 17-18) \[Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p
348 -- Editor\]

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} Feuerbach, 'Über Spiritualismus und Materialismus',
*Werke*, Volume 10, p 129.

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 4, p 249.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} Ibid, p 249. René Descartes (1596-1650) -- deist
philosopher, mathematician and naturalist.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} Feuerbach himself has very well said that the
*beginnings* of any philosophy are determined by the prior state of
philosophical thought (Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 193).

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} Note to the German edition of 1910: F Lange states:
'A genuine materialist will always be prone to turn his glance to the
totality of external Nature and consider Man merely as a wavelet in the
ocean of the eternal movement of matter. To the materialist Man's nature
is merely a particular instance of general physiology, just as thinking
is a special instance in the chain of physical processes of life.'
(*Geschichte des Materialismus*, Volume 2 (Leipzig, 1902), p 74). But
Théodore Dézamy, too, in his *Code de la Communauté* (Paris, 1843)
proceeds from the nature of Man (the human organism), yet no one will
doubt that he shares the views of French eighteenth-century materialism.
Incidentally, Lange makes no mention of Dézamy, whilst Marx counts him
among the French Communists whose communism was more scientific than
that of Cabet, for instance. 'Like Owen\... *Dézamy*, *Gay* and others,
developed the teaching of *materialism* as the teaching of *real
humanism* and the *logical* basis of *communism*.' (*Aus dem
literarischen Nachlass von* *Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand
Lassalle*, Volume 2, p 240) \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 131 -- Editor\] At the time Marx and
Engels were writing the work just quoted (*The Holy Family*), they as
yet differed in their appraisal of Feuerbach's philosophy. Marx called
it 'materialism coinciding with humanism': 'But just as *Feuerbach* is
the representative of *materialism* coinciding with *humanism* in the
*theoretical* domain, French and English *socialism* and *communism*
represent *materialism* coinciding with *humanism* in the *practical*
domain.' In general Marx regarded materialism as the necessary
theoretical foundation of communism and socialism. Engels, on the
contrary, held the view that Feuerbach had once and for all put an end
to the old contraposing of spiritualism and materialism (ibid, pp 232
and 196). \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume 4
(Moscow, 1975), pp 125, 105 -- Editor\] As we have already seen, he,
too, later took note of the evolution, in Feuerbach's development, from
idealism to materialism. Étienne Cabet (1788-1856) -- French utopian
communist; author of *Voyage en Icarie*; Théodore Dézamy (1803-1850) --
French publicist, representative of the revolutionary trend of utopian
communism; Jules Gay (1807-?) -- French utopian communist; Robert Owen
(1771-1858) -- British utopian socialist.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 263.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} Ibid, p 261.

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} Ibid, p 262.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} Ibid, p 295.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} Ibid, p 350.

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} Note to the German edition of 1910: By that time
Feuerbach had already written the following noteworthy lines: 'Despite
all the oppositeness of practical realism in the so-called sensualism
and materialism of the English and the French -- a realism that denies
any speculation -- and the spirit of *all* of Spinoza, they nevertheless
have their *ultimate* foundation in the viewpoint on *matter* expressed
by Spinoza, as a metaphysician, in the celebrated proposition: "Matter
is an Attribute of God."' (K Grün, *L Feuerbach*, Volume 1, pp 324-25)
Baruch Spinoza (1632-1677) -- Dutch materialist philosopher,
rationalist, atheist.

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 2

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} Ibid, p 392.

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Note to the German edition of 1910: In *Die heilige
Familie* (Volume 2 of *Nachlass*) Marx remarks: 'Hegel's *Geschichte der
Philosophie* presents French materialism as the *realisation* of the
Substance of Spinoza' (p 240). \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 131 -- Editor\]

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} Note to the German edition of 1910: 'How do we
cognise the external world? How do we cognise the *inner* world? For
ourselves we have no other means than we have for others! Do I know
anything about myself without the medium of my senses? Do I exist if I
do not exist outside myself, that is, outside my *Vorstellung*? But how
do I know that I exist? How do I know that I exist, not in my
*Vorstellung*, but in my sensations, in actual fact, unless I perceive
myself through my senses?' (Feuerbach's *Nachgelassene Aphorismen* in
Grün's book, Volume 2, p 311)

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 334, and Volume 10,
pp 186-87.

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} Note to the German edition of 1910: I particularly
recommend to the reader's attention the thought expressed by Engels in
*Anti-Dühring*, that the laws of external Nature and the laws governing
man's bodily and mental existence are 'two classes of laws which we can
separate from each other at most only in thought but not in reality' (p
157). \[F Engels, *Anti-Dühring* (Moscow, 1975), p 132 -- Editor\] This
is the selfsame *doctrine of the unity of being and thinking*, *of
object and subject*. Regarding space and time, see Chapter 5 of Part 1
of the work just mentioned. This chapter shows that to Engels, just as
to Feuerbach, space and time are not only forms of contemplation, but
also forms of being (pp 41-42). Eugen Dühring (1833-1921) -- German
eclectic philosopher and vulgar economist.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 5 (Moscow, 1975), p 3 -- Editor.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} 'Dem Denken', he says, 'geht das Sein voran; ehe du
die Qualität denkst, *fühlst* du die Qualität' (Feuerbach, *Werke*,
Volume 2, p 253). \['Being comes before thinking, before you think about
quality you feel it.'\]

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p
173 -- Editor.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} Note to the German edition of 1910: Feuerbach said
of his philosophy: 'My philosophy cannot be dealt with exhaustively by
the pen; it finds no room on paper.' This statement, however, was only
of theoretical significance to him. He went on to say: 'Since for it
\[that is, his philosophy\] the truth is not that which has been
thought, but that which has been not only thought, but seen, heard and
felt.' (*Nachgelassene Aphorismen* in Grün's book, Volume 2, p 306)

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} See my article 'Bernstein and Materialism' in the
symposium *A Critique of Our Critics*. \[Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 326-39 -- Editor\]
Dénis Diderot (1713-1784) -- French materialist philosopher, an
ideologist of the French Revolution of the eighteenth century; head of
the Encyclopaedists; Julien La Mettrie (1709-1751) -- French physician
and materialist philosopher; Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) -- English
materialist philosopher.

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} *Hume*, *sa vie*, *sa philosophie*, p 108.
\[Plekhanov is quoting from the French translation of Huxley's *Hume:
His Life and Philosophy*. We are quoting from the original, p 80 --
Editor.\] David Hume (1711-1776) -- Scottish philosopher, subjective
idealist; Thomas Huxley (1825-1895) -- British naturalist, follower of
Darwin.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} *Hume*, *sa vie*, *sa philosophie*, p 190 \[p 82\].

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) -- German naturalist;
Darwinist.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} Cf also *Chapter Three* in his book *L'âme et le
système nerveux*. *Hygiene et pathologie* (Paris, 1906). August Forel
(1848-1931) -- Swiss neurologist, psychiatrist and entomologist.

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, pp 348-49.

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} *Die psychischen Fähigkeiten der Ameisen*, etc
(München, 1901), p 7.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} Ibid, pp 7-8,

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} Note to the German edition of 1910: Moreover, on
his return from exile, Chernyshevsky published an article, 'The
Character of Human Knowledge', in which he proves, very wittily, that a
person who doubts the existence of the external world should also doubt
the fact of his own existence. Chernyshevsky was always a faithful
adherent of Feuerbach. The fundamental idea of his article can be
expressed in the following words of Feuerbach: 'I am not different from
things and creatures without me because I distinguish myself from them;
I distinguish myself because I am different from them physically,
organically, and in fact. Consciousness presupposes being, is merely
conscious being, that-which-is as realised and presented in the mind.'
(*Nachgelassene Aphorismen* in Grün's book, Volume 2, p 306) Nikolai
Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky (1828-1889) -- Russian revolutionary democrat,
philosopher, writer and literary critic.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} *Die psychischen Fähigkeiten*, same page.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 322. I highly
recommend these words of Feuerbach's to the attention of Mr Bogdanov. Cf
also p 249. Alexander Alexandrovich Bogdanov (1873-1928) -- Russian
social democrat, philosopher and sociologist. Tried to create his own
philosophical system -- empiriomonism (a variant of Machism).

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} 'Der absolute Geist Hegel's ist nichts Anderes als
der abstrakte, von sich selbst abgesonderte sogenannte *endliche* Geist,
wie das unendliche Wesen der Theologie nichts Anderes ist, als das
abstrakte endliche Wesen.' (Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 263) \['the
Hegelian Absolute Spirit is nothing other than the abstract, distinct
from itself, so-called, finite Spirit in the same way as the infinite
essence of theology is nothing other than the abstract finite
essence.'\]

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} *La civilisation primitive*, Volume 2 (Paris,
1876), p 143. It should, however, be observed that Feuerbach made a
truly masterly surmise in this matter. He said: 'Der Begriff des Objects
ist ursprünglich gar nichts Anderes als der Begriff *eines andern* Ich
-- so fasst der Mensch in der Kindheit alle Dinge als freithätige,
willkürliche Wesen auf, daher ist der Begriff des Objects überhaupt
vermittelt durch den Begriff des Du des gegenständlichen Ich.' (Volume
2, pp 321-22) \['the concept of the Object is originally nothing but the
concept of another "Ego" -- so man in his childhood apprehends all
things as free-acting self-willed essences. Therefore the concept of the
object is generally mediated through the concept of the Tu of the
objective "Ego."'\] Edward Burnett Tylor (1832-1917) -- English
anthropologist, student of primitive culture.

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} Note to the German edition of 1910: See Théodore
Gomperz, *Les penseurs de la Grèce*, Volume 2 (Trad par Aug Reymond,
Lausanne, 1905), pp 414-15. Theodor Gomperz (1832-1912) -- German
positivist philosopher and philologist, historian of ancient literature.

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} Note to the German edition of 1910: Feuerbach
called 'cud chewers' (Wiederkäuer) those thinkers who tried to revive an
obsolete philosophy. Unfortunately, such people are particularly
numerous today, and have created an extensive literature in Germany, and
partly in France. They are now beginning to multiply in Russia as well.

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 335 -- Editor. Eduard Bernstein (1850-1932)
-- leader of the extreme opportunist wing of the German social democracy
and the Second International, theoretician of revisionism and reformism;
Benedetto Croce (1866-1952) -- Italian philosopher, historian, literary
critic and politician; was a critic of Marxism; Conrad Schmidt
(1863-1932) -- German social democrat, revisionist.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} See his article 'Die psychophysiologische
Identitätstheorie als wissenschaftliches Postulat', in the symposium
*Festschrift I Rosenthal*, Part 1 (Leipzig, 1906), pp 119-32.

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 339.

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} Note to the German edition of 1910: Ernst Mach and
his followers act in exactly the same way. First they transform
*sensation* into an independent essence, non-contingent upon the sensing
*body --* an essence which they call an element. Then they declare that
this essence contains the resolution of the contradiction between being
and thinking, subject and object. This reveals the grossness of the
error committed by those who assert that Mach is close to Marx.

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, pp 362-63.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 10, pp 308.

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} *Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften*, Volume
5, p 708. Karl Diehl (1864-1943) -- German economist and sociologist.

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 5 (Moscow, 1975), p 4 -- Editor.

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} Note to the German edition of 1910: This accounts
for the reservations always made by Feuerbach when speaking of
materialism. For instance: 'When I go backward from this point, I am in
complete agreement with the materialists; when I go forward, I differ
from them.' (*Nachgelassene Aphorismen* in K Grün's book, Volume 2, p
308) The meaning of this statement will be seen from the following
words: 'I, too, recognise the Idea, but only in the sphere of mankind,
politics, morals and philosophy.' (Grün, Volume 2, p 307) But whence
Idea in politics and morals? This question is not answered by our
'recognising' the Idea.

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 343.

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} Ibid, p 344.

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} Note to the German edition of 1910: Incidentally,
Feuerbach too thinks that the 'human being' is created by history. Thus
he says: 'I think only as a subject educated by history, generalised,
united with the whole, with the genus, the spirit of world history. My
thoughts do not have their beginning and basis directly in my particular
subjectivity, but are the outcome; their beginning and their basis are
those of world history itself.' (K Grün, Volume 2, p 309). Thus we see
in Feuerbach the embryo of a materialist understanding of history. In
this respect, however, he does not go further than Hegel (see my article
'For the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel's Death', *Neue Zeit*, 1890
\[Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow,
1974), pp 401-26 -- Editor\]), and even lags behind him. Together with
Hegel, he stresses the significance of what the great German idealist
called the geographic basis of world history. 'The course of the history
of mankind', he says, 'is certainly prescribed to it, since man follows
the course of Nature, the course taken by streams. Men go wherever they
find room, and the kind of place that suits them best. Men settle in a
particular locality, and are conditioned by the place they live in. The
essence of India is the essence of the Hindu. What he is, what he had
become, is merely the product of the East-Indian sun, the East-Indian
air, the East-Indian water, the East-Indian animals and plants. How
could man originally appear if not out of Nature? Men, who become
acclimatised to any kind of nature, have sprung from Nature, which
tolerates no extremes.' (*Nachgelassene Aphorismen*, K Grün, Volume 2, p
330)

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 20. The manuscript of the earlier
version shows that, having written the words 'In his *Contribution to
the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law*, he has shown that relations
of people in society\...', Plekhanov intended to continue his thought.
Then he crossed out this sentence and instead cited a passage from the
preface to Marx's *Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*,
which began with the words: 'Legal relations' and added: 'he wrote
there'. So it strongly appeared as if the cited passage had been taken
from the *Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law --*
Editor.

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} *Nachlass\...*, Volume I, p 477. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 457 --
Editor\]

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} Feuerbach, *Werke*, Volume 2, p 345.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} Engels was not referring to himself but to all who
shared his views. 'Wir bedürfen\...', he said; there can be no doubt
that Marx was one of those who shared his views.

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} See Part II of *La Misère de la philosophie*,
Observations, First and Second. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), pp 165-66 -- Editor\]
Addendum to the German edition of 1910: It should however be noted that
Feuerbach too criticised Hegelian dialectic from the materialist
viewpoint. 'What kind of dialectic is it', he asked, 'that contradicts
natural origin and development? How do matters stand with its
"necessity\"? Where is the "objectivity" of a psychology, of a
philosophy in general, which abstract itself from the only categorical
and imperative, fundamental and solid objectivity, that of physical
Nature, a philosophy which considers that its ultimate aim, absolute
truth and fulfilment of the spirit lie in a full departure from that
Nature, and in an absolute subjectiveness, unrestricted by any Fichtean
non-ego, or Kantian thing-in-itself.' (K Grün, Volume 1, p 399)

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 29
-- Editor.

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} *Wissenschaft der Logik*, Volume 1 (Nürnberg,
1812), pp 313-14.

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} Regarding the matter of 'leaps' see my pamphlet *Mr
Tikhomirov's Grief* (St Petersburg, M Malykh's Publishing House), pp
6-14. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1
(Moscow, 1974), pp 365-72 -- Editor\]

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} 'Bei der Allmählichkeit bleibt der Übergang von
einer Bewegungsform zur anderen immer ein Sprung, eine entscheidende
Wendung. So der Übergang von der Mechanik der Weltkörper zu der
kleineren Massen auf einem einzelnen Weltkörper; ebenso von der Mechanik
der Massen zu der Mechanik der Moleküle -- die Bewegungen umfassend, die
wir in der eigentlich sogenannten Physik untersuchen', etc
(*Anti-Dühring*, p 57). \['In spite of all gradualness, the transition
from one form of motion to another always remains a leap, a decisive
change. This is true of the transition from the mechanics of celestial
bodies to that of smaller masses on a particular celestial body; it is
equally true of the transition from the mechanics of masses to the
mechanics of molecules -- including the forms of motion investigated in
physics proper\...' (Frederick Engels, *Anti-Dühring*, Moscow, 1975, p
80 -- Editor\]

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} *Die Mutationen*, pp 7-8. Emile Justin Armand
Gautier (1837-1920) -- French biological chemist \[MIA\]; Hugo de Vries
(1848-1935) -- Dutch botanist; introduced the mutation theory.

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} *Arten*, etc, p 421.

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} To say nothing of Spinoza, it should not be
forgotten that many French eighteenth-century materialists were
favourably inclined towards the theory of the 'animism of matter'. Raoul
Heinrich Francé (1874-1943) -- German botanist, populariser of biology.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} Note to the German edition of 1910: See Engels,
*Ludwig Feuerbach*, pp 1-5. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), pp 337-42- Editor\] Alexander Ivanovich
Herzen (1812-1870) -- Russian revolutionary democrat, materialist
philosopher, writer and publicist.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p
29- Editor.

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} See my article 'Belinsky and Rational Reality' in
the symposium *Twenty Years*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1980), pp 387-434 -- Editor\]
Vissarion Grigoryevich Belinsky (1811-1848) -- Russian revolutionary
democrat, literary critic and publicist, materialist philosopher.

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} See the introduction to *Zur Kritik der politischen
Oekonomie*. \[Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 20 -- Editor\]

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} Note to the German edition of 1910: In this case,
Feuerbach, as I have already said, did not go further than Hegel.

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} *Die Urgesellschaft* (Stuttgart, 1891), pp 20-21.
Lewis Henry Morgan (1818-1881) -- outstanding American scientist,
archaeologist, ethnographer; engaged in the study of primitive society.

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} *Die Indianer Nordamerikas* (Leipzig, 1865), p 91.
Theodor Waitz (1821-1864) -- German anthropologist, philosopher and
educationalist.

[[78.]{.info}]{#n78} *Au coeur de l'Afrique*, Volume 1 (Paris, 1875), p
199. Georg August Schweinfurth (1836-1925) -- German anthropologist and
naturalist; explorer of Africa.

[[79.]{.info}]{#n79} *Au coeur de l'Afrique*, Volume 2, p 94. Concerning
the influence of climate on *agriculture*, see also Ratzel, *Die Erde
and das Leben*, Volume 2 (Leipzig and Wien), 1902, pp 540-41.

[[80.]{.info}]{#n80} *Anthropogeographie* (Stuttgart, 1882), p 92.
Friedrich Ratzel (1844-1904) -- German geographer and ethnographer;
regarded geographical environment as the chief factor in the development
of human society.

[[81.]{.info}]{#n81} *Das Kapital*, Volume 1, pp 524-26. \[Karl Marx,
*Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 481 -- Editor\]

[[82.]{.info}]{#n82} *Völkerkunde*, Volume 1 (Leipzig), 1887, p 56.

[[83.]{.info}]{#n83} \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 159 -- Editor\] Napoleon I said: 'La nature
des armes décide de la composition des armées, des places de campagne,
des marches, des positions, des ordres de bataille, du tracé et des
profils des places fortes; ce que met une opposition constante entre le
système de guerre des anciens et celui des modernes.' (*Précis des
guerres de César* (Paris, 1836), pp 87-88. \['the nature of arms decide
the composition of the armies, the theatres of war, the marches, the
positions, the battle array, the plan and profile of fortresses. This
makes constant opposition between the old system of war and the modern
one.'\]

[[84.]{.info}]{#n84} *Völkerkunde*, Volume 1, p 83. It must be noted
that at the early stages of development the enslavement of captives is
sometimes nothing more than their *forcible incorporation in the
conquerors' social organisation*, *with equal rights being granted*.
*Here there is no use of the surplus labour* of the captive, but only
the common advantage derived *from collaboration with him*. However,
even this form of slavery presupposes the existence of definite
productive forces, and a definite organisation of production.

[[85.]{.info}]{#n85} EJ Eyre, *Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of
Australia* (London, 1847), p 243. Edward John Eyre (1815-1901) --
British colonial governor.

[[86.]{.info}]{#n86} Plekhanov is quoting from the French translation of
H Stanley's *In Darkest Africa*, that is, *Dans les ténèbres de
l'Afrique*, Volume 2 (Paris, 1890), p 91. We are quoting from the
original, Volume 2 (London, 1890), p 92 -- Editor. Henry Morton Stanley
(real name John Rowlands, 1841-1904) -- British geographer, traveller
and explorer of Africa.

[[87.]{.info}]{#n87} Plekhanov is quoting from the French translation of
R Burton's *The Lake Regions of Central Africa*, that is, *Voyage aux
grands lacs de l'Afrique orientale* (Paris, 1862), p 666. We are quoting
from the original, Volume 2 (London, 1860), p 368 -- Editor. Richard
Burton (1821-1890) -- British geographer and traveller.

[[88.]{.info}]{#n88} *Völkerkunde*, Volume 1, p 93.

[[89.]{.info}]{#n89} This is admirably explained by Engels in the
chapters of his *Anti-Dühring* that deal with an analysis of the 'force
theory'. See also the book *Les maîtres de la guerre* by
Lieutenant-Colonel Rousset, professor at the École supérieure de guerre
(Paris, 1901). Setting forth the views of General Bonnal, the author of
this book writes: 'The social conditions obtaining in each epoch of
history exert a preponderant influence, not only on the military
organisation of a nation but also on the character, the abilities, and
the trends of its military men. Generals of the ordinary stamp make use
of the familiar and accepted methods, and march on towards successes or
reverses according to whether attendant circumstances are more or less
favourable to them\... As for the great captains, these subordinate to
their genius the means and procedures of warfare.' (p 20). How do they
do it? That is the most interesting part of the matter. It appears that,
'guided by a kind of divinatory instinct, they transform the means and
procedures in accordance with the parallel laws of a social evolution
whose decisive effect (and repercussion) on the technique of their art
they alone understand in their day' (ibid). Consequently, it remains for
us to discover the causal link between 'social evolution' and society's
economic development for a materialist explanation to be given to the
most unexpected successes in warfare. Rousset is himself very close to
giving such an explanation. His historical outline of the latest in the
military art, based on General Bonnal's unpublished papers, closely
resembles what we find set forth by Engels in the analysis mentioned
above. At places the resemblance approaches complete identity. Guillaume
Bonnal (1844-1917) -- French general, military theoretician and
historian; Léonce Rousset (1850-1938) -- professor at the Ecole
supérieure de la Guerre, author of works on the history of military
affairs.

[[90.]{.info}]{#n90} *Völkerkunde*, Volume 1, p 19.

[[91.]{.info}]{#n91} *Das Kapital* Volume 1, pp 524-26. \[Karl Marx,
*Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p 481 -- Editor\]

[[92.]{.info}]{#n92} See his *History of Civilisation in England*,
Volume 1 (Leipzig, 1865), pp 36-37. According to Buckle, one of the four
causes influencing the character of a people, viz, *the general aspect
of Nature*, acts chiefly on the imagination, a highly-developed
imagination engendering superstitions, which, in their turn, retard the
development of knowledge. By acting on the imagination of the natives,
the frequent earthquakes in Peru exercised an influence on the political
structure. If Spaniards and Italians are superstitious, that too is the
result of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions (ibid, pp 112-13). This
*direct* psychological influence is particularly strong at the early
stages of the development of civilisation. Modern science, however, has,
on the contrary, shown the striking similarity of the religious beliefs
of primitive tribes standing at the same level of economic development.
Buckle's view, borrowed by him from eighteenth-century writers, dates
back to Hippocrates. (See *Des airs*, *des eaux et des lieux*
(traduction de Coray, Paris, 1800), paras 76, 85, 86, 88, etc.) Henry
Thomas Buckle (1821-1862 -- English historian and positivist
sociologist; Hippocrates (c460-377BC) -- outstanding physician of
ancient Greece.

[[93.]{.info}]{#n93} *Völkerkunde*, Volume 1, p 10. John Stuart Mill,
repeating the words of 'one of the greatest thinkers of our time', said:
'Of all vulgar modes of escaping from the consideration of the effect of
social and moral influences on the human mind, the most vulgar is that
of attributing the diversities of conduct and character to inherent
natural differences.' (*Principles of Political Economy*, Volume 1, p
396) John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) -- English bourgeois economist and
positivist philosopher.

[[94.]{.info}]{#n94} Regarding race, see J Finot's interesting work *Le
préjugé des races* (Paris, 1905). Addendum to the German edition of
1910: Waitz writes: 'Certain Negro tribes are striking examples of the
link between the main occupation and the national character.'
(*Anthropologie der Naturvölker*, Volume 2, p 107) Jean Finot
(1858-1922) -- French publicist.

[[95.]{.info}]{#n95} Regarding the influence of the economy on the
nature of the social relations, see Engels, *Der Ursprung der Familie*,
*des Privateigenthums und des Staats* (eighth edition, Stuttgart, 1900);
also R Hildebrand, *Recht und Sitte auf den verschiedenen
(wirtschaftlichen) Kulturstufen*, Part 1 (Jena, 1896). Unfortunately,
Hildebrand makes poor use of his economic data. *Rechtsentstehung und
Rechtsgeschichte*, an interesting pamphlet by T Achelis (Leipzig, 1904),
considers law as a product of the development of social life, without
going deeply into the question of what the latter's development is
conditioned by. In MA Vaccaro's book, *Les bases sociologiques du droit
et de l'état* (Paris, 1898), many individual remarks are scattered which
throw light on certain aspects of the subject; on the whole, however,
Vaccaro himself does not seem fully at home with the problem. See also
Teresa Labriola's *Revisione critica delle più recenti teoriche sulle
origini del diritto* (Rome, 1901). Thomas Achelis (1850-1909) -- German
philosopher and ethnologist; Richard Hildebrand (1840-?) -- German
economist, theoretician of money circulation; Antonio Labriola
(1843-1904) Italian man of letters and Marxist philosopher; Michel
Angelo Vaccaro (1854-1937) -- Italian sociologist.

[[96.]{.info}]{#n96} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 1 (Moscow, 1973), p 421 -- Editor.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n97} *Der Ursprung der Sprache* (Mainz, 1877), p 331.
Ludwig Noiré (1829-1889) -- German philosopher.

[[98.]{.info}]{#n98} Ibid, p 341.

[[99.]{.info}]{#n99} Ibid, p 347.

[[100.]{.info}]{#n100} Ibid, p 369.

[[101.]{.info}]{#n101} *Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens*
(Berlin, 1894), p 201. Karl von den Steinen (1855-1929) -- German
ethnographer and traveller.

[[102.]{.info}]{#n102} Ibid, pp 205-06.

[[103.]{.info}]{#n103} Regarding such 'exclusively herdsmen' see Gustav
Fritsch's book *Die Eingeborenen Süd-Afrikas* (Breslau, 1872). 'The
Kaffir's ideal', Fritsch says, 'the object of his dreams, and that which
he loves to sing of, is his cattle, the most valuable of his property.
Songs lauding cattle, alternate with songs in honour of tribal chiefs,
in which the latter's cattle again play an important part.' (Volume 1, p
50) With the Kaffirs, cattle-tending is the most honourable of
occupations (ibid, p 85), and even war pleases the Kaffir chiefly
because it holds the promise of booty in the shape of cattle (ibid, p
79). 'Law-suits among the Kaffirs are the result of conflicts over
cattle.' (Ibid, p 322) Fritsch gives a highly interesting description of
the life of Bushman *hunters* (ibid, pp 424ff). Gustav Fritsch
(1838-1927) -- German traveller and scientist.

[[104.]{.info}]{#n104} Plekhanov is quoting from the French translation
of Lang's *Myth*, *Ritual and Religion*, that is, *Mythes*, *cultes et
religion* (trad par L Mirillier, Paris, 1896), p 332. We are quoting
from the original, Volume 2 (London, 1887), p 151 -- Editor. Andrew Lang
(1844-1912) -- Scottish scholar, dealt with the origins of religion and
mythology, and the history of literature.

[[105.]{.info}]{#n105} Worth recalling in this connection is R Andreé's
remark that man originally imagined his gods in the shape of animals.
'When man later anthropomorphised animals, there arose the mythical
transformation of men into animals.' (*Ethnographische Parallelen und
Vergleiche*, new series, Leipzig, 1889, p 116) The anthropomorphisation
of animals presupposes a relatively high level of the development of the
productive forces. Cf also Leo Frobenius, *Die Weltanschauung der
Naturvölker* (Weimar, 1898), p 24. Robert Brough Smyth (1830-1889) --
British-born engineer, in Australia from 1852, honorary secretary to the
Board for the Protection of Aborigines from 1860 \[MIA\]. Richard Andreé
(1835-1912) -- German ethnographer, author of works on comparative
ethnography; Leo Frobenius (1873-1938) -- German ethnographer and
archaeologist, explorer of Africa.

[[106.]{.info}]{#n106} *La civilisation primitive*, Volume 2 (Paris,
1876), p 322.

[[107.]{.info}]{#n107} Cf H Schurtz, *Vorgeschichte der Kultur* (Leipzig
and Wien, 1900), pp 559-64. I shall return to this matter later, apropos
of another question. Claude Henri Saint-Simon (1760-1825) -- great
French utopian socialist; Heinrich Schurtz (1863-1903) -- German
ethnographer and historian of culture.

[[108.]{.info}]{#n108} Note to the German edition of 1910: I shall
permit myself to refer the reader to my article in the journal
*Sovremenny Mir* entitled 'On the So-Called Religious Seekings in
Russia' (September 1909). In it, I also discussed the significance of
the mechanical arts for the development of religious concepts. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow,
1976), pp 306-413 -- Editor\]

[[109.]{.info}]{#n109} Karl Bücher (1847-1930) -- German economist and
statistician; Ernst Grosse (1862-1927) -- German sociologist,
ethnographer, historian of art; positivist; Yrjö Hirn (1870-?) --
Finnish aesthetician and historian of literature; Moritz Hörnes
(1852-1917) -- Austrian archaeologist and historian of primitive
culture; Garrick Mallery (1834-1894) -- American ethnographer and
historian; Gabriel de Mortillet (1821-1898) -- French anthropologist and
archaeologist; Sophus Müller (1846-1934) -- Danish archaeologist;
Richard Wallaschek (1860-1917) -- Austrian scholar in the fields of
linguistics and musical ethnology, specialist in primitive art.

[[110.]{.info}]{#n110} *Urgeschichte*, etc, p 38.

[[111.]{.info}]{#n111} *Arbeit und Rhythmus*, p 342.

[[112.]{.info}]{#n112} *Anfänge der Tonkunst*, p 257.

[[113.]{.info}]{#n113} Usually depicting animals too -- GP.

[[114.]{.info}]{#n114} Note to the German edition of 1910: Certain
Marxists in our country are known to have thought otherwise in the
autumn of 1905. They considered a *socialist* revolution possible in
Russia, since, they claimed, the country's productive forces were
sufficiently developed for such a revolution. \[This passage is
characteristic of Plekhanov's Menshevik stand concerning the character
of and the driving forces behind the Russian revolution. Convinced that
the revolution in Russia was to follow the bourgeois revolutions in the
West, Plekhanov held the erroneous view that a whole historic epoch must
separate the socialist from the bourgeois revolution. Plekhanov thought
that in Russia, where industrial development began later than in the
West, and where peasant population predominated, no conflict had as yet
matured between the productive forces and capitalist relations of
production, and so the objective conditions for a socialist revolution
in Russia were lacking -- Editor.\]

[[115.]{.info}]{#n115} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 21- Editor.

[[116.]{.info}]{#n116} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 21- Editor.

[[117.]{.info}]{#n117} Let us take slavery as an instance. At a certain
level of development it *fosters the growth* of the productive forces,
and then begins to *hamper that growth*. Its *disappearance* among the
civilised peoples of the West was due to their *economic development*.
(Concerning slavery in the ancient word, see Professor E Ciccotti's
interesting work *Il tramonto della schiavitú* (Turin, 1899).) In his
book *Journal of the Discovery of the Sources of the Nile* (1865), JH
Speke says that, among the Negroes, *slaves* consider it dishonest and
disgraceful to run away from a master who has paid money for them. To
this it might be added that these same *slaves* consider their condition
more honourable than that of the *hired* labourer. Such an outlook
corresponds to the phase 'when slavery is still a *progressive*
phenomenon'. Ettore Ciccotti (1863-1939) -- Italian politician,
professor of Roman history; John Hanning Speke (1827-1864) -- English
traveller and African explorer.

[[118.]{.info}]{#n118} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p 486 -- Editor.

[[119.]{.info}]{#n119} Rudolf Stammler (1859-1939) -- German jurist and
neo-Kantian philosopher.

[[120.]{.info}]{#n120} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p 503 -- Editor.

[[121.]{.info}]{#n121} Letter to Joseph Bloch, 21 \[-22\] September
1890. See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Correspondence*
(Moscow, 1975), p 395 -- Editor.

[[122.]{.info}]{#n122} Letter to W Borgius, 25 January 1894. See Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), pp
441-42 -- Editor.

[[123.]{.info}]{#n123} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), p 442 -- Editor.

[[124.]{.info}]{#n124} See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 5 (Moscow, 1976), p 4 -- Editor.

[[125.]{.info}]{#n125} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), p 442 -- Editor.

[[126.]{.info}]{#n126} Alfred Espinas (1844-1922) -- French sociologist
and psychologist.

[[127.]{.info}]{#n127} The hunters were preceded by the *gatherers* or
sammelvölker, as German scholars now term them. But all the savage
tribes we know have already passed that stage. Note to the German
edition of 2010: In his work on the origin of the family, Engels says
that purely hunting peoples exist only in the imagination of scholars.
Hunting tribes are 'gatherers' at the same time. However, as we have
seen, hunting has a most profound influence on the development of the
views and tastes of such peoples.

[[128.]{.info}]{#n128} Here is an example from another field. The
'population factor', as it is called by A Coste (see his *Les facteurs
de population dans l'évolution sociale*, Paris, 1901), undoubtedly has a
very big influence on social development. But Marx is absolutely right
in saying that the abstract laws of propagation exist only for animals
and plants. In human society the increase (or decline) of population
depends on that society's organisation, which is determined by its
economic structure. No abstract 'law of propagation' will explain
anything in the fact that the population of present-day France hardly
grows at all. Those sociologists and economists who see in the growth of
population the *primary* cause of social development are profoundly
mistaken (see A Loria, *La legge di populazione ed il sistema sociale*,
Siena, 1882). Adolphe Coste (1842-1901) -- French positivist
sociologist; Achille Loria (1857-1943) -- Italian sociologist and
economist, representative of vulgar political economy, falsifier of
Marxism.

[[129.]{.info}]{#n129} 'The villeins are ugly in shape, No man has seen
uglier. Each of them is 15 feet in stature, Some resemble giants, But
much too ugly, With humps both in front and behind.' Cf Henri Sée, *Les
classes rurales et le régime domanial en France au moyen âge* (Paris,
1901), p 554. Cf also Fr Meyer, *Die Stände*, *ihr Leben und Treiben*
(Marburg, 1882), p 8. Fritz Meyer (1864-?) -- German historian and
ethnographer; Henri Sée (1864-1936) -- French historian.

[[130.]{.info}]{#n130} 'We are men, just as they are, And capable of
suffering, just like they.'

[[131.]{.info}]{#n131} Abroteles Eleutheropoulos (1873-?) -- Greek
bourgeois sociologist; assistant professor of philosophy at the Zürich
University.

[[132.]{.info}]{#n132} *L'histoire de la philosophie*, *ce qu'elle a
été*, *ce qu'elle peut être* (Paris, 1888). François Joseph Picavet
(1851-1921) -- French historian of philosophy.

[[133.]{.info}]{#n133} *Wirtschaft und Philosophie\...*, Volume 1, p 98.
Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) -- outstanding French enlightener and
democrat; ideologist of the petit-bourgeoisie; Xenophanes -- Greek
philosopher of the sixth century BC.

[[134.]{.info}]{#n134} Ibid, p 99.

[[135.]{.info}]{#n135} Ibid, pp 99-101.

[[136.]{.info}]{#n136} Ibid, pp 103-07. Heraclitus (c530-470BC) -- Greek
materialist philosopher, one of the founders of dialectics.

[[137.]{.info}]{#n137} To say nothing of the fact that, in his
references to the economy of ancient Greece, Eleutheropoulos gives no
concrete presentation of it, confining himself to general statements
which here, as everywhere else, explain nothing.

[[138.]{.info}]{#n138} *Wirtschaft und Philosophie\...*, Volume 1, pp
16-17.

[[139.]{.info}]{#n139} Ibid, p 17.

[[140.]{.info}]{#n140} *Der sozialistische Akademiker*, no 20 (Berlin,
1895), p 374. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), pp 442-43 -- Editor\] François Pierre
Guillaume Guizot (1787-1874) -- French bourgeois statesman and
historian; François Auguste Mignet (1796-1884) -- French liberal
historian; Augustin Thierry (1795-1856) -- French historian, in his
works came close to an understanding of the role of material factors and
class struggle in the development of feudal society and the formation of
bourgeois society.

[[141.]{.info}]{#n141} See my article 'On the Role of Personality in
History' in my book *Twenty Years*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 283-315 -- Editor\]

[[142.]{.info}]{#n142} He called it *Greek* because, as he put it, 'its
fundamental theses had been expressed by the Greek Thales, and later
further developed by another Greek' (*Wirtschaft und Philosophie\...*,
Volume 1, p 17), that is, by Eleutheropoulos.

[[143.]{.info}]{#n143} See my preface to the second edition of my
Russian translation of the *Communist Manifesto*. \[See Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp
427-73 -- Editor\]

[[144.]{.info}]{#n144} *Die Entstehung der Stile aus der politischen
Oekonomie*, Part 1 (Brunswick and Leipzig, 1902), pp 19-20.

[[145.]{.info}]{#n145} Vladimir Maximovich Friche (1870-1929) -- Soviet
literary and art critic; before the revolution contributed to social
democratic publications; Nikolai Alexandrovich Rozhkov (1868-1927) --
Russian historian and publicist; representative of 'Legal Marxism'.

[[146.]{.info}]{#n146} Nikolai Konstantinovich Mikhailovsky (1842-1902)
-- Russian sociologist, publicist and literary critic. Waged a struggle
against Marxism in the legally published magazines which he edited.

[[147.]{.info}]{#n147} See *Souvenirs d'un hugolâtre* by Augustin
Challamel (Paris, 1885), p 259. In this case, Ingres revealed more
consistency than Delacroix, who, while he was a romanticist in painting,
retained a predilection for classical music. Hector Berlioz (1803-1869)
-- French composer; Augustin Challamel (1818-1894) -- French man of
letters; author of a number of books on the history of art; Eugène
Delacroix (1798-1863) -- French painter of the Romantic school; Victor
Hugo (1802-1885) -- French writer and poet; Jean Auguste Dominique
Ingres (1780-1867) -- French painter.

[[148.]{.info}]{#n148} Cf Challamel, op cit, p 258.

[[149.]{.info}]{#n149} And especially *in the history of the part* each
of them played therein, in expressing the temper of the times. As we
know, various ideologies and various branches of ideology come to the
fore at various times. For instance, in the Middle Ages theology played
far more important a part than at present; in primitive society dancing
is the most important art, whilst it is far from that nowadays, and so
on.

[[150.]{.info}]{#n150} E Chesneau's book *Les chefs d'école* (Paris,
1883), pp 378-79, contains the following subtle observation regarding
the romanticists' psychology. The author points out that romanticism
made its appearance *after the Revolution and the Empire*. 'In
literature and in art, there was a crisis similar to that which occurred
in morals after the Terror -- a veritable orgy of the senses. People had
been living in fear, and that fear had gone. They gave themselves up to
the pleasures of life. Their attention was taken up exclusively with
external appearances and forms. Blue skies, brilliant lights, the beauty
of women, sumptuous velvet, iridescent silk, the sheen of gold, and the
sparkle of diamonds filled them with delight. People lived only with the
eyes\... they had ceased from thinking.' This has much in common with
the psychology of the times we are living through in Russia. In both
cases, however, the course of events leading up to this state of mind
was itself the outcome of the course of economic development. Ernest
Alfred Chesneau (1833-1890) -- French art critic.

[[151.]{.info}]{#n151} *Hector Berlioz et la société de son temps*
(Paris, 1904), p 190. Jean-Baptiste Tiersot (1857-1936) -- French
musicologist, author of works on Berlioz, Gluck and others.

[[152.]{.info}]{#n152} Ibid.

[[153.]{.info}]{#n153} Here we have the same *qui pro quo* as that which
makes the adherents of the arch-bourgeois Nietzsche look truly
ridiculous when they attack the bourgeoisie. Friedrich Nietzsche
(1844-1900) -- reactionary German philosopher, voluntarist and
irrationalist.

[[154.]{.info}]{#n154} 'L'ouvre d'art', he writes, 'est déterminée par
un ensemble qui est l'état général de l'esprit et des mours
environnantes.' \['the work of art is determined by the ensemble which
is the general state of mind and the surrounding morals.'\] Hippolyte
Adolphe Taine (1828-1893) -- French literary and art critic, philosopher
and historian.

[[155.]{.info}]{#n155} *The Philosophy of History in France and Germany*
(Edinburgh and London, 1874), p 149. Robert Flint (1838-1910) --
Scottish sociologist.

[[156.]{.info}]{#n156} Note to the German edition of 1910: In his
polemic against the Bauer brothers, Marx wrote: 'The French
Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, and in particular *French
materialism*, was not only a struggle against the existing political
institutions and the existing religion and theology; it was just as much
an *open*, *clearly expressed* struggle against the *metaphysics of the
seventeenth century*, and against *all metaphysics*, in particular that
of *Descartes*, *Malebranche*, *Spinoza* and *Leibnitz*.' (*Nachlass*,
Volume 2, p 232). \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *The Holy Family*,
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), pp 124-25 -- Editor\] This
is now common knowledge. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz (1646-1716) --
German scientist and rationalist philosopher, objective idealist;
Nicholas Malebranche (1638-1715) -- French idealist philosopher.

[[157.]{.info}]{#n157} See G Lanson's *Histoire de la littérature
française* (Paris, 1896), pp 394-97, which gives a lucid explanation of
the links between certain aspects of the Cartesian philosophy and the
psychology of the ruling class in France during the first half of the
seventeenth century. Gustave Lanson (1857-1934) -- French historian of
literature.

[[158.]{.info}]{#n158} Sismondi, *Histoire des Français*, Volume 10, p
59, has voiced an interesting opinion of the significance of these
romances, an opinion that provides material for a *sociological study of
imitation*. Jean Charles Leonard de Sismondi (1773-1842) -- Swiss
economist, petit-bourgeois critic of capitalism.

[[159.]{.info}]{#n159} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 101 -- Editor.

[[160.]{.info}]{#n160} *Exposition du système du monde* (Paris), Year 4,
Volume 2, pp 291-92. Pierre Simon de Laplace (1749-1827) -- French
astronomer, mathematician and physicist; Isaac Newton (1642-1727) --
English physicist, astronomer and mathematician, founder of classical
mechanics.

[[161.]{.info}]{#n161} Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p
29 -- Editor.

[[162.]{.info}]{#n162} Regarding this, see, inter alia, Engels'
above-mentioned article 'Über den historischen Materialismus'.

[[163.]{.info}]{#n163} The reader will remember how vehemently Lamprecht
justified himself when he was accused of materialism, and also how
Ratzel defended himself against the same accusation, in his *Die Erde
und das Leben*, Volume 2, p 631. Nevertheless, he wrote the following
words: 'The sum total of the cultural acquirements of each people at
every stage of its development is made up of material and spiritual
elements\... They are acquired, not with identical means, or with equal
facility, or simultaneously\... Spiritual acquirements are based on the
material. Spiritual activity appears as a luxury only after material
needs have been satisfied. Therefore all questions of the origin of
culture boil down to the question of what it is that promotes the
development of the material foundations of culture' (*Völkerkunde*,
Volume 1, first edition, p 17). This is unmitigated historical
materialism, only far less considered, and therefore not of such
sterling quality as the materialism of Marx and Engels. Karl Lamprecht
(1856-1915) -- German liberal historian, a positivist in his
philosophical views.

[[164.]{.info}]{#n164} 'Saint Max' -- a chapter from Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *The German Ideology*. Plekhanov quotes from the
journal *Documents of Socialism*, see Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 5 (Moscow, 1976), pp 292-94 -- Editor.

[[165.]{.info}]{#n165} Maximilian Harden (Felix Ernst Witkowski,
1861-1927) was an influential German journalist and editor; he attacked
Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1907 by publicising allegations about the
homosexual activities of Lieutenant General Kuno Graf von Moltke
(1847-1923), the Kaiser's adjutant. Further exposés of homosexual
activity in the Kaiser's cabinet and entourage led to a series of
trials, dismissals and suicides of various senior military officers --
MIA.

[[166.]{.info}]{#n166} V Bazarov (VA Rudnev, 1874-1939) -- Russian
social democrat; in 1905-07 contributed to a number of Bolshevik
publications. In the period of reaction (1907-10) deviated from
Bolshevism; was one of the main representatives of the Machist deviation
from Marxism.

[[167.]{.info}]{#n167} *The Economic Interpretation of History*, pp 24
and 109. Edwin Seligman (1861-1939) -- American bourgeois economist,
Columbia University professor.

[[168.]{.info}]{#n168} A few incidental words in explanation of what has
been said. According to Marx, 'economic categories are only the
theoretical expressions, the abstractions of the social relations of
production' (*The Poverty of Philosophy*, Chapter 2, Second
Observation). \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p 165 -- Editor\] This means that Marx regards
the categories of *political economy* likewise from the viewpoint of the
mutual relations among men in the social process of production,
relations whose development provides him with the basic explanation of
mankind's *historical* movement.

[[169.]{.info}]{#n169} *The Economic Interpretation of History*, p 137.
Note to the German edition of 1910: Kautsky's *Origin of Christianity*,
as an 'extremist' book, is of course reprehensible from Seligman's point
of view.

[[170.]{.info}]{#n170} The following parallel is highly instructive.
*Marx* says that materialist dialectic, while explaining that which
exists, at the same time explains its *inevitable destruction*. In this
he saw its value, its progressive significance. But here is what
Seligman says: 'Socialism is a theory of what ought to be; historical
materialism is a theory of what has been.' (Ibid, p 108) For that reason
alone, he considers it possible for himself to defend historical
materialism. This means, in other words, that this materialism may be
ignored when it comes to explaining the inevitable destruction of *that
which is* and may be used to explain *that which has been in the past*.
This is one of the numerous instances of the use of a double standard in
the field of ideology, a phenomenon also *engendered by economic
causes*.

[[171.]{.info}]{#n171} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 150 -- Editor.

[[172.]{.info}]{#n172} *Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der
Wissenschaft*, fifth edition, p 113. \[Frederick Engels, *Anti-Dühring*
(Moscow, 1975), pp 136-37 -- Editor\]

[[173.]{.info}]{#n173} *Metaphysics*, Book 5, Chapter 5. Aristotle
(384-322BC) -- Greek philosopher and scientist. In philosophy wavered
between materialism and idealism.

[[174.]{.info}]{#n174} Cadets -- members of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party which was the party of the liberal
monarchical bourgeoisie, founded in October 1905. In an attempt to win
over the peasantry, the Cadets included in their agrarian programme a
clause on the possibility of extending peasant-owned lands through
purchasing of lands at a 'fair' price from the state, monasteries and
private owners. The programme also mentioned 'compulsory alienation' of
landowners' estates for this purpose. 'The Cadets', wrote Lenin, 'want
to preserve the landlord system of agriculture by means of concessions.
They propose redemption payments by the peasants which already once
before in 1861 ruined the peasants.' (VI Lenin, *Collected Works*,
Volume 11, p 328) -- Editor.

[[175.]{.info}]{#n175} Hegel's *Werke*, Volume 12, p 98.

[[176.]{.info}]{#n176} Note to the German edition of 1910: Spinoza
already said (*Ethics,* Part 3, Proposition 2, *Scholium*) that many
people think they act freely because they know their actions but not the
causes of those actions. 'Thus an infant thinks that it freely desires
milk, an angry child thinks that it freely desires vengeance, or a timid
child thinks it freely chooses flight.' The same idea was expressed by
Diderot, whose materialist doctrine was, on the whole, Spinozism
liberated from its theological setting.

[[177.]{.info}]{#n177} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 20 -- Editor.

[[178.]{.info}]{#n178} *Wirtschaft und Recht*, second edition, p 421.

[[179.]{.info}]{#n179} 'Necessity, in its contraposition to liberty, is
nothing else but the unconscious.' (Schelling, *System des
transzendentalen idealismus* (1800), p 424)

[[180.]{.info}]{#n180} This aspect of the matter is discussed in fairly
great detail in various parts of my book on *historical monism*. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow,
1974), pp 480-697 -- Editor\] Sergei Nikolayevich Bulgakov (1871-1944)
-- Russian bourgeois economist and idealist philosopher, sought to
revise Marx's teaching on the agrarian question; Pyotr Bernardovich
Struve (1870-1944) -- Russian bourgeois economist and publicist; one of
the most prominent representatives of 'Legal Marxism'.

[[181.]{.info}]{#n181} *Wirtschaft und Recht*, pp 421ff. Cf also
Stammler's article entitled 'Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung' in
*Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften*, 2 Auflage, Volume 5, pp
735-37.

[[182.]{.info}]{#n182} H Bargy, *La religion dans la société aux
États-Unis* (Paris, 1902), pp 88-89.

[[183.]{.info}]{#n183} Ibid, pp 97-98. Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758) --
American theologian whose teachings became the official philosophy of
American Puritanism.

[[184.]{.info}]{#n184} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 133 -- Editor.

[[185.]{.info}]{#n185} Karl Marx, *A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy* (Moscow, 1971), p 21 -- Editor.

[[186.]{.info}]{#n186} Revolutionary syndicalism -- a petit-bourgeois
semi-anarchist trend in the working-class movement in Western Europe at
the turn of the century. Syndicalists denied the necessity of the
political struggle of the working class, considering the trade unions
capable of overthrowing capitalism and taking management of production
into their own hands without a revolution, simply by organising a
general strike -- Editor.

[[187.]{.info}]{#n187} *Handwörterbuch*, Volume 5, p 736.

[[188.]{.info}]{#n188} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *The Holy
Family*, *Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p 82 -- Editor.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Georgi Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
