---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1907

### Reply to Questionnaire From the Journal *Mercure de France* on the Future of Religion

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp 98-99. Prepared for the
Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'In 1907 the journal *Mercure de France* sponsored
a questionnaire consisting of a single question: 'Assistons-nous à une
dissolution ou à une évolution de l\'idée religieuse et du sentiment
religieux?' ('Are we witnessing the dissolution or the evolution of the
religious idea and religious sentiment?') Thirty-three replies were
published in no 236 of the journal for 15 April 1907, from political and
social figures and writers in various countries, including Maxim Gorky,
Strindberg, Vandervelde and Verhaeren.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

You ask: are we witnessing the decay or the evolution of the religious
idea and religious feeling?

Allow me to reformulate the question from a social-evolutionary point of
view: is not the decay of the religious idea the natural end of its
evolution?

To be able to answer this question, let us take into account what the
evolution of the religious idea has been up to the present.

But, first of all, what is religion? If we use what Edward B Tylor
called 'a minimum definition of the term religion', we shall say that
religion is belief in spiritual beings existing alongside bodies and the
natural processes. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

This belief, which constitutes the necessary element of every religion,
serves also to explain all natural phenomena. But at a higher stage of
social evolution a new element, namely, morality, joins this original
one.

The link between these two elements grows more and more close. Then we
come to what I might call 'a maximum definition of the term religion':
belief in spiritual beings associated with morality and serving as its
sanction. This is why the essence of religion for many people is
morality.

But we are a long way yet from the end of this evolution.

The seemingly indissoluble link between morality and religion is doomed
to disappear as a consequence of the progress of human reason.

The scientific explanation of phenomena can only be materialist. The
intervention of spiritual beings may explain phenomena to the mind of a
savage, but it explains nothing to the mind of a Berthelot; the
significance of such an explanation diminishes for every civilised
person in proportion as he assimilates the results of scientific work.

If many people still believe in spirits and supernatural beings, this is
because, for various reasons, they have been unable to overcome the
obstacles preventing them from adopting the scientific point of view.

When these obstacles have been removed -- and there is every reason to
believe that social evolution will accomplish this -- every trace of
supernatural conception will disappear and morality will come into its
own. Religion, in the maximum sense of the word, will cease to exist. As
regards religious feeling, this too will evidently disappear with the
decay of the religious idea. But, of course, there is more conservatism
in feelings than in ideas. There may and will be, in all probability,
survivals which will produce mongrel, semi-materialist,
semi-spiritualist conceptions of the world.

But these survivals too are in their turn doomed to pass away,
especially with the passing of some social institutions seemingly
sanctioned by religion.

Human progress sounds the death-knell both for the religious idea and
for religious feeling. Timid people, or those with a stake in religion,
express fears for the future of morality. But, I repeat, morality can
have an independent existence.

Belief in spiritual beings even at the present time is very far from
being a buttress of morality. On the contrary, the religious beliefs of
civilised peoples in our day, in the majority of cases, are lagging
behind the moral development of these peoples.

WK Clifford justly remarked: 'If people were no better than their
religions, the world would be a hell.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. True, a spiritual being is not yet a god. To become a
god, the spiritual being must complete a certain evolution. God is a
spiritual being linked by mutual services with a given tribe or
nationality. But every god is a spiritual being. In the present case
that is all we need to know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
