---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1907

### Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Death of Karl Marx

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 84-87.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'This article was written at the beginning of 1908
and was apparently intended for the Italian press. It is not known
whether it was published at that time or not; in Russian it was first
published in the journal *Vestnik Kommunisticheskoi akademii* (*The
Proceedings of the Communist Academy*), nos 2-3, 1933.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The class-conscious proletariat of all lands could best honour the
memory of the great founder of the International by endeavouring to
understand the immense significance Marx's theory has for our times.

This theory is known to have been the object of numerous assaults by the
so-called *critics* of Marx. Unfortunately, these assaults were not
lacking in effect. In the ranks of the militant proletariat of the whole
civilised world there are not a few people who firmly believe that
Marxism as a theory has already outlived its time and must now give way
to new views, the motley combination of which is known as *critical
socialism*. But their belief has as little foundation as had the
'criticism of Marx' itself.

Marxism is not just an *economic* teaching (dealing with the course of
development of capitalist society); nor is it just an *historical
theory* ('historical materialism'); nor can it be described as economic
teaching *plus* historical theory. Marx's economic teaching is not
something standing *alongside* his historical theory. It is *thoroughly
permeated with the historical theory*, or more truly, it is the outcome
of the study of economic development during the present epoch from the
standpoint of that historical theory, aided by the mighty method of
historical materialism. That is why those who say that *Capital* is not
only an *economic* but also an *historical* work are right.

However, even that is not all. The significance of Marx's achievements
in theory is not limited to his remarkable works in the field of
political economy, and, as it used to be called, *the philosophy of
history*. 'Historical materialism' is *only a part of Marx*'s
*materialist world-outlook*, as will be easily appreciated by anyone who
undertakes the pleasant task of reading Engels' famous polemical work
directed against Mr Eugen DÃ¼hring. The first part of this work, written,
so to speak, under the eyes of Marx and indeed partly with his
assistance, is devoted to *philosophy* in the proper meaning of the
term.

The philosophical side of Marxism is, however, almost completely ignored
even by many of those who would like to remain loyal to Marxism. This is
the sole reason why such ridiculous attempts have been made to combine
Marxism either with the philosophy of Kant, or with the philosophy of
Mach, or with some other philosophical systems having absolutely nothing
in common with the world-outlook of the author of *Capital*. But to wish
to combine Marxism with philosophies which have nothing in common with
it is to reveal a total lack of comprehension of the fact that all
aspects of Marx's world-outlook are closely linked with one another, and
that, consequently, one cannot arbitrarily remove one of them and
replace it by a combination of views no less arbitrarily selected from
quite another world-outlook. And in fact we find that all those who have
attempted to carry out this preposterous operation on Marxism have
always turned out to be very bad Marxists. What they wrote about Marx's
*philosophy*, and especially about his *dialectics*, was not only wrong,
but simply ludicrous. And if their 'critical' exercises of this kind
were not met with homeric laughter by those who knew this subject, it
was only because, as I said before, the number of people well versed in
Marxism is very small. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Quite recently, one respected Italian reformist, in the first chapters
of his book on new roads to socialism, revealed the most complete, the
most improbable, and the most childish lack of understanding of
dialectics in general and the materialist dialectics of Marx in
particular ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ -- without evoking any ridicule.

But if the ideologists of the *proletariat* often display this total
incomprehension of Marx's philosophy, they are the real losers, while
the philosophy itself suffers but little. Their views lose all semblance
of system, and enter into abnormal association with views elaborated by
ideologists of the *modern bourgeoisie*, that is to say, of a class
moving to its decline. It may be said without any exaggeration that a
disapproving altitude to the philosophy of Marx is a variety of
*philosophical decadence*.

Moreover, things are no better with regard to the 'criticism' of *other
aspects* of Marx's doctrine. Criticism is obviously an excellent thing.
But it has this quality only when the person engaged in criticism does
in fact take a critical attitude to his subject. It is anything but
splendid when under the pretext of criticism, the 'critic' only repeats
ideas of others which he has adopted without any criticism. Such
criticism is the direct opposite of what criticism *should be*. But it
is just this type of alleged criticism of Marx with which the so-called
*revisionists and syndicalists* ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ have been busying
themselves during the last ten years. This criticism was only *an
uncritical repetition of what had been said with the more or less
clearly acknowledged aim of apologetics by the present-day ideologists
of the bourgeoisie*. If this criticism did signalise some kind of
*movement*, it was a *regressive* and by no means *progressive
movement*. And exactly because this type of criticism was a *movement*
backwards and not forward, the most critical minds were in reality not
those who abandoned themselves to its attractions, but those who
displayed the most *critical* (I do not simply say: *negative*) attitude
towards it.

The 'critics' of Marx have said, and still repeat, that the course of
economic development of capitalist society during the past quarter of a
century has refuted Marx's expectations and predictions. But when they
are called upon to state which specific expectations and predictions
they mean, they point not to the ideas *expressed* by Marx, but to those
*attributed to him* by people who were either unwilling or unable to
understand him. I shall take as an example the notorious '*theory of
impoverishment*'. Marx was said to have held the view that the position
of the proletariat worsens in capitalist society, not only *relatively*,
but also *absolutely*. It will suffice to read the following passage
from *The Poverty of Philosophy* to realise how wrong that is:

As for the working classes, it still remains a very debatable question
whether their condition has improved as a result of the increase in
so-called public wealth. If the economists, in support of their
optimism, cite the example of the English workers employed in the cotton
industry, they see the condition of the latter only in the rare moments
of trade prosperity. These moments of prosperity are to the periods of
crisis and stagnation in the 'correct proportion' of three to ten. But
perhaps also, in speaking of improvement, the economists were thinking
of the millions of workers who had to perish in the East Indies so as to
procure for the million and a half workers employed in the same industry
in England three years' prosperity out of ten. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^

As you see, there is still a vast difference between this 'very
debatable question' and the theory of the absolute impoverishment of the
proletariat which is usually ascribed to Marx by his 'critics'. And the
theory of the *relative* worsening of the position of the proletariat
^[\[5\]](#n5)^ is actually developed in *Capital*.

Or perhaps I shall be told that in this respect there is no room for
doubt: that in reality there is a very significant improvement in its
position that can be achieved by the working class of today? In that
case, I shall cite the situation of the British working class, who
thanks to certain exceptional circumstances, have wrested much larger
concessions from their employers than the proletariat of the European
continent have been able to. Does the reader know why it is so important
for the British working class to win *old age pensions?* Because, as
Charles Booth has pointed out, one-third of the old people in Britain
*die in workhouses*, that is, fall into *pauperism*. It is not hard to
guess to which class these aged people belong, who have to undergo this
wretched experience. But in view of this, it is very difficult to deny
that capitalism, while developing the productive forces of society to an
enormous degree, allows the proletariat only insignificant access to the
fruits of this development. That is precisely Marx's theory of
impoverishment.

*The so-called criticism of Marx has exposed, not the flaws that were
peculiar to Marxism, but the failure to understand Marxism which was
peculiar to its critics.*

There is only one course for the real critic of Marxism to adopt:
correctly to master the materialist method and apply it to the study of
those aspects of historical development -- for example, the *history of
ideology --* on which Marx and his friend and collaborator, Engels,
spent little or no time. *Only in this way* is it possible to uncover
the weak points of any scientific method -- if there are any. Of course,
*such* a criticism demands a great deal more serious intellectual labour
than that required to master the theories which now find such a ready
market among both the erudite and the merely educated bourgeoisie:
Kantianism, immanent philosophy, Brentanoism, 'pure economics', and so
on and so forth. Let us hope that the *second quarter of a century since
the death of Marx* which is now beginning will witness, at last, the
flowering of *such* a criticism, which will at the same time constitute
the greatest *theoretical triumph of Marxism*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. Marxism is an integral theoretical system, as may be
judged by a reading of DÃ¼hring's UmwÃ¤ltzung. Every aspect of this system
is closely linked with all other aspects, each one shedding light on all
the others, thus aiding in their comprehension. One cannot select one
aspect and limit oneself to its acknowledgement, while eliminating or
ignoring the remainder. That would be mutilating Marxism, it would be
plucking out its heart, transforming this living theory into a mummy,
and not content even with that, concentrating all attention only on one
part or another of the mummy. In this lies the grandeur of Marxism, and
in this, too, lies the reason why so many of those who are honestly
trying to understand it, do so wrongly. To understand Marxism correctly
it is essential to have a very wide education, and none of the writers
who have undertaken to criticise Marxism has that.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Plekhanov is referring to A Bonomi's book *Le vie
nuove del socialismo* (*The New Ways of Socialism*, Remo Sandron,
Milano-Palermo-Napoli, 1907) -- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Those who believe that the teaching of the
self-styled revolutionary syndicalists is a *return to Marxism* are very
much mistaken. As a matter of fact, under the banner of this doctrine a
regressive movement to the views of Proudhon and Bakunin is taking
place. In Italy, this regressive movement is occurring under the most
powerful influence of modern 'Manchesterism' -- the bourgeois school of
'pure economics'.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. Compare *Wage Labour and Capital* where the theory of
relative impoverishment is presented. \[Plekhanov was misled in denying
the absolute impoverishment of the working class under capitalism.
Numerous facts testify that absolute impoverishment of the proletariat
is taking place in capitalist society. His reference to Marx is also
unfounded as Marx proved that accumulation of capital is accompanied by
absolute and relative impoverishment of the proletariat -- Editor.\]

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected Works*,
Volume 6 (Moscow, 1976), p 160 -- Editor.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
