---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1907

### Materialismus Militans: Reply to Mr Bogdanov

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3, Progress Publishers (Moscow, 1976), pp. 188-283;\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

[Soviet Editor's Note]{.info}: The three letters *Materialismus
Militans* were written between 1908 and 1910. They were prompted by an
'Open Letter to Plekhanov' printed by Aleksandr Bogdanov in the monthly
*Vestnik Zhizni* (*The Herald of Life*), no 7, 1907. The first and
second letters were published in the *Golos Sotsial-Demokrata* (*The
Voice of a Social-Democrat*) nos. 6-7, 8-9, 1908. The third letter did
not appear in the journal because Plekhanov broke off relations with its
editors at the end of 1908. It was written specially for the collection
of his articles against revisionists entitled *From Defence to Attack*
(1910). In the introduction to the collection, which included all the
three articles against Bogdanov, Plekhanov wrote the following with
regard to the empirio-critics:

"Some of these industrious people even call themselves and sincerely
believe themselves to be enemies of the bourgeoisie. Such are A Bogdanov
and A Lunacharsky. But all that one can say about such people is that
there is a bitter discord between their hearts and their heads: their
heads are working for the benefit of the particular class against which
their hearts rebel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### First Letter

'Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!'^[\[1\]](#n1)^

Dear Sir

No 7 of *Vestnik Zhizni*^[\[2\]](#n2)^ for 1907 contains your 'Open
Letter to Comrade Plekhanov'. This letter makes it clear that you are
dissatisfied with me for many reasons. The most important of these, if I
am not mistaken, is that for the past three years I have been, as you
put it, polemicising with empiriomonism 'on credit', without adducing
serious arguments against it and, again as you yourself put it, these
'tactics' of mine seem to have had some success. Next, you reproach me
for 'constantly addressing' you as *Mr* Bogdanov. Besides this, you are
dissatisfied with my review of Dietzgen's *Das Akquisit der Philosophie*
and *Briefe Ã¼ber Logik.* You say that I warn readers against being too
credulous and unwary in their approach to Dietzgen's philosophy, on the
grounds that it sometimes takes on a resemblance to yours. I will
mention still another reason for your dissatisfaction with me. You
assert that some of those who share my views are making what amounts to
almost a 'criminal' charge against you, and you claim that I am partly
to blame for their 'demoralisation'. I could prolong the list of
reproaches you level against me, but there is no need for this; the
points I have mentioned are quite enough for us to begin an explanation
which will not be without general interest.

Getting down to this, I shall begin with what seems to me to be a
question of second-, if not third-rate, importance, but which is
apparently of no small weight in your eyes, namely the question of your
'title'.

You consider yourself insulted when I address you as 'Mr' and say that I
have no right to insult you. I hasten to assure you on this point, dear
Sir, that it was never my intention to insult you. But when you mention
*rights*, it gives me reason to think that, in your opinion, one of my
Social-Democratic *obligations* is to call you comrade. But, God and our
Central Committee be my judges, I do not recognise any such obligation.
And this for a very simple and obvious reason -- *that you are no
comrade of mine.* And you are no comrade of mine because *you and I
represent two directly opposed world-outlooks.* And as the question for
me is the defence of my outlook, you are, in relation to me, not a
comrade, but the most resolute and irreconcilable opponent. Why should I
be hypocritical, then? Why should I put an utterly false meaning into
words?

Boileau once gave the advice -- 'call a spade a spade\...'^[\[3\]](#n3)^
I take this sensible advice: I call a spade a spade, and you an
empiriomonist. I call *comrades* only those who hold the same views as
myself and serve the same cause I took up long before the Bernsteinians,
Machists and other 'critics of Marx' made their appearance in our
country. Think, Mr Bogdanov, try to be unbiased, and tell me -- have I
really '*no right*' to act in this way? Am I really *obliged* to act
otherwise?

Further. You are terribly mistaken, dear Sir, if you imagine that I am
throwing out more or less obvious hints to the effect that you should
be, if not hanged, at least 'banished' from the confines of Marxism at
the earliest possible moment. If anyone intended to treat you in this
way, he would first of all have come up against the utter *impossibility
of fulfilling* his harsh design. Even Dumbadze, with all his miraculous
power, would not have been able to banish from his domains a person who
did not dwell in them. Similarly, no ideological Pompadour
^[\[4\]](#n4)^ could possibly 'banish' from the confines of a particular
teaching a 'thinker' who was already *outside them.* And that you are
outside the confines of Marxism is clear for all those who know that the
whole edifice of this teaching rests upon *dialectical materialism*, and
who realise that you, as a convinced Machist, do not and cannot hold the
materialist viewpoint. And for the benefit of those who do not know and
do not realise this, I reproduce the following passage, which came from
your own pen.

In characterising the attitude of various philosophers to the
'thing-in-itself', you deign to remark:

A golden mean has been adopted by materialists of a more critical shade
who have rejected the *absolute* unknowability of the 'thing-in-itself',
but at the same time regard it as being *fundamentally* different from
the 'phenomenon', and, therefore, always only 'vaguely knowable' in the
phenomenon, outside of experience as far as its content is concerned
(that is, presumably, as far as the 'elements' are concerned, which are
not the same as elements of experience), but yet lying within the bounds
of what is called the forms of experience, that is, time, space and
causality. Such is approximately the standpoint of the French
materialists of the eighteenth century and among the modern philosophers
-- Engels and his Russian follower, Beltov. ^[\[5\]](#n5)^

This passage (rather clumsy in its 'content') will explain matters even
to those people who, generally speaking, do not care about philosophy.
It must now be plain even to them that you reject Engels' point of view.
And those who know that Engels was completely at one with the author of
*Capital* also in the domain of philosophy will easily understand that
when you reject Engels' viewpoint you *thereby* reject Marx's viewpoint,
and join *his 'critics*'.

I beg you, dear Sir, not to be afraid; don't regard me as some kind of
philosophising Pompadour, and don't imagine that I establish your
adherence to Marx's opponents for the purpose of your 'banishment'. I
repeat: it is impossible to banish from the confines of any teaching a
man who is already outside them. And so far as Marx's critics are
concerned, everyone, even if he did not study in a seminary, now knows
that these gentlemen have departed from the confines of Marxism and are
scarcely likely ever to return.

'Sentence of death' is a measure incomparably more severe than
'banishment'. And if I were ever capable of hinting at the necessity of
you, my dear Sir, being 'hanged' (though only in quotation marks), I
could, of course, on a suitable occasion, also be disposed to the idea
of your 'banishment'. But in this, too, you either give way to quite
unwarranted fear, or are indulging in perfectly groundless irony.

I tell you once and for all that I have never had any desire to 'hang'
anyone. I should be an extremely poor Social-Democrat if I did not
acknowledge the complete freedom of theoretical research. But I should
be an equally poor Social-Democrat if I did not understand that *freedom
of research* must be accompanied and supplemented by *freedom for people
to group according to their views.*

I am convinced -- who could not be? -- that people who differ
fundamentally in theory have every right to differ in practice too, that
is, to group themselves in different camps. I am convinced even that
'situations' do arise when *it is their duty to do so.* Do we not know
already from Pushkin's time:

It is not meet to harness\
Horse with trembling doe. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^

In the name of this unquestionable and incontestable *freedom of
grouping*, I have repeatedly invited the Russian Marxists to form a
special group for the propagation of their ideas, and to dissociate
themselves from other groups which do not share Marxist ideas on some
issues. Repeatedly, and with quite understandable passion, I have
expressed the opinion that any unclarity in ideology brings great harm.
I think that ideological unclarity is especially harmful for us now,
when idealism of all varieties and shades, under the impact of reaction
and the pretext of revising theoretical values, is holding veritable
orgies in our literature, and when some idealists, probably for the sake
of spreading their own ideas, proclaim their views to be Marxism of the
very latest model. It is my deep conviction, and one which I am not in
the least backward in expressing, that theoretical dissociation from
these idealists is more essential now than ever. I understand that
sometimes this might not be to the liking of one or other of the
idealists (especially from among those who would like to have their
theoretical merchandise passed under the flag of Marxism) but,
nevertheless, I resolutely assert that those who reproach me on these
grounds with attempting on somebody's *freedom* (by 'banishment') or
even on his *life* (by 'hanging') reveal a much too narrow understanding
of that freedom in whose name they indict me.

When I invite those who share my views to dissociate themselves from
people who cannot be their comrades in ideology, I am using the
inalienable right of every 'man and citizen'. And when you, Mr Bogdanov,
raise such a ridiculous clamour over this and suspect me of threatening
your person, you simply demonstrate that you have badly assimilated the
notion of that inalienable right.

While not a Marxist yourself, you would like nothing better than that we
Marxists should accept you as our *comrade*. You remind me of the mother
in one of Gleb Uspensky's stories. She wrote to her son, saying that
since he lived a long way off and was in no hurry to see her, she would
complain to the police and demand that the authorities send her son
'under escort' for her to 'embrace' him. Uspensky's philistine, to whom
this maternal threat was addressed, burst into tears whenever he
remembered it. We Russian Marxists will not weep for such reasons. But
this will not stop us from telling you quite bluntly that we wish to
take full advantage of our right to dissociate ourselves and that
neither you nor anyone else (no matter who it may be) will succeed in
'embracing' us 'under escort'.

I shall add the following. If I at all resembled some inquisitor or
other, and if I at all believed that there could be people deserving of
capital punishment (even in quotation marks) for their convictions, I
should, nevertheless, not count you, Mr Bogdanov, among them. I should
then say to myself: '*The right to be executed* is conferred by talent
and there is no trace of talent in our theoretician of empiriomonism. He
is unworthy of execution!'

You, dear Sir, challenge me insistently to be frank. So do not be
offended if I am.

To me, you are not unlike Vasili Tredyakovsky ^[\[7\]](#n7)^ of blessed
memory -- a man of considerable diligence, but, alas, very little
talent. To busy oneself with people of the calibre of the late professor
of eloquence and poetical subtleties one must be endowed with an
enormous power of resistance to boredom. I do not possess much of this
power. That is why I have not replied to you before now, in spite of
your direct challenges.

I said to myself: '*J*'*ai d*'*autres chats Ã  fouetter*.' ^[\[8\]](#n8)^
And that I was sincere and not merely seeking an excuse to avoid doing
polemical battle with you is proved by my deeds; actually, since you
began to challenge me I have in fact been under the regrettable
necessity to 'whip' quite a few 'cats'. Of course, you interpreted my
silence differently. Obviously you thought that I lacked the courage to
launch a frontal attack on your philosophical stronghold, preferring to
direct empty threats at you, to criticise you 'on credit'. I do not deny
you the right to self-flattery, but I, too, have the right to say that
you were flattering yourself. To tell the truth, I simply did not think
it necessary to argue with you, believing that the class-conscious
representatives of the Russian proletariat would themselves be able to
assess your *philosophical subtleties.* Besides, as I already said,
*j*'*avais d*'*autres chats Ã  fouetter*. Thus, as far back as late 1907,
that is to say, immediately after the appearance of your open letter to
me in *Vestnik Zhizni*, some of my comrades advised me to deal with you.
But I replied that it would be more useful to deal with Mr Arturo
Labriola, whose views were being peddled in Russia by your fellow
thinker Mr Anatoly Lunacharsky under the guise of a weapon 'sharpened
for the orthodox Marxists'. Supplied with an afterword by Mr
Lunacharsky, Labriola's book prepared the way for syndicalism
^[\[9\]](#n9)^ in Russia, and I preferred to work on that, and to
postpone meanwhile my reply to your open letter. To tell you the truth,
I am afraid of being bored, and would not have decided to answer you
now, Mr Bogdanov, if it had not been for the same Mr Anatoly
Lunacharsky. While you were elaborating your empiriomonism after the
manner of Tredyakovsky, Lunacharsky (the rogue has a finger in every
pie) began to preach a new religion, ^[\[10\]](#n10)^ and this preaching
can have a much greater practical significance than the propagation of
your alleged philosophical ideas. It is true that, like Engels, I
consider that at the present time 'all the possibilities of religion are
exhausted' (alle MÃ¶glichkeiten der Religion sind erschÃ¶pft).
^[\[11\]](#n11)^ But I do not lose sight of the fact that, strictly
speaking, these possibilities are exhausted only for *class-conscious
proletarians.* Besides the class-conscious proletarians, there are those
who are only partly conscious of their class position and those who are
completely unconscious of it. In the course of development of *these*
sections of the working class, religious preaching can have a strong
negative effect. Finally, apart from the proletarians who are partly
conscious or completely unconscious of their class position, we have a
great multitude of 'intellectuals', who naturally imagine themselves to
be fully *conscious* of their position, but in fact are *unconsciously*
infatuated with every fashionable trend and at the 'present time' --
Goethe said that all reactionary epochs are subjective -- are very much
disposed to all varieties of mysticism. Inventions such as the new
religion of your fellow thinker, dear Sir, are a real godsend to these
people. They rush at them like flies at honey. And as quite a number of
these gentlemen, grasping avidly at everything they have read about in
the latest book, have unfortunately not completely severed their
connection with the proletariat, ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ they may infect them
too with these mystical infatuations. In view of this, I decided that we
Marxists must give a resolute rebuff not only to the new gospel of
Anatoly, but also to anything but new philosophy of Ernst (Mach), which
has been more or less adapted by you, Mr Bogdanov, for our use here in
Russia. And for this reason alone, I undertook the task of replying to
you.

I am aware that many comrades were surprised that I did not find it
necessary to polemicise with you before now. But this is an old story
that remains eternally new. Even at the time when Mr Struve published
his well-known *Critical Notes*, ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ some of my fellow
thinkers (then very few in number) quite rightly judged these *Notes* to
be the work of a man who had not worked out a consistent manner of
thinking and advised me to come out against him. This kind of advice
became still more persistent after the same Mr Struve published his
article 'On Freedom and Necessity' in *Voprosy filosofii i psikhologii*.
I remember that, when I met Lenin in the summer of 1900, he asked me why
I had done nothing about Struve's article. My reply was quite simple:
the ideas expressed by Mr Struve in his article 'On Freedom and
Necessity' had been refuted in advance by me in my book *The Development
of the Monist View of History.* The new error made by the author of
*Critical Notes* must have been clear to anyone who had read and
understood my book; I had no time to discuss the matter with those who
had not read my book, or did not understand it. I did not consider
myself in any way obliged in respect of our Marxist intelligentsia to
play the part of Shchedrin's owl, relentlessly pursuing the eagle to
instruct it by the phonetical method: 'Your Majesty, say -- A, B, C\...'
In Shchedrin's story the eagle became so completely fed up with the owl
that at first it shouted at it: 'Leave me alone, damn you', and then
finally killed it. I do not know whether the part of tutor-owl to the
Russian intelligentsia of a more or less Marxist turn of thought
presented any dangers for me. But I had neither the inclination nor the
opportunity to be cast in such a thankless role, since I had other
practical and -- above all -- theoretical tasks. Would I be far advanced
in theory if I 'reacted' to everything to which I was (and am) expected
to 'react'? Suffice it to say that some readers would have liked me to
express my opinion on our contemporary eroticism (that is, on Mr
Artsybashev ^[\[14\]](#n14)^ and his brethren) and others asked me what
I thought about Madame Isadora Duncan's dancing. Woe to the writer who
took it into his head to 'react' to all the spiritual whims of that
capricious and nervous lady, the (Russian) intelligentsia! Take any one
of the philosophical fancies of this 'lady'. Is it so long since she was
harping on Kant? Is it long since she was demanding that we reply to the
Kantian 'critique' of Marx? Not long at all! In fact it was so recently
that this frivolous 'lady' has not yet worn out the shoes in which she
went running after neo-Kantianism. And after Kant came Avenarius and
Mach; and after these two Ajaxes of empirio-criticism came Joseph
Dietzgen. And now right behind Dietzgen we have PoincarÃ© and Bergson.
'Cleopatra had many lovers!' But let those who will take up the cudgels
against them. I am all the less inclined to do so because I lay not the
slightest claim to please our modern intelligentsia, who is not the
heroine of my romance\...

But because I do not think myself obliged to do battle with the numerous
lovers of our Russian Cleopatra it does not follow that I have not the
right to make some reference to them in passing, such being also one of
the inalienable rights of man and citizen. For instance, I have never
engaged in criticism of the Christian dogmatic theology, and probably I
never shall. But this does not deprive me of the right to express my
opinion about any of the Christian dogmas, should the occasion arise.
What would you think, Mr Bogdanov, of an orthodox theologian who seized
upon some passing remarks of mine concerning Christian dogmas -- and
such remarks are likely to be found in my writings -- and began to
accuse me of criticising Christianity 'on credit'? I think you would
have enough common sense to shrug your shoulders at such a charge. So do
not be surprised, dear Sir, if I have no less common sense, that is, if
I shrug my shoulders when I hear how you use my passing remarks about
Machism to accuse me of what you call criticism -- 'on credit'.

Earlier in this letter, to be on the safe side, I quoted your opinion on
Engels' philosophical standpoint, an opinion which should not leave the
slightest doubt of any kind in the minds of even the most slow-witted as
to where you stand in relation to Marxist philosophy. But now I recall
that, when at a recent meeting of Russians in Geneva, I drew your
attention in my speech to those lines of yours, you were pleased to rise
from your seat and shout: 'That's what I used to think; now I see I was
mistaken.' That was an extremely important statement, and I, and with me
every reader interested in our philosophical dispute, am bound to accept
it, both as information and for guidance\... if only it contains
sufficient logical sense for one to be guided by it.

Formerly it pleased you to think that Engels' philosophical standpoint
was that of the golden mean and you rejected it as unsound. Now it does
not please you to think so. What does this mean? Does it mean that you
now recognise Engels' view as satisfactory? I should be very glad to
hear this from you, even if it were only for one thing -- I should not
then have to overcome the boredom of having a philosophical dispute with
you. But so far I have had to deny myself this pleasure, since nowhere
have you declared that you have changed from Saul to Paul, that is to
say, that you have abandoned Machism and become a dialectical
materialist. Quite the contrary. In the third book of your
*Empiriomonism*, you express exactly the same philosophical views you
expounded in the second book, from which I took the quotation
illustrating your complete disagreement with Engels. What has changed,
then, Mr Bogdanov?

I shall tell you exactly what has changed. When the second book of your
*Empiriomonism* was published -- and that was not in the days of yore,
but no further back than 1905 -- you still had the courage to criticise
Engels and Marx with whom you disagreed and continue to disagree as much
as an idealist can possibly disagree with a materialist. This courage
was, of course, to your credit. If one who is afraid to look truth in
the face is a poor thinker, still worse is the one who looks truth in
the face and is then afraid to tell the world what he has seen there.
And the worst of all is he who conceals his philosophical convictions in
consideration of some practical benefits. *Such* a thinker obviously
belongs to the species of Molchalins. ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ Let me repeat, Mr
Bogdanov, that the boldness you displayed as recently as 1905 was a
credit to you. It is just a pity that you lost it so quickly.

You have seen that my 'tactics', as you call them -- in fact they could
be reduced to a simple statement of what is for all an obvious fact,
namely, that you are one of Marx's 'critics' -- have had, as you
yourself have been pleased to say, some success, that is to say, our
orthodox Marxists have ceased to regard you as their comrade. This has
scared you, so you have thought up your own 'tactics' against me. You
decided that you would be in a more favourable position to contend with
me if you declared that you sided with the founders of scientific
socialism, and that I was a sort of critic of theirs. In other words,
you decided to apply the 'tactics' which are known as putting the blame
on somebody else. Having taken this decision, you wrote that critical
analysis of my theory of cognition which you published in the third book
of *Empiriomonism* and in which -- despite what you said in the second
book -- I am no longer counted among the followers of Marx and Engels.
Your courage failed you, Mr Bogdanov, and I am sorry for you. But we
must be just even to people who are lacking in courage. Therefore, I
must say that, unlike your usual self, on this occasion you displayed no
little cleverness. In this perhaps you surpassed even the famous monk
Gorenflot.

The French know of this monk. But he is probably not so well known to
Russians, so I shall say a few words about him.

Once, I don't remember which particular fast day it was, the monk
Gorenflot had an intense desire to eat chicken. But that would be a sin.
What should he do to have his chicken and at the same time avoid
committing a sin? The monk Gorenflot found a simple way out. He caught
the tempting chicken and performed the ritual of christening it,
bestowing on it the name of carp or of some other kind of fish. Fish is
known to be a Lenten dish, not forbidden on fast days. So our monk ate
his chicken on the pretext that it had been christened a fish.

You, Mr Bogdanov, acted in exactly the same way as this cunning monk.
You feasted and continue to feast on the idealist philosophy of
'empiriomonism'. But my 'tactics' made you feel that this was a
theoretical sin in the eyes of orthodox Marxists. So, after thinking the
matter over briefly, you performed the holy ritual of christening on
your 'empiriomonism' and renamed it the philosophical teaching of Marx
and Engels. Well, no orthodox Marxists will ever forbid such spiritual
nourishment. So you manage to have it both ways: you continue to enjoy
'empiriomonism' and at the same time you consider yourself a member of
the family of orthodox Marxists. And not only do you consider yourself
one of that family, but you are offended (or pretend to be) at those who
do not wish to recognise you 'as one of them'. Just like the monk
Gorenflot. But the monk was crafty in small things, while you, Mr
Bogdanov, display craft in big things. That's why I say you are much
smarter than the famous monk ever was.

But, alas, even the sharpest wit is helpless *in the face of facts.* The
monk could christen his chicken by the name of fish, but it went on
being a chicken. Similarly, Mr Bogdanov, you may call your idealism
Marxism, but this will not make you a dialectical materialist. And the
more zealously you apply your new 'tactics', the more noticeable it will
be that your philosophical views are wholly incompatible with the
dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels; moreover -- and this is even
worse -- it will become the more obvious that you are simply unable to
understand what is the chief distinguishing feature of this materialism.

In the interests of impartiality, however, it should be said that
materialism in general remains a closed book for you. Herein lies the
explanation of the innumerable blunders in your criticism of my theory
of cognition.

Here is one of these blunders. Whereas in 1905 you described me as a
follower of Engels, now you certify that I am a disciple of Holbach. On
what grounds? Only on the grounds that your new 'tactics' direct you not
to recognise me as a Marxist. You have no other reason. And just because
you have no other reason for calling me a disciple of Holbach, apart
from your need to employ the 'tactical' wisdom of the monk Gorenflot,
you immediately reveal your weak side, your complete impotence in
questions of materialist theory. Indeed, if you had even a nodding
acquaintance with the history of materialism, you would realise that
there are no grounds for describing me as a Holbachian -- holbachien, as
Rousseau once expressed it. Since you describe me as a Holbachian in
connection with the theory of cognition I defend, I don't think it would
be useless for me to inform you that this theory has a much greater
resemblance to Priestley's ^[\[16\]](#n16)^ teaching than to Holbach's.
In other respects, the philosophical outlook I uphold is further removed
from Holbach's teaching than, for example, from that of HelvÃ©tius,
^[\[17\]](#n17)^ or even from that of La Mettrie, as anyone acquainted
with the works of the last-named will easily appreciate. But the trouble
is that you know nothing about the works either of La Mettrie, or
HelvÃ©tius, or Priestley, or, for that matter, Holbach himself, among
whose disciples you have enrolled me, after expelling me from the school
of Marx and Engels -- probably because of my poor progress in
understanding dialectical materialism. Yes, that is just the trouble:
you know nothing at all of materialism, either its history or as it is
today. And this is not only your trouble, Mr Bogdanov; it is the old
trouble of all opponents of materialism. It is an old story that even
those who knew absolutely nothing about materialism claimed the right to
speak against it. It is self-evident that this worthy habit could be so
firmly established solely because it was fully in keeping with the
prejudices of the ruling classes. But we shall speak of this later.

You send me to school to the author of *SystÃ¨me de la nature*, on the
ground that, to quote your own words, I expound materialism in the name
of Marx with the aid of quotations from Holbach. ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ But,
firstly, Holbach is not the only author I quote in my philosophical
articles. And secondly -- and this is the main point -- you do not
understand at all *why* I had to quote so often from Holbach and other
representatives of the eighteenth-century materialism. I did this by no
means with the aim of setting forth Marx's views, as you would have
everyone believe, but with the aim of defending materialism from those
absurd reproaches which were advanced *against it* by its opponents in
general, and the neo-Kantians in particular.

For example, when Lange says in his notorious but essentially quite
superficial *History of Materialism* that 'materialism obstinately takes
the world of sensuous appearance for the world of real things', I
consider it my duty to show that Lange is distorting historical truth.
And since he states this opinion precisely in the chapter on Holbach, in
order to expose him I had to quote Holbach, that is to say, the very
author whose views Lange distorts. For approximately the same reason, I
had to cite the author of *SystÃ¨me de la nature* in my controversy with
Messrs Bernstein and C Schmidt. These gentlemen, too, talked a lot of
nonsense about materialism, and I had to demonstrate to them just how
badly they comprehended the subject they had undertaken to pass
judgement on. Besides, in my arguments with them I had perforce to cite
not only Holbach, but also La Mettrie, HelvÃ©tius and especially Diderot.
True, all these writers are representatives of the eighteenth-century
materialism, and so anyone unfamiliar with the subject might, perhaps,
ask himself: why is Plekhanov quoting particularly the
eighteenth-century materialists? I have a very simple reply to this: I
do so because the opponents of materialism, for example that same Lange,
considered the eighteenth century to be the epoch of the greatest
flowering of that teaching. Lange directly refers to the
eighteenth-century materialism as classical materialism.

As you see, Mr Bogdanov, the nut is quite easy to crack. But, being well
versed in the sly 'tactics' of the monk Gorenflot, you want not to
*crack the nut*, but to *keep it whole*, since it is not in your
interests to crack it. But do you know what? When one is endeavouring to
becloud simple explanations, it is difficult to get along without
sophisms, and the sophist requires at least some *skill in dealing with
ideas*, as Hegel described it. As far as you are concerned, however much
you imitate the crafty Gorenflot, you are very far from possessing such
skill. That is why your sophisms are exceedingly awkward and clumsy.
This is very inconvenient for you. So, every time you are in need of
sophisms, I would advise you to turn to Mr Lunacharsky, since his
sophisms come far more easily and elegantly. This makes things all the
more convenient for criticism. I don't know how it is with everybody
else, but I find it much more pleasant to expose the elegant sophistry
of Mr Lunacharsky than to deal with your clumsy sophistical efforts, Mr
Bogdanov.

I cannot say if you will accept my well-intended advice, although as you
see, it is not proffered quite disinterestedly; but for the time being
it is with your clumsy sophistical concoctions that I have to deal. So,
once more rallying my powers of resistance to boredom, I shall continue
to expose them.

By listing me among Holbach's disciples, you wanted to discredit me in
the eyes of your readers. In your preface to the Russian translation of
Mach's *Analysis of Sensations*, you say that, as a counterweight to
Mach's philosophy, my comrades and I advance 'the philosophy of
eighteenth-century natural science as formulated by Baron Holbach, a
purely bourgeois ideologist, very far removed also from the moderate
socialist sympathies of Ernst Mach'. Here we find revealed, in all its
ugly nakedness, your incredible ignorance of the subject and your
extraordinarily comic awkwardness in 'dealing with ideas'.

Baron Holbach is indeed very far removed from the moderate socialist
sympathies of Mach. And why shouldn't he be? He is removed from them by
approximately one hundred and fifty years! In truth, one would really
have to be a worthy descendant of Tredyakovsky to put the blame for this
on Holbach or any of his eighteenth-century fellow thinkers. Surely it
was not of his own will that Holbach *lagged behind* Mach in point of
time. If we are to argue in this fashion we might as well blame
Cleisthenes, for example, for being 'far removed' even from the
opportunist socialism of Mr Bernstein. To every vegetable its own time,
Mr Bogdanov! But in class society, at any given time there are not a few
varieties of philosophical vegetables on God's earth, and men select one
or other of them according to taste. Fichte was right when he said that
to know a man is to know his philosophy. It seems to me therefore that
Mr Bogdanov's undoubted and even immoderate sympathy for the '*moderate*
socialist sympathies of Ernst Mach' is very strange.

Hitherto I had supposed that Mr Bogdanov was not only incapable of
sympathising with any kind of '*moderate* socialist sympathies', but
that, as a man of an '*extreme*' mode of thought, he would be inclined
to brand them as opportunism unworthy of our times. Now I see that I was
mistaken. And on reflection, I now understand why exactly I was
mistaken. For a moment I had forgotten that Mr Bogdanov is one of the
'critics' of Marx. Not for nothing is it said: bind the cock's claws and
lose the fight. Mr Bogdanov began by repulsing dialectical materialism
and ended with obvious and even immoderate sympathy for the 'moderate
socialist sympathies' of Mach. That is quite natural. 'Wer *a* sagt,
muss auch *b* sagen.' ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

That Holbach was a baron is an incontestable historical truth; but why
did you, Mr Bogdanov, remind your readers of the baronial status of
Holbach? We must suppose that you did this, not out of love for titles,
but simply because you wanted to taunt us, the defenders of dialectical
materialism, with being the alleged disciples of a *baron*. Well, you
are entitled to do so. But in trying to taunt us, don't forget, most
honoured Sir, that you cannot get two skins from one bull. It is you
yourself who says that Baron Holbach was the *purest ideologist of the
bourgeoisie.* It is clear, therefore, that his baronial title has no
significance at all in determining the sociological equivalent of his
philosophy. The whole question is: what role did this philosophy play in
its time? That in its time it played a supremely revolutionary role you
may learn from many commonly available sources, including, by the way,
Engels, who, in characterising the French philosophical revolution of
the eighteenth century, said:

The French were in open combat against all official science, against the
church and often also against the state; their writings were printed
across the frontier, in Holland or England, while they themselves were
often in jeopardy of imprisonment in the Bastille. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

You may believe me, dear Sir, when I tell you that among such
revolutionary writers was Holbach, as well as other materialists of that
period. Moreover, the following must be noted.

Holbach, and in general the French materialists of that time, were the
ideologists not so much of the bourgeoisie as of the third estate, in
that historical period when this estate was thoroughly imbued with
revolutionary spirit. The materialists made up the left wing of the
ideological army of the third estate. And when the third estate in turn
split up, when on the one hand the bourgeoisie and on the other the
proletariat emerged from it, the proletarian ideologists based
themselves on the teaching of the materialists precisely because it was
the extreme revolutionary philosophical doctrine of its time.
Materialism became the basis of socialism and communism. Marx pointed
this out in his book *Die heilige Familie.* He wrote therein:

There is no need for any great penetration to see from the teaching of
materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual endowment of
men, the omnipotence of experience, habit and education, and the
influence of environment on man, the great significance of industry, the
justification of enjoyment, etc, how necessarily materialism is
connected with communism and socialism. ^[\[21\]](#n21)^

Marx then goes on to remark that:

\... the apologia of vices by *Mandeville*, one of Locke's early English
followers, is typical of the socialist tendencies of materialism. He
proves that in *modern* society vice is *indispensable* and *useful*.
This was by no means an apologia for modern society. ^[\[22\]](#n22)^

Marx is right. One does not have to be exceptionally intelligent to
understand the necessary connection between materialism and socialism.
However, it does demand some intelligence. That is why those 'critics'
who completely lack intelligence do not see the connection pointed out
by Marx and think they can support, and even find new principles as a
'basis' for socialism, while opposing materialism. Moreover, those
supporters of socialism who possess *no* intelligence whatever are ready
to embrace any philosophy, except materialist philosophy. This explains
why, when they begin to pass judgement on materialism, they utter the
most inexcusable nonsense about it.

You too, dear Sir, did not notice the necessary connection between
materialism and socialism. Why? I shall leave this for the reader to
answer, and will confine myself to reminding you of how you even
reproach us Marxists with spreading the ideas of French materialism --
an action, which, according to you, does not conform to the tasks of
modern socialist propaganda. Here, too, in your usual fashion, you are
completely at variance with the founders of scientific socialism.

In the article 'Programm der blankistischen Kommune-FlÃ¼chtlinge',
published originally in no 73 of the paper *Volksstaat* for 1874 and
reproduced later in the collection *Internationales aus dem*
'*Volksstaat*', Engels notes with satisfaction that the German
Social-Democratic workers *sind mit Gott einfach fertig* (are simply
through with God) and that they live and think as materialists,
^[\[23\]](#n23)^ and remarks on page 44 of the above-mentioned
collection that in all probability this holds true also for France:

If not \[he stipulates\], there could be nothing simpler than to
organise the mass distribution among workers of the splendid French
materialistic literature of the last century \[that is, the eighteenth
century, Mr Bogdanov -- GP\], of the literature in which the French
spirit has attained its sublime expression both as regards form and
content, and which, considering the then existing level of science, even
today stands exceedingly high as regards content \[*dem Inhalt nach auch
heute noch unendlich hoch steht*\], and still unexcelled as regards
form. ^[\[24\]](#n24)^

As you see, Mr Bogdanov, Engels was not afraid to spread among the
proletariat that 'philosophy of natural science' which you are pleased
to call the philosophy of the 'purest ideologists of the bourgeoisie';
on the contrary, he directly recommended wide dissemination of its ideas
among the French workers who had not yet become materialists. We, the
Russian followers of Marx and Engels, consider it worthwhile to
propagate these ideas, among others, in the ranks of the Russian
proletarians, whose class-conscious representatives, unfortunately, have
not all by any means accepted the materialist point of view. Considering
this task useful, about two years ago I planned the publication in
Russian of a library of materialistic literature in which first place
would have been given to translations of works of the eighteenth-century
French materialists -- works that are in fact incomparable in form and
even now extremely instructive in content. However, nothing ever came of
this. In Russia it is very much easier to find a market for the works of
those numerous schools of contemporary philosophy which Engels
designated by the general contemptuous title of 'the pauper's broth of
eclecticism' ^[\[25\]](#n25)^ than for literature in any way devoted to
materialism. A clear example of this is the very poor sales of Engels'
*Ludwig Feuerbach*, which I translated into Russian and which is a
splendid book in every way. Our reading public nowadays is indifferent
to materialism. But don't rejoice too soon, Mr Bogdanov. The
indifference of our reading public to materialism is a bad sign, since
it means they are continuing to wear their long conservative pigtails
even in such periods when they themselves are full of what would seem to
be the most fearless and 'advanced' theoretical 'searchings'. It is the
historical misfortune of poor Russian thinking that, even in the moments
of its greatest revolutionary upsurge, it very seldom manages to shake
off the influence of Western bourgeois thinking, which can be nothing
but conservative in view of the social relationships now prevailing in
the West.

The well-known renegade from the eighteenth-century French liberation
movement, La Harpe, said in his book *RÃ©futation du livre 'De
l*'*Esprit*', that when he first advanced his refutation of HelvÃ©tius,
his criticism found scarcely any response among Frenchmen. Subsequently,
he said, they began to take a totally different attitude to it. La Harpe
himself accounts for this by the fact that his first effort was made in
the pre-revolutionary epoch, when the French public did not have as yet
the opportunity to see in practice the dangerous consequences arising
from the dissemination of materialist views. In this case, the renegade
was right. The history of French philosophy *after* the Great Revolution
could not show more clearly that its characteristic anti-materialist
trends were rooted in the instincts of self-preservation of the
bourgeoisie, who had somehow coped with the old regime and therefore
abandoned their former revolutionary infatuation and turned
conservative. And this to a greater or lesser degree is applicable to
other countries besides France. One would have to be very naive indeed
not to see how much cowardly hypocrisy there is in the supposedly
supercilious contempt with which contemporary bourgeois ideologists
everywhere regard materialism. The bourgeoisie fear materialism as a
revolutionary doctrine, well adapted to tear from the eyes of the
proletariat the theological blinkers by means of which they wish to
benight it and impede its spiritual growth. Engels himself, better than
anyone else, demonstrated the truth of this in the article 'Ãber
historischen Materialismus', published in nos 1 and 2 of *Neue Zeit*,
1892-93, which had appeared originally in the form of an introduction to
the English edition of the famous pamphlet *Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific.* Engels, addressing the British reader, furnishes a
materialist explanation of the fact that the British bourgeois
ideologists do not like materialism.

Engels points out that materialism, which was an aristocratic doctrine
first in England and then in France, soon became a revolutionary
doctrine in the latter country, 'so much so that, when the Great
Revolution broke out, the doctrine hatched by English Royalists gave a
theoretical flag to French Republicans and Terrorists, and furnished the
text for the Declaration of the Rights of Man'. This alone would have
been enough to intimidate the 'respectable' philistines of foggy Albion.

Thus, if materialism became the creed of the French Revolution
\[continues Engels\], the God-fearing English bourgeois held all the
faster to his religion. Had not the reign of terror in Paris proved what
was the upshot, if the religious instincts of the masses were lost? The
more materialism spread from France to neighbouring countries, and was
reinforced by similar doctrinal currents, notably by German philosophy,
the more, in fact, materialism and free thought generally became on the
Continent the necessary qualifications of a cultivated man, the more
stubbornly the English middle class stuck to its manifold religious
creeds. These creeds might differ from one another, but they were, all
of them, distinctly religious, Christian creeds. ^[\[26\]](#n26)^

The subsequent internal history of Europe with its struggle of classes
and proletarian armed uprisings convinced the British bourgeoisie more
than ever of the need to preserve religion as a curb on the people. Now
this conviction began to be shared by all the Continental bourgeoisie.

The *puer robustus*, here \[said Engels\], turned from day to day more
*malitiosus*. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ Nothing remained to the French and German
bourgeoisie as a last resource but silently to drop their free
thought\..., one by one, the scoffers turned pious\... spoke with
respect of the Church, its dogmas and rites, and even conformed with the
latter as far as could not be helped. French bourgeois dined *maigre* on
Fridays, and German ones sat out long Protestant sermons in their pews
on Sundays. They had come to grief with materialism. '*Die Religion muss
dem Volk erhalten werden*' -- religion must be kept alive for the people
-- that was the only and the last means to save society from utter ruin.
^[\[28\]](#n28)^

Then began -- for my own part I shall add -- together with the 'return
to Kant', that reaction against materialism which still characterises
the trend of European thought generally and philosophy in particular.
The repentant bourgeois, more or less hypocritically, points to this
reaction as the best proof of the success of philosophical 'criticism'.
But we Marxists, who know that the course of development of thought is
determined by the course of development of life, are not easily
dislodged by such more or less hypocritical assertions. We are capable
of defining the sociological equivalent of this reaction; we know that
it was caused by the appearance of the revolutionary proletariat on the
scene of world history. Since we have no reason to fear the
revolutionary proletariat, since, on the contrary, we consider it an
honour to be its ideologists, we do not renounce materialism. Indeed, we
defend it against the cowardly and biased 'criticism' of the bourgeois
wiseacres.

There is yet another reason why the bourgeoisie turned away from
materialism, one which, incidentally, also has its roots in the
psychology of the bourgeoisie as the ruling class in modern capitalist
society. Every class which has attained power is naturally disposed to
*complacency*. And the bourgeoisie, ruling in a society based upon
bitter mutual competition among the commodity producers, is naturally
inclined to a complacency in which there is no trace of altruism. The
precious 'ego' of every worthy representative of the bourgeoisie
completely occupies his every aspiration and design. In Act II, Scene I
of Sudermann's *Das Blumenboot*, Baroness Erfflingen impresses on her
youngest daughter: 'People of our rank exist in order to make all things
in the world into a sort of merry panorama that passes or, rather,
*seems* to pass before us.' In other words, people such as the dazzling
Baroness who, by the way, came of a most bourgeois family, must train
themselves to regard everything which happens in the world exclusively
from the viewpoint of their own more or less agreeable personal
experiences. ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ *Moral solipsism* -- these are the two
words which best of all describe the sentiments of the most typical
representatives of the present-day bourgeoisie. It is not surprising
that from such sentiments spring systems which recognise nothing except
subjective 'experiences', and which would inevitably come to theoretical
solipsism if they were not saved from this by their founders' lack of
logic.

In my next letter, I shall show you, dear Sir, by what monstrous feats
of illogicality your dear Mach and Avenarius save themselves from
solipsism. There, too, I shall demonstrate that for you yourself, who
find it useful to keep aloof from them in some matters, there is also no
safeguard from solipsism, other than lapsing into the most howling
absurdities. But for the moment I must finish dealing with my attitude
to eighteenth-century French materialism.

No less than Engels, I am enthralled with this teaching, which is so
rich and varied in content and brilliant in form, ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ but
also like Engels I understand that natural science has advanced
considerably since the time when this doctrine flourished, and that now
we can no longer share the views of that time -- say, Holbach's -- on
physics, chemistry or biology. I not only subscribe to the critical
remarks made by Engels in *Ludwig Feuerbach* in regard to French
materialism, but also, as you are aware, I have for my part augmented
and reinforced these critical remarks by references to the sources.
Knowing this, the unbiased reader will only laugh to hear you say that,
in defending materialism, I am defending the eighteenth-century
philosophy of natural science as distinct from the same philosophy of
the twentieth century (your preface to the Russian translation of
*Analysis of Sensations*). He will laugh even more heartily when he
recollects that Haeckel is also a materialist. Or perhaps you will tell
us that Haeckel, too, does not rank with the natural scientists of our
time? It is obvious that, in this regard, the only light of your eyes is
Mach with, of course, those who think like him.

It is true that among the twentieth-century naturalists you will not
find many who, like Haeckel, hold the materialist point of view. This,
however, is not an argument against Haeckel, but rather in his favour,
since it demonstrates that he has been able to withstand the influence
of anti-materialist reaction, the sociological equivalent of which I
defined above with the help of Engels. Natural science has nothing to do
here, dear Sir, it is *not the gist of the matter*. ^[\[31\]](#n31)^

No matter how things stand with natural science, it is as clear as
daylight that you, as a defender of Machist philosophy, must definitely
not claim to be a follower of Marx and Engels. Indeed, Mach himself, in
the preface to the Russian translation of his *Analysis of Sensations*,
and on page 292 of the Russian text, admits that his philosophy is akin
to Hume's. And do you remember what Engels says about Hume?

He says that if the German neo-Kantians are attempting to resurrect
Kant's views, and the English agnostics those of Hume, '*this is\...
scientifically a regression*'. ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ This, it would seem, is
quite unambiguous, and can hardly please you who would have us believe
that one can and must *advance under the banner* of Hume and Mach.

Generally speaking, Mr Bogdanov, it was not a happy day for you when you
took it into your head to expel me from the school of Marx and Engels
and enrol me among Holbach's pupils. In doing so, you not only sinned
against truth, but revealed an astonishing lack of skill in controversy.

Now admire your own handiwork. You are pleased to write: 'The basis and
essence of materialism, according to Comrade Beltov, is the notion of
the primacy of "nature" over "spirit." This definition is very wide and,
in this case, has its disadvantages.' ^[\[33\]](#n33)^

We shall let the disadvantages alone, meantime, and recall that you
wrote these lines directly after you had stated that I was expounding
materialism 'in the name of Marx and with the aid of quotations from
Holbach'. Consequently, one might think that my definition of the 'basis
and essence' of materialism was borrowed from Holbach and contradicted
what in fact I would have the right to expound in the name of Marx. But
how did the founders of scientific socialism define materialism?

Engels writes that on the question of the relation of being to thinking,
the philosophers split into two great camps:

Those who asserted the primacy of spirit to nature and, therefore, in
the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or other\...
comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded nature as
primary, belong to the various schools of materialism. ^[\[34\]](#n34)^

Isn't this exactly what I said about the 'basis and essence of
materialism'? So, at least in this case, I had every right to expound
materialism in the name of Marx and Engels, without requiring any
assistance from Holbach.

Did you not think, dear Sir, what situation you put yourself in by
attacking the definition of materialism which I accepted? You wished to
attack me, but, as it turned out, you attacked Marx and Engels. You
wished to expel me from the school of these thinkers, but, as it
happened, you have come out as a '*critic*' of Marx. This, of course, is
not a crime, but it is a fact, and in the present instance, a very
instructive one. This again is evidence of your lack of courage. You
want to criticise Engels, but are afraid to oppose him openly, so you
attribute his ideas to Holbach and Plekhanov. Nothing could be more
characteristic of you. For me, it is not at all a question of
*persecuting* you, but rather of *defining* you, that is to say, of
explaining to my readers to which particular category of wiseacres you
belong.

I trust that this has now become sufficiently clear to them. However, I
must warn them: so far we have seen in you only the blossoms; we shall
eat the berries in the next letter, in which we shall take a walk in the
orchard of your criticism of my theory of cognition. There we shall find
many juicy and tasty berries!

But now I must finish. Till we meet again, dear Sir, and may the
pleasant god of Mr Lunacharsky protect you!

GV Plekhanov

##### Second Letter

'Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!'

Dear Sir

This letter of mine to you falls naturally into two parts. Firstly, I
consider myself *obliged* to reply to the 'critical' objections raised
by you against 'my' materialism. Secondly, I wish to utilise my *right*
to go over to the offensive and examine the basis of that 'philosophy'
in whose name you attack me, and with the aid of which you would like to
'supplement' Marx, -- that is to say, the philosophy of Mach. I know
that the first part will be pretty much of a bore to many readers.
However, I am compelled to follow you, and if there is little that is
amusing in our joint walk through your 'critical' orchard, the blame is
not mine, but his who planned and planted the orchard.

### I

You criticise 'my' definition of matter which you take out of the
following passage from my book *A Critique of Our Critics.*

In contrast to 'spirit', we call 'matter' that which *acts on our
sense-organs and arouses in us various sensations.* What is it exactly
that acts on our sense-organs? To this question I answer with Kant:
*things-in-themselves*. Thus, matter is nothing else than the totality
of things-in-themselves, in so far as these things constitute the source
of our sensations.

This passage seems to have provoked your mirth.

Thus \[you write smilingly\], 'matter' (or 'nature' in its antithesis to
'spirit') is defined through 'things-in-themselves' and through their
capacity to 'arouse sensations by acting on our sense-organs'. But what
are these 'things-in-themselves'? 'That which acts on our sense-organs
and arouses in us various sensations.' That is all. You will find that
Comrade Beltov has no other definition, if you leave out of account the
probably implied negative characteristics: *non*-'sensation',
*non-*'phenomenon', *non*-'experience'. ^[\[35\]](#n35)^

Wait, dear Sir, don't forget that *rira bien, qui rira le dernier*.
^[\[36\]](#n36)^

I don't define matter '*through*' things-in-themselves at all. I assert
only that *all* things-in-themselves are material. By the materiality of
things, I understand -- and here you are right -- their ability one way
or another, directly or indirectly, to act on our senses and thus arouse
in us sensations of one kind or another. In my dispute with the
Kantians, I thought I was entitled to confine myself to indicating
simply that things had this ability. I did so because this ability was
not only not questioned but was explicitly acknowledged by Kant on the
very first page of his *Critique of Pure Reason.* But Kant was
inconsistent. On the first page of the above-mentioned work he
acknowledged things-in-themselves to be the source of our sensations,
but at the same time he was by no means averse to recognising these
things as something immaterial, that is to say, inaccessible to our
senses. This inclination of his, which led him to contradict himself, is
especially clearly revealed in his *Critique of Practical Reason.* In
view of this inclination of his it was quite natural for me to insist,
in arguing with Kant's followers, that things-in-themselves are, on his
own admission, the source of our sensations, that is, they possess all
the signs of being material. While insisting on this, I exposed Kant's
inconsistency, indicating to his followers the logical necessity for
them to declare for one or the other of the two irreconcilable elements
of this contradiction, a way out of which their mentor, Kant, could not
find. I said that they could not be content with Kant's dualism; they
had to accept *either* subjective idealism *or* materialism.
^[\[37\]](#n37)^ Once our dispute took this turn, I found it worth while
to note the main feature distinguishing subjective idealism from
materialism, namely, that subjective idealism negates the material
nature of things, whereas this is recognised by materialism. This may be
known even to you, Mr Bogdanov, who knows absolutely nothing of the
history of philosophy. ^[\[38\]](#n38)^

That is how matters stood. But you, not in the least grasping what was
involved (and evidently not able to grasp it) at once seized on words
the meaning of which remained quite 'unknowable' to you, and pounced on
me with your cheap irony. Haste makes waste, Mr Bogdanov.

To proceed. In this dispute with you I shall have to refer, even more
often than in arguing with the Kantians, to the main feature
distinguishing materialism from subjective idealism. I shall therefore
try to explain this feature for you, with the help of, I hope, some
fairly convincing extracts.

In his work *Of the Principles of Human Knowledge*, the celebrated
subjective idealist (and Anglican bishop) George Berkeley writes:

It is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses,
mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects, have an
existence, natural or real, distinct from their being perceived by the
understanding. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^

But this opinion may involve a manifest contradiction. 'For, what are
the forementioned objects but the things we perceive by sense? And what
do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations?' ^[\[40\]](#n40)^

Berkeley continues: colour, figure, motion, extension are quite known to
us as our sensations. But we would entangle ourselves in contradictions
if we considered them as signs or images of things existing outside
thinking. ^[\[41\]](#n41)^

In contrast to the subjective idealists, Feuerbach, the materialist,
says: to prove that something *is*, means to prove that something exists
not only in thought (*nicht nur gedachtes ist*). ^[\[42\]](#n42)^

Engels states exactly the same thing in his controversy with DÃ¼hring,
when opposing his view to the idealist view of *the world as an idea*,
he declares that the real unity of the world consists in its materiality
(*besteht in ihrer MaterialitÃ¤t*). ^[\[43\]](#n43)^

After this, is it necessary to explain further what exactly we
materialists understand by the materiality of objects? To be on the safe
side, I shall explain it.

We call material objects (bodies) those objects that exist independently
of our consciousness and, acting on our senses, arouse in us certain
*sensations* which in turn underlie our notions of the external world,
that is, of those same material objects as well as of their
relationships.

That, I think, is enough. I shall only add this: Mach, whose
'philosophy' you, dear Sir, believe to be the 'philosophy' of the
twentieth-century natural science, *adheres firmly on this question to
the point of view of the eighteenth-century idealist Berkeley.* He even
uses almost the same expressions as the worthy bishop. He says:

It is not bodies that produce sensations, *but complexes of elements*
(complexes of sensations) that form bodies. If bodies seem to a
physicist to be something lasting and real, and *elements* their
fleeting, transient reflection, he does not notice that all 'bodies' are
only the logical symbols for *complexes of elements* (complexes of
sensations). ^[\[44\]](#n44)^

You are well aware, of course, Mr Bogdanov, what precisely your teacher
says on this subject. But it is obvious that you do not know at all what
Berkeley said about it. You are like MoliÃ¨re's Jourdain, who for a very
long time did not realise that he was speaking in prose. You have
mastered Mach's view on matter, but in your simplicity you had no idea
that *this was* a *purely idealistic view.* That is the reason for your
astonishment at my definition of matter; the reason for your failure to
guess why it was necessary for me to insist, when arguing with the
neo-Kantians, on the materiality of things-in-themselves. Ridiculous
Monsieur Jourdain! Poor Mr Bogdanov!

If you had known at least a little of the history of philosophy, you
would have been well aware that the definition of matter which has
caused you so much hilarity is not my private property, but the common
property of very many thinkers of the materialist, and even of the
idealist camp. It was held, for example, in the eighteenth century by
the materialists Holbach and Joseph Priestley. ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ And only
the other day, we could say, the idealist (only not subjective idealist)
E Naville, in a paper he read in the French Academy, answered the
question: 'What is matter?', saying: 'C'est ce qui se rÃ©velÃ© Ã  nos sens'
\['that which is revealed to our senses'\]. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^ You can see
from this, dear Sir, how widespread is 'my' definition of matter.
^[\[47\]](#n47)^ However, do not imagine that by referring to this I am
trying to divert your 'critical' blows from myself to others. Nothing of
the kind. I can manage to ward them off myself, and for that I need no
great audacity or agility, since your blows are indeed very weak and
clumsy, and, therefore, not to be feared in the least.

If I define matter as the source of our sensations, you believe, quite
unjustifiably, that I am 'probably' characterising matter in 'a negative
way', that is to say, as *non*-experience. It is even strange to me how
you could be so grossly mistaken; indeed, many pages of the same book
from which you quote, *A Critique of Our Critics*, should have made
clear to you my conception of experience. Moreover, my conception of
experience could have clarified for you the notes to Engels' *Ludwig
Feuerbach*, which you also quote. In one of those notes I say, in
polemicising with the neo-Kantians:

Every experiment and every productive activity of man represents an
*active* relation on his part to the external world, a deliberate
calling forth of definite phenomena. And as a phenomenon is the fruit of
the action of a thing in itself upon me (Kant says the *affecting* of me
by that thing), in carrying out an experiment or engaging in production
of this or that product, I force the thing in itself to 'affect' my
'ego' in a definite manner determined beforehand by me. Consequently, I
know at least some of its properties, namely those through whose
intermediary I force it to act. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^

The direct meaning of this is that experience presupposes interaction
between the subject and the object *outside it.* It is clear from this
that I would have got involved in an unpardonable contradiction with
myself had I tried negatively to define the object by the words
'*non*-experience'. Good gracious, it is precisely 'experience'. More
correctly: *one of the two essential conditions of experience.*

On the following page of your book (xiv), Mr Bogdanov, you formulate
somewhat differently the strange idea which you attributed to me. There
you would have me say that 'things-in-themselves', in the first place,
do exist, and, moreover, outside our experience; secondly, they are
subject to the law of causality. This again is most strange.

If things-in-themselves are 'subject to the law of causality', it is
plain that they do not exist outside experience. How did you fail to see
that when you attributed to me two propositions sharply contradicting
each other? And if you really thought I was contradicting myself here,
you should have immediately drawn your readers' attention to my
unforgivable lack of logic, since that disclosure alone would have
sufficed to nullify 'my' whole theory of knowledge. You are a bad
polemicist, Mr Bogdanov! Or, perhaps, you refrained from disclosing my
contradiction only out of a vague realisation that it existed only in
your imagination! If so, you should have pondered this 'experience' of
yours in order to make it clear instead of vague. By doing so and coming
to the conviction that my contradiction was but the fruit of your own
imagination, you would not have put it down to me, and at the same time
would have saved yourself from making a most ridiculous blunder. So here
again it must be said: you are a bad and clumsy polemicist, Mr Bogdanov.

Let's go on further, and first of all note that the expression
'things-in-themselves exist outside our experience' is not a very happy
one. It could mean that things in general are inaccessible to our
experience. This is how Kant understood it, and, as I remarked earlier,
contradicted himself as a result. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^ Nearly all the
neo-Kantians understand it in this way, too, and, in this case, Mach is
in agreement with them. To him, the words 'thing-in-itself' are always
linked with the notion of some kind of *x* which lies outside the bounds
of our experience. By virtue of such a notion of what is called the
thing-in-itself, Mach was quite logical in declaring the thing-in-itself
to be an absolutely unnecessary metaphysical appendage to the
conceptions we derive from experience. You, Mr Bogdanov, are looking at
this question through the eyes of your teacher and you evidently cannot
even for a moment admit that there may be people who employ the term
'thing-in-itself' in a quite different sense from the Kantians and
Machists. This is the reason why you are completely unable to understand
me, who is neither a neo-Kantian nor a Machist.

Yet the question is fairly simple. Even if I had decided to use the
unfortunate expression 'things-in-themselves exist outside of
experience', it would by no means have meant that things-in-themselves
are *inaccessible* to our experience but only that they exist even when
our experience does not extend to them, for one reason or another.

In saying '*our experience*', I have in mind human experience. But we
are aware that at one time there were no people on our planet. And if
there were no *people*, neither was there their *experience.* Yet the
earth was there. And this means that it (also a thing-in-itself!)
existed *outside* human experience. *Why* did it exist outside
experience? Was it because it could not in general be the object of
experience? No, it existed outside experience *only* because the
organisms, which by their structure are capable of having experience,
had not yet appeared. ^[\[50\]](#n50)^ In other words, 'existed outside
experience' means 'existed prior to experience'. That and nothing more.
So that when experience began, it (the earth) existed, not only outside
experience, but also in experience, constituting an essential condition
of experience. All this may be expressed briefly in these words:
experience is the result of the interaction of subject and object; but
the object does not cease to exist even when there is no interaction
between it and the subject, that is to say, when there is no experience.
The well-known proposition 'there is no object without subject' is
basically incorrect. ^[\[51\]](#n51)^ The object does not cease to exist
even when there is as yet no subject, or when its existence has already
ceased. And anybody to whom the conclusions of modern natural science
are not an empty phrase must necessarily agree with this. We have seen
that in accordance with the contemporary theory of evolution, the
subject appears only after the object has reached a certain stage of
development.

Those who contend that there can be no object without a subject are
simply confusing two quite distinct concepts: the existence of the
object 'in itself', and its existence in the *conception of the
subject.* We have no right to identify these two forms of existence.
Thus, for example, you, Mr Bogdanov, exist first 'in yourself', and,
secondly, in the conception, say, of Mr Lunacharsky, who takes you for a
most profound thinker. The confusing of the object 'in itself' with the
object as it exists for the subject is the very source of the confusion
by means of which the idealists of all colours and shades 'overthrow'
materialism.

The objections you, dear Sir, raise against me are based on the same
confusion. In point of fact, you are dissatisfied with 'my' definition
of matter as the source of sensations. Let us then examine more closely
what precisely causes your dissatisfaction.

You liken 'my' definition of matter to the proposition which runs 'a
soporific power is what induces sleep' (p xiii). You borrowed this
expression from one of MoliÃ¨re's characters, but, as usual, you have
reproduced it badly. MoliÃ¨re's character says 'opium induces sleep
*because* it has soporific power'. The funny thing here is that a person
accepts as explanation of a fact that which in reality is only another
way of stating the fact. If MoliÃ¨re's character had been content simply
to state the fact, to say: 'opium induces sleep', there would have been
absolutely nothing to laugh at. Now recollect what I say: 'Matter
arouses in us certain sensations.' Does this resemble the explanation
given by MoliÃ¨re's character? Not in the least. I am not explaining, but
simply stating what I believe to be an incontestable fact. All other
materialists act in exactly the same way. Those who know the history of
materialism are aware that none of the representatives of this teaching
ever asked themselves *why* the objects of the external world have the
capacity to arouse sensations in us. True, some English materialists
sometimes maintained that this took place by divine will. However, when
they voiced this pious thought, they were abandoning the viewpoint of
materialism. Once again it turns out, dear Sir, that you laughed at me
for no good reason. And when a man laughs at another for no good reason,
he simply makes himself look ridiculous.

Rira bien, qui rira le dernier.

You think that the definition 'Matter is what serves as the source of
our sensations' is an utterly empty phrase. The sole reason why you
think so is that you are chock-full of prejudices founded upon the
idealist theory of knowledge.

In pestering me with the question, what is it precisely that arouses
sensations in us, you really want me to tell you what exactly we know
about matter apart from its action on us. And when I reply: apart from
its action on us, it is completely unknown to us, you exclaim
triumphantly: 'That means we know nothing about it!' Now what grounds
have you for triumph? The grounds of your idealist conviction that to
know things only through the impressions they make upon us is not to
know them at all. This conviction came to you from Mach, who borrowed it
from Kant, who in turn had inherited it from Plato. ^[\[52\]](#n52)^ But
no matter how respectable this conviction may be by its age, it is
nevertheless quite incorrect.

*There is not and cannot be any other knowledge of the object than that
obtained by means of the impressions it makes on us.* Therefore, if I
recognise that matter is known to us only through the sensations which
it arouses in us, this in no way implies that I regard matter as
something 'unknown' and unknowable. On the contrary, it means, firstly,
that matter is knowable and, secondly, that it has become known to man
in the measure that he has succeeded in getting to know its properties
through impressions received from it during the lengthy process of his
zoological and historical existence.

If this is so, if we can know the object only through the impressions
which it produces on us, then it must be clear to anyone capable of
thought that if we *disregard* these impressions, we shall be quite
unable to say anything about the object other than that it exists.
^[\[53\]](#n53)^ Therefore whoever demands that we define the object
while disregarding these impressions, is demanding something absolutely
absurd. In its logical sense, or, to be more precise, in its logical
nonsense, this demand is tantamount to asking in what relationship the
object stands to the subject at a time when there is no relationship at
all between the two. And you, dear Sir, ask me precisely this absurd
question, demanding that I should tell you what matter is when it does
not arouse any sensations in us, that is to tell you the colour of a
rose when no one looks at it, what it smells like when no one smells it,
and so forth. The absurdity of your question is that the very manner of
its presentation precludes all possibility of giving a reasonable reply
to it. ^[\[54\]](#n54)^

Following in the footsteps of Mach, who *in this instance* is the true
pupil of Berkeley (there it is, the 'natural science of the twentieth
century'!), you, Mr Bogdanov, will say: if the object can be known to us
only through the sensations, and, consequently, the notions, which it
produces in us when the object is in some form of contact with us, there
is no logical need for us to acknowledge that the object has existence
independently of these sensations and notions. Earlier, in the same
passage where you obtained 'my' definition of matter, ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ I
replied to this objection, which seems to my now fairly numerous
idealist adversaries to be irrefutable. But either you cannot or do not
want to understand that reply, so I shall repeat it in the second part
of this letter when examining Mach's 'philosophy': since I am firmly
resolved 'to force understanding', to use an expression of Fichte's, if
not on you -- I have poor hopes of you -- then at least on those of the
readers who have no interest in defending idealist prejudices. However,
before proceeding to repeat my reply, I shall analyse and assess, for
what it is worth, the most important of the 'critical arguments' you
advance in your polemic with me.

You 'formulate carefully' in my 'original expressions' the following
idea: 'To their \[things-in-themselves -- GP\] forms and relationships
there correspond forms and relationships of phenomena -- as
hieroglyphics correspond to the things which they designate.' About this
idea you enter upon the following lengthy discourse:

Here there is a talk of the 'form' and the 'relationships' of
things-in-themselves. This means they are presumed to possess both one
and the other. Splendid. And do they have 'appearance'? A silly
question, the reader will say. How can they have *form* without having
any *appearance*? But these two words express one and the same thing. I
think so too. But here is what we read in Comrade Plekhanov's notes to
the Russian translation of Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach*: 'But "appearance"
is precisely the result of the action on us of things-in-themselves.
*Apart from this action they have no appearance.* Therefore, to contrast
their "appearance" as it exists in our consciousness to the "appearance"
they allegedly have in reality, is to fail to realise what concept is
connected with the word "appearance\"\... Thus, things-in-themselves can
have no appearance of any kind. Their "appearance" exists only in the
consciousness of those subjects on which they act\...' (p 112, 1906
edition, the year in which the collection referred to, *A Critique of
Our Critics*, was published.)

Replace everywhere the word 'appearance' in the above quotation by the
word 'form', its synonym, which in the present case fully conforms to it
in meaning, and Comrade Plekhanov brilliantly refutes Comrade Beltov.

Isn't that fine! Plekhanov brilliantly refutes Beltov, that is to say,
himself! Very spitefully said! But hold on, dear Sir, rira bien, qui
rira le dernier. Remember the circumstances in which I expressed the
idea which you are criticising and what was its *true* 'appearance'.

It was expressed in my controversy with Mr Conrad Schmidt, who
attributed to materialism the doctrine of the *identity* of being and
thinking, and said, addressing me, that if I was 'serious' in
recognising the action of things-in-themselves upon me, I must also
acknowledge that space and time exist objectively, and not just as forms
of contemplation peculiar to the subject. I replied to this as follows:

That space and time are forms of consciousness, and that, therefore,
*subjectivity* is their primary distinctive feature, ^[\[56\]](#n56)^
was already known to Thomas Hobbes, and would not be denied by any
present-day materialist. The whole question is whether certain forms or
relations of *things* correspond to these forms of consciousness. It
goes without saying that materialists can give only an affirmative
answer to this question, which, of course, does not mean that they
recognise the false (or rather, absurd) identity, which the Kantians,
including Herr Schmidt, would impose upon them with obliging naivety.
^[\[57\]](#n57)^ No, the forms and relations of things-in-themselves
cannot be what they *seem* to us, that is, as they appear to us as
'translated' in our minds. Our representations of the forms and
relations of things are no more than *hieroglyphics*; the latter
designate exactly these forms and relations, and this is enough for us
to be able to study how things-in-themselves affect us, and, in our
turn, to exert an influence on them. ^[\[58\]](#n58)^

What is this passage all about? About the same thing as I discussed with
you above, Mr Bogdanov: that the *object in itself* is one thing, and
the object in the conception of the subject is quite another thing. Now
the question is: am I logically entitled to replace here the word 'form'
by the word 'appearance', which, according to you, is its synonym? Let
us try it and see what happens. 'That space and time are appearances of
consciousness, and that, therefore, *subjectivity* is their primary
distinctive feature, was already known to Thomas Hobbes, and would not
be denied by any materialist\...' Wait a moment, how can that be? What
is this subjective 'appearance' of consciousness? I employ the word
'appearance' in the sense of that visual perception of an object which
exists in the subject's consciousness. The question is one of the
'sensuous contemplation' of the object, so that in the passage we are
discussing the expression 'appearance of consciousness' must signify --
if the word 'appearance' is, in fact, synonymous with the word 'form' --
nothing else than the visual perception of the consciousness of
consciousness. Leaving aside for the moment the question as to whether a
visual perception of this kind is possible, I direct your enlightened
attention, dear Sir, to the circumstance that here the visual perception
of the consciousness of consciousness would prove to be space and time;
but this is utter rubbish, stuff and nonsense. And this naturally was
unknown to Thomas Hobbes, and of course not a single materialist would
acknowledge it. What brought us to this nonsensical pass? An unfounded
belief in your capacity to analyse philosophical concepts. We believed
you when you said that the word 'appearance' is a synonym of the word
'form'; we substituted 'appearance' for 'form' and got a mishmash that
is even difficult to put into words. So 'appearance' is not synonymous
with 'form'? It is not; the concept 'appearance' does not by a long
chalk cover the concept 'form'. As Hegel in his *Science of Logic*
demonstrated very well, the 'form' of the object is identical with its
'appearance' only in a certain and, moreover, *superficial* sense, in
the sense of external form. A more profound analysis will lead us to
conceive form as a 'law' of the object, or, more correctly, as its
*structure*.

This important contribution of Hegel's ^[\[59\]](#n59)^ to the logical
doctrine of form was already known in Russia in the 1820s to people who
dealt with philosophy. To convince you of this I invite you to read the
following excerpt from a letter written by D Venevitinov to Countess
'NN' 'You see now', he wrote, after defining the concept of science,
'that the word *form* expresses not the external appearance of science,
but the general law which science must follow.' ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ It is
indeed a very great pity, Mr Bogdanov, that you are not aware of that
which, thanks to Venevitinov, was known at least to some Russian ladies
of society as long as eighty years ago!

Now, one more question: In what sense did I employ the expression 'forms
of consciousness' when arguing with Conrad Schmidt? In the sense of the
external *appearance* of consciousness, as Venevitinov would say? Of
course, not. I used the word 'form' in the sense of the 'law' of
consciousness, its 'structure'. So that in no respect was the word
'form' for me a synonym for 'appearance'; and one would have to
understand absolutely nothing about philosophy to propose that
substitution of one word for the other, which you proposed in order to
hold me up to ridicule.

Rira bien, qui rira le dernier.

Sometimes people become involved in lengthy arguments simply because
they are using words in different senses. Such arguments are boring and
futile. But far more boring and far more futile are the arguments in
which one contestant attaches a definite concept to particular words,
while his adversary, using the same words, attaches no definite concept
at all to them, and, consequently, is able to play with them as he
thinks fit. To my regret, I am now compelled to conduct such an argument
with you. When I used the word 'form', *I knew* what exactly should be
understood by it, whereas *you did not know*, because of your
astonishing ignorance of the history of philosophy; it did not even
occur to you that it was something requiring study and thought. You
permitted yourself to play with words, as only a person could do who did
not even suspect how dissimilar were the two concepts connected with
these words. The result was only what was to be expected. In exposing
the utter emptiness of your 'philology', not only was I bored myself,
but I was also compelled to bore my readers; and you, dear Sir, made
yourself a laughing-stock just because your 'philology' was so totally
lacking in content. What did you need to do that for?

Your 'philology', amazing in its emptiness, is also remarkable in
another respect, which I leave to the reader to characterise, if he or
she is not already too bored trying to follow my argument with you.

I have in mind those 'hieroglyphics' which are mentioned in the same
part of my article quoted by you in which I deal also with the question
of forms of consciousness.

This article ('Materialism Yet Again') dates to the beginning of 1899. I
took the word 'hieroglyphics' from Sechenov, who, at the beginning of
the nineties had already written in the article 'Objective Thought and
Reality':

No matter what objects may be in themselves, independent of our
consciousness -- let our impressions of them be but conventional signs
-- in any case, the similarity and distinction of the signs we perceive
correspond to the similarity and distinction of reality. In other words,
the similarities and distinctions which man finds among the objects he
perceives are real similarities and distinctions.

Take note, dear Sir, that the thought expressed by me in 'Materialism
Yet Again', and which provided you with a pretext for a truly scandalous
play on words, is completely identical with the idea expounded by
Sechenov in the above passage. Nor did I in the least hide the
similarity of my views to those of Sechenov; on the contrary, I stressed
this in one of my notes to the first edition of my translation of
Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach* (issued in 1892). ^[\[61\]](#n61)^ Therefore,
dear Sir, you had every opportunity to know that in matters of this kind
I adhered to the point of view of contemporary materialist physiologists
and not to that of eighteenth-century natural science. But that by the
way. The main point here is: in the new edition of my translation of
*Ludwig Feuerbach* published abroad in 1905 and in Russia in 1906, I
declared that while I continued to share Sechenov's *view* on this
question, his *terminology* seemed somehow ambiguous to me.

When he admits \[I said\] that our impressions may be only conventional
signs of things in themselves, he seems to acknowledge that things in
themselves have some kind of 'appearance' that we do not know of and
which is inaccessible to our consciousness. But '*appearance*' is
precisely only the result of the action upon us of the things in
themselves; *outside this action they have no 'appearance*'
*whatsoever.* Hence, to oppose their 'appearance' as it exists in our
consciousness to that 'appearance' of theirs which they supposedly have
in reality means not to realise which concept is connected with the word
'appearance'. Such an imprecision of expression underlies, as we said
above, all the 'gnosiologal' scholasticism of Kantianism. I know that Mr
Sechenov is not inclined to such scholasticism; I have already said that
his theory of knowledge is perfectly correct, but we must not make to
our opponents in philosophy concessions in terminology which prevent us
from expressing our own thoughts with complete precision.
^[\[62\]](#n62)^

Strictly speaking, this remark of mine could be reduced to this: if the
thing-in-itself has colour only when it is being looked at, and smell
only when it is being smelled, and so on, then in calling our
conceptions of it conventional signs, we give grounds for thinking that,
in our view, to its colour, smell, etc, as these exist in our
sensations, correspond some kind of colour-in-itself, some kind of
smell-in-itself, and so forth -- to put it briefly, some kind of
*sensations-in-themselves* that cannot become objects of *our
sensations.* That would have been a distortion of *Sechenov*'s *views*
which I share, and therefore in 1905 I said I was against the *Sechenov
terminology*. ^[\[63\]](#n63)^ But since I myself had formerly used the
same somewhat ambiguous terminology, I made haste to point this out:

Another reason why I make this reservation \[I added\] is because in the
notes to the first edition of my translation of this pamphlet by Engels
I also failed to express myself quite exactly and only subsequently felt
all the awkwardness of that inexactness. ^[\[64\]](#n64)^

After this reservation it would seem that any misunderstanding would be
impossible. But for you, dear Sir, even the impossible is possible. You
gave the 'appearance' of not noticing this reservation, and once again
launched upon your wretched play on words, basing this on the
identification of the terminology which I use *now* and that which I
*formerly* used, and which I myself rejected as somewhat ambiguous. The
'beauty' of such 'criticism' is obvious to any unbiased person, and
there is no need for me to characterise it. Many of my opponents in the
idealist camp are now following your example, 'criticising' my
philosophical views by cavilling at the weakness of the terminology
which I myself declared to be unsatisfactory before they took up their
'critical' pens. It is very likely that it was from me that some of
these gentlemen heard for the first time why in fact this terminology
was unsatisfactory. ^[\[65\]](#n65)^ They should not therefore be
surprised if I do not reply to their more or less voluminous works. By
no means every 'criticism' is worthy of counter-criticism.

To get back to you, Mr Bogdanov. You point maliciously to the fact that
the second edition of my translation of *Ludwig Feuerbach* was published
in the same year (1906) as my collection *A Critique of Our Critics.*
Why do you refer to this? This is why. You yourself were aware that it
was ridiculous and absurd to seize on expressions which I myself had
declared to be unsatisfactory before it had occurred to any of my
adversaries to criticise them. So you decided to assure your readers
that in 1906 I 'brilliantly refuted' myself by simultaneously employing
two different terminologies. You did not think it necessary to ask
yourself to which period of time the polemical article included in the
collection printed in 1906 belonged. I have said already that it dated
back to the beginning of 1899. I did not find it possible to correct the
terminology of this polemical article for the reasons I already
indicated in the preface to the second edition of my *Monist View of
History.* There I wrote:

I have here corrected only *slips* and *misprints* which had crept into
the first edition. I did not consider it right to make any changes in my
*arguments*, for the simple reason that this is a *polemical* work.
Making alterations in the substance of a *polemical* work is like
appearing before your adversary with a new weapon while compelling him
to fight with his old weapon. This is impermissible\...

You have again got yourself into a stupid mess, Mr Bogdanov, but this
time it was because you ignored the voice of your literary conscience,
warning you that you were acting wrongly in cavilling at terms which I
had already abandoned. The moral of this story is: the twinges of
literary conscience represent 'experience' which it is sometimes very
unwise to ignore. You should remember that, Mr Bogdanov.

Thus, we see that 'Comrade Plekhanov' does not at all refute 'Comrade
Beltov'. But you were not content to lay only one contradiction at my
door. You had a broader plan. After ascribing to 'Comrade Plekhanov'
contradictions with 'Comrade Beltov', you go on: 'But a minute later
Comrade Plekhanov cruelly avenges himself for Comrade Beltov.' (p xv)
What, spiteful again? Well, good luck to you! But\... rira bien, qui
rira le dernier.

You quote my notes to *Ludwig Feuerbach.* It says there, among other
things, that the appearance of the object depends upon the organisation
of the subject. 'I do not know how a snail sees', I say there, 'but I am
sure it does so differently from man.' Then I set forth this
consideration:

What is a snail *for me?* Part of the external world that is acting upon
me in a way determined by my organisation. So if I assume that the snail
in some way 'sees' the external world, I am forced to admit that the
'appearance' in which the external world presents itself to the snail is
itself determined by the properties of this real, existing world.

To you as a Machist, this consideration seems to have no rational basis.
When you quote it, you underline the word 'properties' and shout:

Properties! Why, the 'properties' of objects which include also their
'form' and their 'appearance' generally -- these 'properties' are
obviously 'the result of the action on us of things-in-themselves; they
have no "properties" apart from this action on us'! Surely the concept
'properties' has the same *empirical* origin as the concepts
'appearance' and 'form'? It is their generic concept and comes from
experience by the same way of abstraction. Whence come the 'properties'
of things-in-themselves? Their properties exist only in the
consciousness of those subjects on which they act. ^[\[66\]](#n66)^

You know already, Mr Bogdanov, how careless you were in proclaiming
'appearance' to be a synonym of 'form'. Now I have the honour to bring
to your notice that you have acted just as carelessly in identifying the
'appearance' of the object with its 'properties', and in confronting me
with the ironical question: whence come the 'properties' of the
'things-in-themselves'? You think that this question will bowl me over,
since it is to me you ascribed the idea that the 'properties' of things
exist only in the consciousness of those subjects upon which they act.
The fact is, however, that I have never voiced this idea, which is one
worthy only of subjective idealists of the calibre of Berkeley, Mach and
their followers. I said something quite different, as you yourself
should know, by the way, having read, and even quoted, my notes to
*Ludwig Feuerbach*.

When I said that a snail sees the external world differently from the
way it is seen by man, I remarked:

From this, however, it does not follow that the properties of the
external world have only subjective significance. By no means! If a man
and a snail move from point A to point B, the straight line will be the
shortest distance between those two points for both the man and the
snail; if both these organisms went along a broken line *they would have
to expend a greater amount of labour for their advance.* Consequently,
*the properties of space* have *also objective significance*, although
they are 'seen' differently by different organisms at different stages
of development. ^[\[67\]](#n67)^

Now, what right did you have to ascribe to me the subjective-idealist
view on the properties of things as something existing only in the
consciousness of the subject? You will now tell us, perhaps, that space
is not matter. Let us assume that this is true, and speak about matter.

Since in discussing philosophy with you it is necessary to speak in a
popular way, I shall take an example: if, to use Hegel's words quoted
above, the thing-in-itself has colour only when it is being looked at,
and smell only when it is being smelled and so on, it is as clear as
daylight that by ceasing to look at it or smell it, we do not deprive it
of the capacity to evoke in us again the sensation of colour when we
look at it again, or the sensation of smell when we again carry it to
our nose, and so forth. This capacity is the property of the thing as a
thing-in-itself, that is to say, a property *independent* of the
subject. Is that clear?

Whenever you feel inclined to translate that into philosophical
language, turn to Hegel -- he is also an idealist, but not a subjective
one, and *in this case* that's the whole point. This old man of genius
will explain to you that in philosophy the word 'properties' also has
two meanings: the properties of the given thing are manifested, first of
all, *in its relation to others.* But the concept of properties is not
exhausted by this. Why is it that one thing discloses itself in one way
in its relation to others, while another thing will disclose itself
differently? Obviously, because this other thing-*in-itself* is not the
same as the first one. ^[\[68\]](#n68)^

And that's how it really is. Although the thing-in-itself has colour
only when it is being looked at, then, taking this condition for
granted, if the rose is red and the corn-flower blue, it is clear that
the reason for this distinction must be sought in the distinctiveness of
the properties possessed by the thing-in-itself, either the one we call
a rose or the one we call a corn-flower, quite independently of the
subject looking at them.

By acting upon us, the thing-in-itself arouses in us a series of
sensations on the basis of which we form our conception of it. Once we
have this conception, the thing-in-itself takes on a two-fold character:
it exists, firstly, in itself, and, secondly, in our conception of it.
Its properties -- let us say, its structure, exist in exactly the same
way: firstly, in itself, and, secondly, in our conception of it. That is
all there is to it.

When I stated that the 'appearance' of the thing was only the result of
its action on us, I had in mind the properties of the thing as they are
*reflected in the conception of the subject* (*im Subjectiven Sinne
aufgefasst*, as Hegel would have said, but in the words of Marx, 'as
they exist translated into the language of human consciousness').
However, in stating the above, I was far from affirming that the
properties of things exist only in our conception. On the contrary, that
is just why you do not like my philosophy -- because it unhesitatingly
recognises (besides the existence of the object in the conception of the
subject) the existence of the 'object-in-itself' independently of the
subject's consciousness, and maintains, *in this* -- *extremely rare* --
*case, in the words of Kant*, that it is absurd to conclude that a
phenomenon exists without that which appears in it. ^[\[69\]](#n69)^

'But this is dualism', we are told by people who are favourably disposed
to the idealist 'monism' *Ã  la* Mach, Verworn, ^[\[70\]](#n70)^
Avenarius, and others. No, dear Sirs, we reply, there is not even a
smell of dualism here. True, it might be possible justly to reproach us
with dualism if we separated the subject with its conception from the
object. But we do not commit this sin. I said earlier that the existence
of the subject presupposes that the object has reached a certain stage
of development. What does this mean? Nothing more and nothing less than
that *the subject itself is one of the constituent parts of the
objective world.* Feuerbach aptly remarked:

I feel and think, not as a subject opposed to the object, but as a
*subject-object*, as a real material being. For me the object is not
only an object of conception; it is also the basis, the necessary
condition, of my conception. The objective world is to be found not only
outside myself; it is also within me, in my own skin. Man is but a part
of nature, a part of being; there is no room, therefore, for
contradiction between his thinking and being. ^[\[71\]](#n71)^

Elsewhere (*Wider den Dualismus von Leib und Seele, Fleisch und Geist*),
he says: 'To myself, I am a psychological object; to others, I am a
*physiological* object.' ^[\[72\]](#n72)^

Finally, he reiterates: 'My body, as a whole, is my "self," my true
essence. What thinks is not the abstract being, but this real being,
this body.' Now, if this is the case (and from the materialist point of
view, it is the case precisely), it is not difficult to understand that
subjective 'experiences' are really nothing else but the
self-consciousness of the object, its consciousness of itself, as well
as of that great whole ('the external world') to which it itself
belongs. The organism which is endowed with thought exists not only '*in
itself*', and not only '*for others*' (in the consciousness of other
organisms), but also '*for itself*'. You, Mr Bogdanov, exist not only as
a given mass of matter, and not only in the mind of the Blessed Anatoly,
who regards you as a profound thinker, you exist also in your own mind
conceiving that mass of matter of which you are composed as nobody else
but Mr Bogdanov. ^[\[73\]](#n73)^ So our sham dualism turns out to be an
unmistakable monism. And that's not all. It is the only true, that is to
say, the only possible monism. For *how* is the antinomy of subject and
object resolved in idealism? Idealism proclaims that the object is only
the subject's 'experience', or, in other words, that the object does not
exist in itself. However, as Feuerbach said, this is not *solving* the
problem; it is simply *evading its solution*. ^[\[74\]](#n74)^

All this is as simple as ABC. Nevertheless, not only does it remain
'*unknown*' to you, Mr Bogdanov, it is also '*unknowable*' for you. You
were spoiled in your early youth by your philosophical wet-nurse Mach,
and ever since then you have been quite incapable of comprehending even
the most simple and most clear truths of contemporary materialism. So
when you encounter one or other of these simple and clear truths, say,
in my writings, it immediately acquires a misshapen 'appearance' in your
mind, causing you under the influence of this 'experience' to cackle
like the goose that saved the Capitol and to start raising against me
objections that spread the most tiresome confusion of ideas and the most
pernicious tedium for miles around.

In Shakespeare's *Merchant of Venice*, Bassanio says of Gratiano: 'His
reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you
shall seek all day ere you find them; and when you have them, they are
not worth the search.'

The truth must be told, Mr Bogdanov: you bear no resemblance to
Gratiano: *your* 'chaff' does not conceal even one grain of wheat.
Moreover, it has been rotting on the philosophical threshing-floor for
more than a hundred and fifty years and mouse-eaten long since into the
bargain. Yet you shamelessly pass it off as though it had come from the
very last harvest of 'natural science'. Is it pleasant to poke among the
leavings of mice? And you were puzzled as to why I was not in a hurry to
engage in polemics with you\...

But I was forgetting that you are not only an *unsuccessful
'critic*'\... of Marx and Engels, but also one *lacking in courage.*
While 'criticising' their philosophical views, you now try to convince
your readers that your disagreement is, strictly speaking, only with me,
presenting me on that score as a pupil of Baron Holbach's. Your present,
shall we say, lack of frankness, forces me to remind you once more of
the good old times -- and, perhaps, not so old -- of 1905, when you were
still artless enough to acknowledge me as one who shared Engels'
philosophical views. You yourself know, dear Sir, that you were then
much nearer the truth. And just in case any naive reader does not know
of this, I shall make fairly long extracts from Engels' *Ãber
historischen Materialismus*, which I already quoted in my first letter.
In the first section of the article Engels, among other things, defends
materialism against the agnostics. We shall concentrate on this defence.

Leaving aside, as being irrelevant here, Engels' critical remark
concerning the views of the agnostics on the existence of God, I shall
quote almost fully what he says on the question of the 'thing-in-itself'
and the possibility of it being known by us.

According to Engels, the agnostic admits that all our knowledge is based
upon the information (*Mitteilungen*) which we receive through our
senses. But, admitting this, the agnostic asks: How do we know that our
senses give us correct representations of the things-in-themselves which
we perceive through them? Engels replies to this by citing the words of
Faust: '*Im Anfang war die That*.' ('In the beginning was the deed.')
Then he continues:

From the moment we turn to our own use these objects, according to the
qualities we perceive \[*Wahrnehmen*\] in them, we put to an infallible
test the correctness or otherwise of our sense-perceptions. If these
perceptions have been wrong, then our estimate of the use to which an
object can be turned must also be wrong, and our attempt must fail. But
if we succeed in accomplishing our aim, if we find that the object does
agree with our idea of it, and does answer the purpose we intended it
for, then that is positive proof that our perceptions of it and of its
qualities, *so far*, agree with reality outside ourselves \[*mit der
ausser uns bestehenden Wirklichkeit*\]. ^[\[75\]](#n75)^

Errors in our judgements concerning the properties of the things
perceived are caused, in Engels' opinion, by the fact that the
perceptions upon which we acted were either superficial or incomplete,
or combined with the results of other perceptions in a way not warranted
by reality (*durch die Sachlage*). Engels continues:

So long as we take care to train and to use our senses properly, and to
keep our action within the limits prescribed by perceptions properly
made and properly used, so long we shall find that the result of our
action proves the conformity of our perceptions \[Ã¼bereinstimmen\] with
the objective nature of the things perceived. Not in one single
instance, so far, have we been led to the conclusion that our
sense-perceptions, scientifically controlled, induce in our minds ideas
respecting the outer world that are, by their very nature, at variance
with reality, or that there is an inherent incompatibility
\[Unvertraglichkeit\] between the outer world and our sense-perceptions
of it. ^[\[76\]](#n76)^

However, the 'neo-Kantian agnostic' does not give up. He replies that
while we may correctly perceive the properties of a thing, we cannot by
any sensuous perception or mental process grasp the thing-in-itself,
which is thus beyond our knowledge. But this argument, as alike as two
peas to what Mach thinks of the thing-in-itself, does not disturb
Engels. He says that Hegel long since replied to this:

If you know all the qualities of a thing, you know the thing itself;
nothing remains but the fact that the said thing exists without us; and
when your senses have taught you that fact, you have grasped the last
remnant of the thing-in-itself, Kant's celebrated unknowable *Ding an
sich.*

To this Engels added that in Kant's time our knowledge of material
things was so fragmentary that, behind each of them, a mysterious
thing-in-itself might well be suspected.

But one after another these\... things have been grasped, analysed, and,
what is more, *reproduced* by the giant progress of science; and what we
can produce we certainly cannot consider as unknowable. ^[\[77\]](#n77)^

I have the honour to inform you, Mr Bogdanov -- if you have really not
noticed it -- that here Engels, in a few words, sets forth the
principles of the same theory of knowledge which I have been defending
till now and shall go on defending. I declare in advance my readiness to
renounce all my views on the theory of knowledge which would prove to be
in contradiction with these principles -- so firmly convinced am I of
their unshakeable truth. If you think that some details of second- or
third-rate importance in my theory of knowledge really differ from
Engels' teaching, then please prove it. No matter how tiresome it is to
be disputing with you, in this case, you would not have long to wait for
an answer. Meanwhile, I invite you to 'drop your allegories' and give
all of us, both your willing and unwilling readers, an answer to the
following question: *do you share the materialist views of Engels as
expressed in the above quotations?*

But remember that we want a 'plain' answer to this 'cursed question'
without any 'allegories' or 'empty hypotheses'. ^[\[78\]](#n78)^ And
since you are very much addicted to 'empty hypotheses' and unnecessary
'allegories', I warn you not to seize on separate words, but to speak to
the point. *Only* on this condition can we discuss the matter with any
advantage to the reading public. But if this condition is fulfilled the
whole controversy will be simplified to the last degree.

I have my reasons for saying this; I have a fair idea of your method of
'philosophical' (hm!) thinking, and I foresee the possibility of such a
diversion, for example, as the following.

Engels said that it is no longer possible to believe -- as was
permissible in Kant's time -- that behind each thing forming part of
nature around us there is concealed some kind of mysterious
thing-in-itself which is beyond our knowledge. In view of this, Mr
Bogdanov, you are capable of placing the great theoretician of Marxism
in the same category as Mach for having *denied* the existence of the
thing-in-itself. But a sophism like this is so pitiful that it is really
not worth resorting to.

It is strikingly clear from Engels' categorical admission of 'the
reality outside ourselves', *which may or may not correspond to our idea
of it*, that according to his teaching the existence of things *is not
confined* to their existence in our perception. Engels denies the
*existence only of the Kantian thing-in-itself*, that is to say, only
one which is alleged not to be subject to the law of causality and is
beyond our knowledge. Here again I am in complete agreement with Engels,
as you may easily verify by scrutinising my articles against Conrad
Schmidt, which were reprinted in *A Critique of Our Critics*, and which
you referred to in your controversy with me. ^[\[79\]](#n79)^
Consequently, there is no need to 'quibble' in this respect.

All the more so, since, in accordance with the views of Engels, quoted
at the beginning of my letter, the real unity of the world existing
independently of our ideas is precisely in its materiality. This is
exactly the standpoint which I advanced in my disputes with the
neo-Kantians, and which served as a pretext for your ill-conceived
attacks upon my definition of matter.

Logic has its own rules, and all 'empty hypotheses' are impotent before
them. If you, Mr Bogdanov, really wish to be a Marxist, you will have
above all to revolt against your mentor, Mach, and 'bow' to what he is
trying to 'burn' after the example set by the bishop of blessed memory,
Berkeley of Cloyne. You will have to confess that 'bodies' are not just
the logical symbols of complexes of sensations, but that they are the
basis of these sensations and exist independently of them. There is no
other way out. One cannot be a Marxist yet reject the philosophical
basis of Marxism.

He who, like Mach, considers that bodies are simple logical symbols for
complexes of sensations must share the fate that inevitably befalls all
subjective idealists: he will arrive at solipsism, or, in an endeavour
to avoid this, will get entangled in insoluble contradictions. That is
what happened to Mach. Don't you believe that, Mr Bogdanov? I shall
prove it to you all the more willingly, since in revealing your
teacher's weaknesses, I shall at the same time be revealing *your own*
'philosophical' weaknesses; no copy is ever better than the original.
And after all it is more pleasant to deal with the original than with
the copy, and particularly such a dim one as your 'empiriomonist'
exercises.

### II

So, I part with you, dear Sir, and go on to Mach. Well, that's a load
off my shoulders; and I'm sure the reader will also breathe a sigh of
relief.

Mach wishes to combat metaphysics. The very first chapter of his book,
*Analysis of Sensations*, is devoted to 'preliminary remarks against
metaphysics'. However, it is just these preliminary remarks which show
that the survivals of idealist metaphysics are too tenacious in him.

He himself describes what exactly impelled him to philosophic
reflections, and the character they took. He writes:

When I was very young (I was fifteen years old at the time) I once found
in my father's library Kant's work, *The Prolegomena To Every Future
Metaphysic*, and I have always looked upon this incident as a happy one
for me. This work made a great and lasting impression on me, the equal
of which I did not again experience in the reading of philosophical
works. Two or three years later, I suddenly realised what a superfluous
role was played by the 'thing-in-itself'. One fine summer day, when I
was strolling in the open air, the whole world all at once seemed to me
to be *one* complex of interconnected sensations, and my 'ego' a part of
this complex, a part in which these sensations were only more strongly
connected. Although I did not reflect upon this properly until later,
this moment had decisive importance for the whole of my world-outlook.
^[\[80\]](#n80)^

We can see from this that Mach's thought followed the same direction as
Fichte's, who at one time also took Kant's transcendental idealism as
his starting point and soon came also to the same conclusion that the
thing-in-itself played a quite 'superfluous' role. However, Fichte had a
good knowledge of philosophy, whereas Mach says of himself that he could
devote time to philosophy only on his Sunday walks (*doch nur als
SonntagsjÃ¤ger durchstreifen*). ^[\[81\]](#n81)^ Therefore, Fichte's
philosophical views shaped into a fairly orderly system, though
suffering from internal contradictions, while Mach's 'anti-metaphysical'
Sunday walks 'in the open air' had quite sad consequences.

Judge for yourself. The whole world round Mach 'all at once' seemed to
him to be one complex of sensations, and his '*ego*' part of this
complex. But if the '*ego*' is only part of the world, it is clear that
only an insignificant part of the worldly complex of sensations falls to
the share of the '*ego*', while the remaining and incomparably greater
part exists '*outside of the ego*', and is the external world in
relation to him, the '*non-ego*'. What is the outcome of this? It is a
case of '*ego*' and '*non-ego*', or subject and object, or that
self-same antinomy which, as Engels justifiably remarked, is the
fundamental question of all modern philosophy, and which Mach, imbued
with a sovereign contempt for 'metaphysics', wished to transcend.
Indeed, not at all a bad result of his Sunday walks. However, this was
not the only result, as we shall see presently, of Mach's meditations
'in the open air'. There were other no less remarkable results.

Once the antinomy of the subject and the object (the '*ego*' and the
external world) is given, it must be resolved somehow; and for this it
is certainly necessary to explain what exactly are the relationships
between the two elements composing the antinomy. Mach declares that the
whole world is *one* complex of interconnected sensations. Obviously, he
believes this is the answer being sought to the question of the
relationships between the '*ego*' and the external world and the
external world and the '*ego*'. But I ask, in the words of Heine: '*Is
that the answer, really?*'

Let us assume that the sensations of which the '*ego*' consists are
indeed 'connected' with the sensations that constitute the external
world.

But in this assumption there is not even a hint of the *character* of
this connection. Mach, for instance, does not approve of solipsism. He
says: 'es gibt keinen isolierten Forscher' ('there is no such thing as
an isolated investigator'), ^[\[82\]](#n82)^ and, of course, he is
right. But it will suffice us to assume that there are only *two*
investigators to find ourselves besieged on all sides by those very
metaphysical questions that Mach was anxious to abolish by means of the
now famous *coup d'Ã©tat* 'in the open air'. We shall call our two
'investigators' A and B. Both A and B are connected with that great
complex of sensations which -- we are assured by Mach, although he does
not prove his assurance in any way at all -- constitutes the universe,
the 'whole world'. It may well be asked: can A and B know of each
other's existence? At first glance, the question appears to be almost
superfluous; of course, they can know of each other, because if they
could not then each would be in relation to the other an inaccessible
and unknowable thing-in-itself and such a thing was pronounced
non-existing on that Sunday when the whole world appeared to Mach as one
integral complex of sensations. But the matter is more complicated
precisely by the circumstance that 'investigator' A can become known to
'investigator' B, and contrariwise. If A has learned of B's existence,
it means he must have had a definite notion of him. And since this is
the case, then B exists not only *in himself*, as a part of the great
world complex of sensations, but also in the mind of A, who is also no
more than a part of this complex. In other words, investigator B is in
relation to investigator A an *object*, external to A, and producing a
certain impression on him. Thus, we are confronted not only with the
antinomy of the subject and object, but also with some idea of how it is
resolved: the object exists outside the subject but this does not hinder
the object from arousing certain sensations in the subject. The
thing-in-itself, which we thought we had written off once and for all as
a result of Mach's Sunday discovery, has turned up again. True, Mach
waged war on the unknowable thing-in-itself, but now we have to deal
with a thing which is fully accessible to our consciousness:
'investigator' B can be 'investigated' by 'investigator' A, and B on his
part can do the same good turn to A. And this shows that we have made a
step forward. But it is a step forward only in relation to Kant's
transcendental idealism, and not at all in respect to materialism, which
*denies* that the thing-in-itself is unknowable, as you and I, Mr
Bogdanov, are perfectly well aware after all that has been said above.
What then distinguishes Mach's 'philosophy' from materialism? Let me
explain.

The materialist will say that each of our two investigators is none
other than a 'subject-object', a real material being, a body, possessing
the capacity to sense and think. Whereas the rebel against metaphysics,
Mach, will raise the objection that since bodies are but the 'logical
symbols for complexes of elements (complexes of sensations)', we have no
logical right to admit that our investigators are material beings, we
are obliged to regard them as parts of the world complex of sensations.
Meantime we shall neither dispute nor contradict this. For the moment,
we shall agree that our 'investigators' represent, so to speak, small
complexes of sensations. But our tractability does not remove the
obstacles in our way; we are still in a state of complete ignorance
regarding the way A gets to know of the existence and the properties of
B. If we had assumed from the standpoint of materialism that B, by his
organism and his acts, arouses definite sensations in A, which then
become the basis of definite conceptions, the result would be sheer
nonsense: one complex of sensations arousing certain sensations in
another complex of sensations? This would have been even worse than the
famous 'philosophy' which explains that the earth rests on whales, the
whales swim on water, and the water is on the earth. Why, even Mach
himself, as we shall see later, protests against such assumptions.
However, let's not stray from our interesting subject. The assumption
that B becomes known to A by arousing certain sensations in the latter,
has led us into absurdity. And we are led into the same absurdity, as we
saw earlier, by the assumption that B is beyond the reach of A's
knowledge. What are we to do now? Where are we to find the answer to our
importunate question? Someone may advise us to recall Leibnitz and
appeal to his 'pre-established harmony'. Since we happen to be very
amenable at the moment, we might, perhaps, have accepted such advice,
but the implacable Mach has deprived us of this last way out: he
pronounces pre-established harmony to be a monstrous theory (*monstruose
Theorie*). ^[\[83\]](#n83)^

All right, we agree to reject it; what good is a monstrous theory to us!
But, unfortunately, on page 38 of the Russian translation of *Analyse
der Empfindungen*, we come across the following:

Independent scientific research is easily rendered unintelligible where
a view suitable for a special, strictly limited aim is made beforehand
the basis of *all* investigations. This happens, for instance, when we
regard all experiences as 'actions' of the external world reaching our
consciousness. This brings us up against a whole series of metaphysical
difficulties that appear to be absolutely insoluble. But these evaporate
directly we look at the problem in a mathematical sense, so to speak,
that is, when we realise that what is valuable for us is only the
establishment of *functional relationships*, the elucidation of the
*dependence existing between our experiences.* Then it becomes first of
all clear that the establishment of a connection between them and some
kind of unknown and unspecified primordial variables
(things-in-themselves) is a matter that is purely fictitious and without
purpose.

Mach categorically declares that it is absurd to consider our
experiences as the result of the action of the external world reaching
our consciousness. We take his word for it and say to ourselves: if at a
given moment we have the 'experience' of hearing another person's voice,
we should be very much in error if we thought to explain this
'experience' by the action upon us of the external world, or, strictly
speaking, that part of it consisting of the person speaking. Every
assumption of such action, Mach assures us, is obsolete metaphysics. It
remains, therefore, for us to suppose that we hear the other person's
voice, not because he is speaking (and acting upon us through air
vibrations), but because we have an 'experience' of him thanks to which
he seems to us to be speaking. And if he hears our reply, this also is
not to be explained by the fact that the air vibrations caused by us are
exciting in him certain auricular sensations, but by his 'experience',
the purport of which is that it seems to him we are replying. This,
indeed, could not be more lucid, and here there are really no
'metaphysical difficulties'. But isn't this -- by your leave! -- again
that same theory of 'pre-established harmony' that Mach described as
monstrous? ^[\[84\]](#n84)^

Mach proves to us that the only valuable thing for us is to establish
functional relationships, that is to say, to elucidate the dependence of
*our* experiences on one another. Again we accept his word for it, and
again say to ourselves: since the whole matter is one of establishing
the functional dependency of *our* experiences upon one another, we have
no right to recognise that the existence of other people is independent
of these experiences. Such recognition would give rise to a whole tangle
of 'metaphysical difficulties'. But still this is not all. The same
consideration leads us to believe that we cannot, without sinning
against logic, acknowledge the existence of those 'elements' which do
not belong to our 'ego', and comprise the '*non-ego*', the external
world. In general, nothing exists *except our experiences.* Everything
else is invention, 'metaphysics'. Long live solipsism! ^[\[85\]](#n85)^

#If Mach believes he can get over this undoubted 'difficulty' by
distinguishing between '*ego*' in its narrowest sense ^[\[86\]](#n86)^
and '*ego*' in a wider sense, ^[\[87\]](#n87)^ he is terribly mistaken.
His extended '*ego*' does, in fact, include, as he himself indicates
with a reassuring mien, the external world, in the composition of which
there are also, by the way, other '*egos*'. But this distinction was
made already by Fichte, with whom '*ego*' is contrasted to '*non-ego*'
(and this '*non-ego*' embraces other individuals). ^[\[88\]](#n88)^
However, this did not prevent Fichte from remaining a subjective
idealist -- and for a very simple reason: with him, as with Berkeley and
Mach, '*non-ego*' existed *only in the conception of the 'ego*'. Since
the way out of the boundaries of '*ego*' was closed (very firmly) to
Fichte by his denial of the existence of the thing-in-itself, all
theoretical possibility of his escaping solipsism vanished. But neither
is solipsism a way out; Fichte, therefore, sought safety in the absolute
'ego'.

It is clear that my absolute '*ego*' \[he wrote to Jacoby\] is not the
individual\... but the individual must be deduced from the absolute
'*ego*'. My *Doctrine of Science* will do this in the doctrine of
natural right.

Unfortunately, the *Doctrine of Science* did not do this. Fichte never
succeeded in coping theoretically with solipsism. Neither does Mach. But
Fichte, being a great master in the treatment of philosophical
conceptions, was, at least, aware of the weaknesses in his own
philosophy. Mach, who is (probably) a good physicist, is (undoubtedly) a
bad thinker, and is completely unaware that his 'philosophy' is
overflowing with the most unacceptable and glaring contradictions. He
strolls in and out of these contradictions with an (imperturbable)
calmness of spirit that is truly worthy of a better cause.

Here, look at this, Mr Bogdanov! A question occurs to Mach: does
inorganic matter also experience sensations? He has this to say
regarding it:

The question is natural enough, if we proceed from the current
widespread physical notions according to which matter is the *immediate*
and indisputably given *reality*, out of which everything, inorganic and
organic, is constructed. Then, indeed, sensation must suddenly arise
somewhere in this structure consisting of matter, or else must have
previously been present in the foundation. From *our* standpoint, the
question is fundamentally a false one. For us, matter is not what is
primarily given. Rather, what is primarily given are the *elements*,
which in a certain definite relation are designated as sensations.
^[\[89\]](#n89)^

To give Mach his due, he is quite logical here. He is no less logical,
too, on the following page, where, after repeating that matter is
nothing else than a definite kind of connection between elements, he
rightly deduces:

Consequently, the question of sensation in matter should be formulated
in this way: does a definite kind of connection of elements experience
sensations (elements which in a certain relationship are the selfsame
sensations)? No one will put this question in such a form.
^[\[90\]](#n90)^

That is so. But the following passage, which immediately precedes Mach's
logical (*from Mach*'s *point of view*) argument on matter just quoted,
is completely illogical:

If, while I experience some sensation, I or someone else could observe
my brain with all possible physical and chemical appliances, it would be
possible to ascertain with what processes of the organism particular
sensations are connected. Then, at least by analogy, we might come
nearer to a solution of the oft-raised question: how far does sensation
extend in the organic world, do the lower animals have sensations, do
plants have sensations? ^[\[91\]](#n91)^

Far be it from me to raise the question once again here: where the
'someone else' to observe 'my' brain would come from. We already know
that in Mach's 'philosophy' there is positively nowhere he could come
from. But we are already accustomed to *this* lack of logic in our
'philosopher'; it no longer interests us. We have something more
important in mind. Mach told us that 'the question of sensation in
matter should be formulated in this way: does a definite kind of
connection of elements experience 'sensations (elements which in a
certain relationship are the self-same sensations)'? And we agreed with
him that it was absurd to put the question in this form. Now if this is
true, it is no less absurd to pose the question as to whether the lower
animals have sensations and the plants have sensations. Mach, however,
has not lost hope of 'coming nearer' to a solution of this question,
which, from his standpoint, is absurd. How to approach a solution? 'At
least by analogy.' By analogy with what? With what goes on in my brain
when I experience certain sensations. And what is my brain? Part of my
body. And what is body? Matter. And what is matter? 'Nothing else than a
definite kind of connection of elements.' Therefore, we have to deduce
as Mach did: consequently, the question of what goes on in my brain when
I experience a certain sensation should be formulated thus -- what goes
on in a definite kind of connection of a definite kind of 'elements'
composing the '*ego*', 'which in a certain relationship are the selfsame
sensations', when the '*ego*' experiences sensations? This question is
as impossible logically (from Mach's point of view) as the question
regarding sensations in inorganic matter. Yet, we run into this question
in one form or another on almost every page of *Analyse der
Empfindungen.* Why is this?

Here is the reason. As a naturalist, Mach is constantly compelled to
adopt the *materialist standpoint*, though he is quite unaware of it.
And every time he does this, he comes into logical conflict with the
*idealist basis* of his own 'philosophy'. Here is an example. Mach says:

Together with a vast number of physiologists and contemporary
psychologists, I\... am convinced that the phenomena of will must become
comprehensible exclusively -- to put it briefly, and in generally
understood terms -- from organic-physical forces. ^[\[92\]](#n92)^

This sentence, 'to put it briefly, and in generally understood terms',
makes sense only when it comes from the pen of a materialist.
^[\[93\]](#n93)^

Another example.

The adaptation to chemical and living conditions', we read on page 91 of
the same book, 'expressed in *colour*, demands a great deal more
*movement* than adaptation to the chemical living conditions manifested
in taste and smell.

This is a very apt way of putting it, but it is still a completely
materialist idea. ^[\[94\]](#n94)^

Third example. Mach writes:

If some kind of process is going on in both inorganic and organic
bodies, a process fully determined by the circumstances of the given
moment, and limited to itself so that no further effects arise from it,
we can scarcely speak of an aim; such a case, for example, as when
irritation causes a sensation of light, or a muscular contraction.
^[\[95\]](#n95)^

It is impossible not to agree with this. But the case analysed by Mach
presupposes such irritation (of an organ of the given subject) the
*effect* of which is sensation. This is a purely materialist view on the
origin of sensations, and as such it simply does not tally with Mach's
teaching that the body is but the *symbol* (of some aggregate of
sensations).

The naturalist in Mach tends towards materialism. It could not be
otherwise; there cannot be a *non*-materialist natural science. But the
'philosopher' in Mach tends towards idealism. This is also perfectly
understandable. The public opinion of the contemporary (conservative)
bourgeoisie, at grips with the contemporary (revolutionary) proletariat,
is too hostile to materialism for it to be anything but exceedingly rare
that a naturalist should declare himself outright, as Haeckel did, on
the side of materialist monism. Mach has two souls in his breast. Hence
his inconsistency. ^[\[96\]](#n96)^

For all that, I must again give him his due. He is *not only*
ill-informed on the question: idealism *or* materialism? It is not only
that he does not understand materialism. He does not understand idealism
either.

You do not believe this, Mr Bogdanov? Read on. Mach complains that it
was considered possible to convert him either into an idealist -- a
follower of Berkeley (Berkeleyaner) or into a materialist. He considers
such an accusation to be groundless. 'To this charge, I plead not
guilty', he says. ^[\[97\]](#n97)^ On page 288 (of the Russian
translation) the same 'protest' is repeated. But on page 292, Mach,
defining his 'very peculiar' relationship with Kant, writes:

Kant's critical idealism was, as I must acknowledge with the deepest
gratitude, the starting point of all my critical thought. But I found it
impossible to remain faithful to it. Very soon I returned to the views
of *Berkeley*, which are maintained in more or less hidden form in the
works of *Kant*. Through research in the field of the physiology of the
sense-organs, and the study of *Herbart*, I arrived at views akin to
those of *Hume*, although at that time I was not acquainted with
*Hume*'s own works. And even today I cannot help regarding *Berkeley*
and *Hume* as far more consistent thinkers than *Kant.*

It follows, then, that there is no smoke without fire. And what a fire!
One might say we have a real blaze here! In fact, *Machism is only
Berkeleyism refashioned a little and repainted in the colours of
'twentieth-century natural science*'. It was not by chance that Mach
dedicated his work *Erkenntnis und Irrthum* to Wilhelm Schuppe, who, say
what you like, is an idealist of the purest water, a fact that can be
easily verified by reading his *Erkenntnistheoretische Logik.*

But -- it is impossible to speak of Mach's philosophy without numerous
'buts' -- our philosopher does also hold views which, perhaps, draw him
away from Berkeley. Thus he says:

It is true that some species have perished, just as there is no doubt
that some species have come into being. Therefore the sphere of action
of will, striving after pleasure and avoiding suffering, must extend
beyond the bounds of the preservation of the genus. Will preserves the
genus when it is worth preserving, and destroys it when its further
existence ceases to be useful. ^[\[98\]](#n98)^

What 'will' is this? Whose? Where did it spring from? Berkeley would
have replied, of course, that it is the will of God. And such a reply
would have ended many misunderstandings in the mind of a religious
person. It would also have had the advantage that it might have provided
a new argument in favour of the religious views of that friend of yours,
Mr Bogdanov -- the Blessed Anatoly. However, Mach does not say a word
about God; therefore, we shall reject the 'hypothesis of God' and turn
our attention to the following words of our 'thinker' -- Mach. 'One may
accept Schopenhauer's idea of the relationship between will and power
without perceiving anything metaphysical in either of them.'
^[\[99\]](#n99)^ Now, as you see, Schopenhauer has stepped on to the
stage, and the question inevitably arises: how can one perceive nothing
metaphysical in Schopenhauer's idea of the relationship between will and
power? Mach has no reply to this question, nor is he likely ever to have
one. Be that as it may, the fact remains that when he began to talk
about the will which preserves the genus that is worth preserving and
destroys it when it is not worth preserving, Mach has plunged into
metaphysics of the very lowest order.

There is still more of it. On page 45 of his *Analysis of Sensations*,
Mach speaks of the 'nature of *green in itself*' (his italics -- GP), a
nature which remains immutable, no matter from which angle we may look
at it. In the German original, in the corresponding passage, we read:
'*das GrÃ¼ne an sich*' -- 'green-in-itself'. ^[\[100\]](#n100)^ But how
can there be 'green-in-itself'? Did not the same Mach assure us that
there could not possibly be any thing-'in-itself'? Just imagine, the
thing-in-itself turns out to be stronger than Mach. He drives it out
through the door, and it flies in again through the window, having
assumed the utterly absurd appearance of 'colour-in-itself'. What an
invincible power!

One may exclaim involuntarily (as L BÃ¼chner did):

O Ding an sich,\
Wie lieb'ich dich,\
Du, aller Dinge Ding! ^[\[101\]](#n101)^

How can this possibly be? What kind of philosophy is this after all?
That's just the point, gentlemen, it isn't a philosophy at all. Mach
himself declares this: 'Es gibt vor allem keine Mach'sche Philosophie'
('Above all, there is no Machist philosophy'), he says in the preface to
*Erkenntnis und Irrthum.* The same statement occurs in *Analysis of
Sensations*: 'Again I repeat, there is no philosophy of Mach.'
^[\[102\]](#n102)^

Well, there's no denying the truth! There is really no Machist
philosophy. And there is none, because Mach was quite unable to digest
the philosophical concepts with which he wanted to operate. However, the
position would have been little better even if he had been seriously
prepared for the part of philosopher. Subjective idealism, which was his
point of view, would then have led him either to solipsism, which he
does not want, or to a whole series of insoluble logical contradictions
and to reconciliation with 'metaphysics'. There is no Machist
philosophy. This is very important for us, the Russian Marxists; for
some years now we have had this 'philosophy' of Mach thrust upon us, and
have been urged and pressed to combine this non-existing philosophy with
the teaching of Marx. But still more important is that this philosophy
*Ã  la* Mach -- or more truly, *Ã  la* Berkeley or Fichte -- cannot be
relieved of its incurable contradictions. Especially at the present
time: even in the eighteenth century, subjective idealism was the
still-born child of philosophy. Now, in the atmosphere of contemporary
natural science, there is hardly any room for it to breathe. Therefore
even those who would fain revive it have to be continuously renouncing
it. I repeat, logic has its own rules.

I think I may now part with you, Mr Bogdanov. I shall make only one
further remark. In your open letter to me, you complain that my
associates in philosophy in Russia are spreading all kinds of
cock-and-bull stories about you. You are wrong. I am not going to assure
you that the people you are accusing of *deliberate* -- so I understand
you -- distortion of your ideas have a greater sense of morality than to
stoop to such conduct. I look on the question from the purely practical
point of view, and ask: *why should anyone distort your ideas when to
tell the truth about them can be far more damaging than any lie?*

I express my sincere sympathy with you over this -- alas -- undoubted
possibility.

GV Plekhanov

##### Third Letter

'Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!'

Dear Sir

A whole year has passed since I finished my second letter to you. I
thought that I should never again have any dealings with you; however, I
have to take up my pen once more to write you this *third* letter. This
came to pass in this way.

### I

You are unquestionably a pupil of Mach's. But not all pupils are alike:
some are modest and some immodest. The modest ones hold dear the
interests of truth and are never anxious to extol their own virtues; the
immodest ones think only of how to procure the limelight for themselves,
and are indifferent to the interests of truth. The history of thought
shows that a pupil's modesty is almost always in direct proportion to
his talent, while immodesty is in inverse proportion. Take, for example,
Chernyshevsky. He was modesty personified. In expounding Feuerbach's
philosophical ideas, Chernyshevsky was always willing to give full
credit to Feuerbach, even for ideas that were Chernyshevsky's own. If he
did not mention Feuerbach by name, this was only because of the
censorship; he did everything he could to let the reader know whose
philosophical principles *Sovremennik* ^[\[103\]](#n103)^ was defending.
He was just as modest in other fields apart from philosophy. In the
domain of socialism, Chernyshevsky was a follower of the brilliant West
European Utopians. Consequently, with his innate modesty, when
presenting and defending his socialist opinions, he constantly made it
clear to the reader that these opinions were, strictly speaking, not his
own, but those of his 'great Western teachers'. But for all that,
Chernyshevsky displayed great wealth of intellect, logic, knowledge and
talent both in his philosophical works and in his socialist articles. To
repeat: a pupil's modesty is almost always in direct proportion to his
talent, while immodesty in inverse proportion. You belong to the
category of immodest students. When spreading Mach's 'philosophy'
throughout Russia, you reveal qualities that are exactly the reverse of
those shown by Chernyshevsky in disseminating Feuerbach's philosophy:
yet you claim independence and originality of mind. You expressed
surprise because, in my second letter where I refuted your would-be
critical remarks concerning some of my philosophical conceptions, I
confined myself to dealing with the insoluble and really ludicrous
contradictions in which Mach entangled himself, and did not think it
necessary to take up your own concoctions. Anyone who is not utterly
bereft of logic knows that when the *foundation* of some philosophical
doctrine collapses, the *superstructures* that might be erected by the
pupils of the thinker who proclaimed this foundation is bound to
collapse too. And if everybody were acquainted with your own
relationship to Mach, all would grasp at once that with the collapse of
Machism, nothing could remain of your own 'philosophical' constructions
but dust and debris. But like the immodest student you are, you took
every precaution to conceal from your readers your true relationship to
Mach. Consequently, there may still be people today who will be
impressed by that attitude of studied carelessness with which you try to
prove -- as, for instance, you did at one public meeting soon after my
second letter to you came out -- that the objections to Mach's
'philosophy' are no concern of yours. It is for the benefit of such
people as these that I again take up the pen; I wish to free them from
their delusions. When I wrote my first two letters to you, I had
comparatively little space at my disposal, and could not deal both with
original and copy. Naturally, I preferred to analyse the original. Now I
am not so cramped for space, and, besides, I have a few days of leisure.
So I may deal with you.

### II

You are pleased to remark:

I learned a great deal from Mach. I think that Comrade Beltov could also
learn much of interest from this outstanding scientist and thinker, this
great destroyer of scientific fetishes. My advice to young comrades is
not to be disturbed by the argument, that Mach is not a Marxist. Let
them follow the example of Comrade Beltov, who learned so much from
Hegel and Holbach, who, if I am not mistaken, were not Marxists either.
However, I cannot own myself a 'Machist' in philosophy. In the general
philosophical conception, there is only one thing I borrowed from Mach
-- the idea of the neutrality of the elements of experience in relation
to the 'physical' and 'psychical', and the dependence of these
characteristics solely on the *connection* of experience. In all that
follows -- the theory of the genesis of psychical and physical
experience, the doctrine of substitution, the teaching regarding the
'interference' of complex processes in the general world picture founded
on all these premises -- in all of these I have nothing in common with
Mach. In short, I am much less of a 'Machist' than Comrade Beltov is a
'Holbachian', and I hope that this does not prevent either of us from
being good Marxists. ^[\[104\]](#n104)^

I shall not follow your example by paying compliments either to myself
or to my opponent. As far as the latter is concerned, that is, you, dear
Sir, I am afraid, I must again be unkind and remind you of what I said
in my previous letters, namely, how utterly impossible it is for anyone
who rejects the *materialist* basis of the world-outlook of Marx and
Engels to be a 'good Marxist'. ^[\[105\]](#n105)^ You are not only very
far removed from 'being a good Marxist', but you have the bad luck to
attract all those who, while claiming the title of Marxist, want to
adapt their outlook to suit the palate of our contemporary little
bourgeois supermen. But that by the way. I quoted your words only to
show what a large dose of self-conceit you have injected into the
explanation of your attitude to your teacher, Mach. If you are to be
believed, it would seem that you have very little in common with Mach on
a whole series of propositions that are highly important from the
standpoint of 'empiriomonism'. The trouble is that we cannot believe you
in the present case. You are blinded by self-conceit. To become
convinced of this, one need only take into consideration the
incontestable and very simple circumstance that even where you imagine
yourself to be independent of your teacher you only spoil the teaching
you borrowed from him. What's more, you do this *while remaining quite
true to his spirit*, so that all your 'empiriomonism' is nothing more
than making *distinctly* absurd what was absurd only *potentially*
(*absurdum an sich*, as Hegel would have said) in your teacher's
doctrine. What kind of independence is this? Where is there even a hint
of independence here? Enough, our most esteemed friend. Your ridiculous
pretensions collapse like a house of cards at the least breath of
criticism.

You consider me unjust? That is understandable. I repeat, you are
blinded by self-conceit. But the case is just as I have stated it.
Proofs? There is no lack of them. I take for the time being the first on
the list of your contributions to the philosophy of 'empirio-criticism'
which you detailed above, your 'theory of the genesis of physical and
psychical experience'. Nothing could be more characteristic of you than
this theory, so it deserves every attention. What does this theory
consist of? Of this:

In presenting the world-outlook of Mach and Avenarius as 'deeply-rooted
in the acquisitions of contemporary science', ^[\[106\]](#n106)^ you
add:

If we call this outlook critical, evolutionary, coloured sociologically
with positivism, we shall indicate at one stroke the main currents of
philosophical thought which merge in it into one stream.
^[\[107\]](#n107)^

Then you proceed:

Resolving all that is physical and psychical into identical elements,
empirio-criticism does not permit the possibility of any kind of dualism
whatever. But here arises a new critical question: dualism has been
refuted, eliminated, but has monism been achieved? Does the standpoint
of Mach and Avenarius really free our thinking from its dualistic
nature? We have no choice but to answer this question in the negative.
^[\[108\]](#n108)^

Further on you explain why you find yourself 'compelled' to be
dissatisfied with your teachers. You state that these writers still have
two connections, distinct in principle and not susceptible of being
united under any higher law. These are: connection of the physical
series on the one hand, and connection of the psychical series on the
other. Avenarius finds duality here, but not dualism. You consider this
idea of his to be wrong.

You argue:

The fact is that laws, distinct in principle and irreducible to unity,
are but little better for integral and orderly knowledge than realities,
distinct in principle and irreducible to unity. When the domain of
experience is divided into two series, with which knowledge is forced to
work quite differently, knowledge cannot feel itself whole and
harmonious. Inevitably we are confronted with a number of questions
aimed at eliminating duality, at replacing it by a higher unity. Why can
there be two laws that are distinct in principle in the united stream of
human experience? And why precisely two? Why is the dependent
'psychical' series to be found in close functional relationship
precisely with the nervous system and not with some other 'body'; and
why are there not in the field of experience countless numbers of
dependent series connected with the 'bodies' of other types? Why do some
complexes of elements appear in both series of experiences -- both as
'bodies' and as 'notions' -- while others are never bodies and belong
always to one series, and so forth. ^[\[109\]](#n109)^

Since the world-outlook of Mach and Avenarius, 'deeply-rooted in the
acquisitions of contemporary science', cannot furnish the answer to your
numerous and profound 'whys', you, with your characteristic
self-confidence, undertake 'the task of overcoming this duality'.
^[\[110\]](#n110)^ And it is just here, in your battle with 'this
duality', that your philosophical genius is displayed in all its glory.

First of all, you try to elucidate wherein lies the distinction between
the two series of experience, the physical and the psychical; and then
you wish, 'if it appears feasible, to examine the *genesis* of this
distinction'. ^[\[111\]](#n111)^ Thus, the problem you set yourself
falls into two separate problems. The first of these is solved in the
following way.

According to you, a constant character of everything physical is its
*objectivity*. The physical is always objective. Therefore, you try to
find a definition for the objective. It is not long before you are
convinced that the following definition must be accepted as the most
correct:

We term those data of experience objective which have the same vital
meaning for us and for other people, those data upon which not only do
we construct our activities without contradiction, but upon which, we
are convinced, other people must also base themselves in order to avoid
contradiction. The objective character of the physical world consists in
the fact that it exists not for me personally, but for everybody, and
has a definite meaning for everybody, the same, I am convinced as for
me. The objectivity of the physical series is its *universal
significance.* As for the 'subjective' in experience, it is that which
does not have universal significance, that which has meaning only for
one or several individuals. ^[\[112\]](#n112)^

Having found this definition, which reduces itself to objectivity being
universal significance and universal significance the coordination of
the experience of various people, you believe you have solved the first
of the two secondary problems into which you had subdivided your
principal problem. Now you proceed to the second. 'Where', you ask, 'do
we get this coordination, this mutual conformity? Should it be regarded
as "pre-established harmony" or as the result of development?'
^[\[113\]](#n113)^ It is easy to guess in which sense you solve these
questions: you stand for 'development'. You say:

A general characteristic of the 'physical' domain of experience, as we
have learned, is objectivity, or universal significance. To the physical
world we relate exclusively that which we regard as objective\... The
coordination of collective experience which is expressed in this
'objectivity' could appear only as the result of the progressive
coordination of the experience of various people by means of mutual
utterances. The objectivity of the physical bodies we encounter in our
experience is in the last analysis established by the mutual
verification and coordination of the utterances of various people. In
general, the physical world is socially-coordinated, socially
harmonised, in a word, *socially organised experience*.
^[\[114\]](#n114)^

This is sufficiently lucid in itself. But you are afraid of being
misunderstood. You assume that someone may ask: must a person, who has
bruised his leg on a stone, wait for some stranger's utterance to be
convinced of the objectivity of the stone? To forestall what is indeed a
far from idle question, you reply:

The objectivity of external objects is always reduced to the exchange of
utterances *in the last analysis*, but is by far not always *directly*
founded on it. In the process of social experience certain general
relationships are created, general law-regulated relationships (abstract
space and time are among these), which characterise the physical world
which they embrace. These general relationships, socially formed and
consolidated, are for the most part connected by the social coordination
of experience, and are for the most part *objective*. Every new
experience which entirely agrees with these relationships, which fits
entirely in the bounds of these relationships, we identify as objective,
without waiting for anybody's utterances. New experience, naturally,
receives the characteristics of the old experience in the forms of which
is has crystallised. ^[\[115\]](#n115)^

You see, dear Sir, that in expounding your opinions, I have readily
afforded you the right to speak for yourself, as the one most competent
to deal with what some readers, for instance Mr Dauge, naively regard as
'A Bogdanov's philosophy'. You cannot say that by presenting your ideas
in my own words I have thereby changed their content. That is a great
convenience. Therefore, I again invite you to speak for yourself in
order to dispel any misunderstandings that might have arisen concerning
your example with the stone. You said that the stone confronts us as
something objective because it is to be found amidst the spatial and
temporal consistency of the physical world. But it may be objected that
even ghosts haunt the spatial and temporal consistency of the physical
world. Really, are ghosts 'objective', too? You smile condescendingly
and remark that the objectivity of phenomena comes under the control of
developing social experience, and is sometimes 'revoked' by it:

The hobgoblin that smothers me in the night has for me the character of
objectivity, perhaps not a bit less than the stone against which I
bruise myself; but the utterances of others take away this objectivity.
If this higher criterion of objectivity is forgotten, systematic
hallucinations could create an objective world with which healthy people
could scarcely agree. ^[\[116\]](#n116)^

### III

Now I shall cease to trouble you for a while. You have said enough; I
want to ponder your words. Now that we have, thanks to you, a 'higher
criterion of objectivity', I should like to examine just how
'objective', that is to say, alien to subjectivism, is your own 'theory'
concerning it.

Speaking personally, no hobgoblin ever smothers me in the night. But it
is said that this quite often happens to the stout wives of
Zamoskvorechye merchants who like to have a hearty meal just before
bedtime. To these worthy ladies the hobgoblin is no loss objective than
the stones which pave (unfortunately, not always) the streets of
Zamoskvorechye. The question arises: is the hobgoblin objective? You
warrant it isn't, since the utterances of other people take away
objectivity from the hobgoblin. This, to be sure, is very pleasant,
since everyone will agree that life would be more peaceful without
hobgoblins than with them. Here, however, we come up against a small,
but rather nasty, 'snag'. Nowadays, there are quite a few people indeed
who express themselves categorically in the sense that there are no
devils in general and hobgoblins in particular. Nowadays, all these
'evil spirits' have been deprived of the hallmark: 'universal
significance'. But there was an epoch -- an extremely protracted one at
that -- when this hallmark belonged wholly and completely to the 'evil
spirits' and when it would never have entered anybody's head to deny the
'objectivity' of the hobgoblin. What follows from this? That the
hobgoblins displayed all the distinctive features of objective
existence? If we argue from the standpoint of your 'higher criterion of
objectivity', we should answer in the affirmative. This alone is quite
sufficient for us to see how highly absurd this 'higher criterion' is,
and to reject your theory of objectivity as the most inept handiwork of
a most inexpert pedant.

Somewhat further on you give the question still another twist: you say:

Social experience is far from being all socially organised and always
contains various contradictions, so that certain of its parts do not
agree with others. Sprites and hobgoblins may exist in the sphere of
social experience of a given people or of a given group of people -- for
example, the peasantry; but they need not therefore be included under
socially organised or objective experience, for they do not harmonise
with the rest of collective experience, and do not fit in with its
organising forms, for example, with the chain of causality.
^[\[117\]](#n117)^

Sprites and hobgoblins do not harmonise with the rest of collective
experience! Really, dear Sir, with the rest of *whose* experience, if
the *whole* of the given people believes in the existence of sprites and
hobgoblins? It is clear the sprites and hobgoblins do not in the least
contradict the collective experience of this particular people. You will
perhaps retort that in speaking of the rest of collective experience you
had in mind the social experience of more developed peoples. If so, I
beg you to tell us how matters stood when even the most developed
peoples believed in sprites and hobgoblins. There was really such a
period; you yourself know that (primitive animism). Consequently, in the
period of primitive animism sprites and hobgoblins and all other kinds
of spirits in general had objective existence. And as long as you hold
on to your 'higher criterion of objectivity', no reservation will ever
save you from this conclusion.

And the chain of causality? By what right do you cite it here? Didn't
you yourself declare some pages before this that 'Hume had every reason
to deny the *absolute universal significance* of causal connection'?
^[\[118\]](#n118)^ This is fully understandable when looked at from the
angle of your doctrine of experience. According to this doctrine, causal
connection is but a comparatively 'late product of socially cognitive
development'. Besides, in a certain period of the evolution of this
product (the period of animism) the notion of sprites and hobgoblins was
perfectly at home with the concept of causal connection. It is clear,
therefore, that *from your standpoint* causal connection cannot serve as
a 'higher criterion of objectivity'.

No, Mr Bogdanov, no matter how you twist and turn you will never shake
off the hobgoblins and sprites, as they say, neither by the cross, nor
by the pestle. Only a correct doctrine of experience can 'relieve' you
of them, but your 'philosophy' is as far removed from such a doctrine as
we are from the stars of heaven. Guided by the clear and incontestable
meaning of your theory of objectivity, we must reply to the question of
the existence of the hobgoblin in this way: the time was when the
hobgoblin had objective existence; subsequently this 'granddad' (as our
peasants used to call him only recently) lost objective being, and now
exists only for the wives of Zamoskvorechye merchants and for other
personages who have the silly habit of making 'utterances' in the same
sense as they do.

What a 'development' the hobgoblin has passed through! And why 'passed
through'? Because people began to make 'utterances' against it. It must
be admitted that one hears on occasion some truly remarkable
'utterances'. Indeed, contemporary 'utterances' against the hobgoblin
completely deprive it of objective existence, whereas in the Middle Ages
one could only be 'delivered' from them by incantation and exorcism. By
this method, a particular merchant's wife might chase away the
hobgoblin, but did not do away with it altogether. Nowadays things are
much better!

And there are still people who doubt the force of progress!

If there was a time when the hobgoblin had objective existence, it may
be assumed also that this same objective existence extended
simultaneously to witches, for example. That being so, what are we to
think of those judicial proceedings by means of which mankind in the
Middle Ages hoped to put an end to some unpleasant machinations of the
devil, then existing 'objectively'? It would appear that these
proceedings, later denounced as infamous, had some 'objective' basis.
Isn't that true, Mr Bogdanov?

It is clear that the entire history of human thought must take on a
quite new appearance after being investigated with the aid of your
'higher criterion of objectivity'. That in itself is an excellent thing.
It is enough to win one the title of philosophical genius. But the
question is not yet exhausted, not by a long chalk. Viewing matters from
the standpoint of your 'higher criterion of objectivity', the entire
history of the earth appears in a completely new light. In the course of
the last seventy years, natural science in general has been striving to
master the idea of development. But, after listening to you, Mr
Bogdanov, we are forced to confess that the idea of development that is
gradually being mastered by modern natural science has nothing in common
with the idea of development you have advanced, while leaning, as you
say, on the same natural science. In this respect, you have
unquestionably accomplished yet another revolution. You are a genius
twice over!

All we profane people who clung to the old theory of development were
firmly convinced that the emergence of man and, consequently, man's
'utterances', were preceded by a very long period in the development of
our planet.

Then you appeared and, like MoliÃ¨re's Sganarelle, *Vous avez changÃ©
cela*. ^[\[119\]](#n119)^ Now we are compelled to see the march of
events completely in reverse.

There cannot be the slightest doubt that our planet belongs to the
objective, 'physical' world. Likewise, there cannot be the least shadow
of doubt that the process of development of this planet is part and
parcel of the same world.

But we have been informed by you, Mr A Bogdanov, that 'in general, the
physical world is socially-coordinated, socially-harmonised, in a word,
*socially organised* experience'. ^[\[120\]](#n120)^ It follows,
therefore, that the existence of men preceded the existence of our
planet: first came men; men began to give 'utterance', while socially
organising their experience; out of this happy circumstance came the
physical world in general and our own planet in particular. This, of
course, is also 'development', but it is development in reverse: or more
correctly, *development inside out.*

It might seem to the reader that if the existence of men preceded the
existence of the earth, people must have been, as it were, suspended in
the air for some time. But you and I know, Mr Bogdanov, that this is
simply a 'misunderstanding' -- the consequence of a certain inattention
to the demands of logic. You see, the air too belongs to the physical
world. So that at the time under discussion there was no air either. In
general, there was nothing in the objective, physical sense, but there
were people, who 'uttered' their experiences to each other, coordinated
their experience and thus created the physical world. All this is plain
and above board. I shall remark in passing that it now becomes quite
clear why your like-minded friend, Mr Lunacharsky, felt his religious
vocation, and invented for us a religion 'without God'. Only those
people believe in God who think that he created the world; but you, Mr
Bogdanov, have clearly demonstrated to all of us, and especially to your
colleague, Mr Lunacharsky, that the world was created by men and not by
God.

Some reader will observe that the 'philosophy' which claims that the
physical world was created by men is the most thoroughgoing, though of
course very confused, *idealist* philosophy. And he may add, perhaps,
that only an eclectic is capable of attempting to make such a philosophy
agree with the teaching of Marx and Engels. But you and I, Mr Bogdanov,
will again say that this is just a 'misunderstanding'. The philosophy
that pronounces the physical world to be the result of socially
organised experience is more able than any other to make deductions in
the spirit of Marxism. Socially organised experience is really the
experience gained by man in the struggle for existence. And man's
struggle for existence presupposes the economic process of production;
the economic process of production presumes the existence of certain
relations of production, that is to say, a certain economic order of
society. The concept of an economic order of society opens before us the
wide field of 'economic materialism'. We have only to gain a foothold in
this field in order to acquire the untrammelled right to call ourselves
convinced Marxists. And, besides, what Marxists! The most extreme of all
those who existed both before the appearance of the earth as the outcome
of socially organised experience, and after that gratifying event. We
are not just ordinary Marxists, we are super-Marxists. Ordinary Marxists
say: 'On the basis of the economic relationships and the social
existence of men which they determine, corresponding ideologies arise.'
But we super-Marxists add: 'Not only ideologies, but the physical world
as well.' The reader can now see that we are much better Marxists than
Marx himself, better even than Mr Shulyatikov, ^[\[121\]](#n121)^ and
that's saying something!

Naturally, Mr Bogdanov, you are going to shout about our exaggeration;
but you will be wasting your breath. There is not the least exaggeration
in my words. I have given a completely accurate account of the obvious
meaning of your, it is true, quite incredible, theory of objectivity, as
well as of the motive behind your theory. You imagined that by
identifying the physical world with socially organised experience, you
had opened before economic materialism a quite new and ever so broad
theoretical perspective. Generally naive, you are probably most naive of
all on the subject of economic materialism. When speaking about you, I
keep to Newton's rule: *hypothesis non fingo*. ^[\[122\]](#n122)^ But
here I shall make a small exception to this general rule. I confess to
having a strong suspicion that you were primarily attracted to Mach
through your extreme simple-mindedness. You say: 'Where Mach outlines
the connection between cognition and the social-labour process, the
coincidence of his views with Marx's ideas occasionally becomes really
striking.' ^[\[123\]](#n123)^ To substantiate this, you cite the
following from Mach: 'Science arose from the needs of practical life\...
from technique.' Now that is just this 'technique' combined with the
word 'economy' -- also often used by Mach -- that has brought about your
undoing, Mr Bogdanov. You thought that by combining Mach and Marx you
would approach the theory of cognition from a new direction altogether,
and proclaim 'unuttered words' to us. You thought you were called upon
to correct and supplement both the teaching of Marx and Engels and the
teaching of Mach and Avenarius. But this was a misunderstanding -- this
time without quotation marks. First of all, you reduced Mach to
absurdity; secondly, you demonstrated before the eyes of all how grossly
you erred in considering yourself a 'good Marxist'. In short, the
results you achieved were quite different from what you expected.
^[\[124\]](#n124)^

###### IV

Hold on a minute, though. After I had written the foregoing chapter, I
asked whether I had indeed quite accurately presented your idea by
asserting that it follows from your theory of 'objectivity' that *at
first* there were men, and *later* the physical world was created by
them. I admit frankly that after turning the matter over in my mind, I
saw that things were not quite, or, perhaps, not at all as I had
written. The expressions 'at first' and 'later' show how facts relate to
one another *in point of time.* If there were no such thing as time,
these expressions would be meaningless. But you have it that time
itself, like space, was created by the process of the social
organisation of human experience. Here are your own words:
'*Coordinating his experiences with the experiences of other people, man
created the abstract forms of time.*' ^[\[125\]](#n125)^ And further:

Thus, what do the abstract forms of space and time in the last analysis
signify? They express *socially organised* experience. While exchanging
countless utterances, people constantly mutually eliminate the
contradictions of their social experience, harmonise it, organise it
into generally significant, that is to say, objective forms. The further
development of experience now proceeds on the basis of these forms and
is necessarily confined within their limits. ^[\[126\]](#n126)^

As you see, we are now coming to the conclusion that there was a time
when there was no time. This is somehow strange. Evidently, I am using
the wrong terminology, which is very difficult for those of us who are
profane in regard to empiriomonism to get rid of. It is impossible to
say there was a time when there was no time. It is impossible for the
obvious reason that when time *did not exist* there was no *time*. This
is one of those truths the discovery of which does the greatest credit
to the human mind. But such truths are blinding, like lightning, and a
blind person is easily lost among terms. I shall think and express
myself otherwise, *abstracting myself from time*: there is no socially
organised experience, neither is there time. What then is there? There
are people from whose experience time '*is developing*'. Very good. But
if time 'is developing', it means, therefore, that it will have
developed. Which brings us to the point that there *will be* a time when
there will be *time*. Here again I have returned involuntarily to the
old terminology. But what is to be done, Mr Bogdanov, when I am so
obviously incapable of thinking of *development outside time?*

This reminds me of the retort made by Engels to DÃ¼hring on this very
doctrine of time. DÃ¼hring contended that time has a beginning and based
this idea on the consideration that formerly the world was in an
unchanging and self-equal state, that is, in a condition in which there
were no successive changes. And when there are no successive changes, he
argued, the concept of time necessarily transforms itself into the more
general notion of being. Engels was thoroughly justified in replying to
this as follows:

In the first place we are here not in the least concerned with what
ideas change in Herr DÃ¼hring's head. The subject at issue is not the
*idea of time*, but *real* time, which Herr DÃ¼hring cannot rid himself
of so cheaply. In the second place, however much the idea of time may
convert itself into the more general idea of being, this does not take
us one step further. For the basic forms of all being are space and
time, and being out of time is just as gross an absurdity as being out
of space. The Hegelian 'timelessly past being' and the neo-Schellingian
'unpreconceivable being' \[*unvordenkliches Sein*\] are rational ideas
compared with this being out of time. ^[\[127\]](#n127)^

That is how matters stand from the point of view of Marx and Engels,
with whom you, dear Sir, would like to be 'treated as one of the
family'. Being outside time is just as gross an absurdity as being
outside space. You affixed both these absurdities to Mach's 'philosophy'
and on that really not very firm basis you imagined that, thanks to your
enlightened efforts, '*empirio-criticism*' had been transformed into
'*empiriomonism*'. And when I criticised your teacher, Mach, you didn't
turn a hair, as they say. That, you implied, is no concern of mine; I am
obliged to Mach for much, but, after all, I am an independent thinker.
Indeed what a thinker you are! Indeed, what fine independence you show!
It resembles Russia before the Varangians. True, it is not large, but it
is fertile (fancy, two whopping absurdities!) and\... there is no order
in it either. ^[\[128\]](#n128)^

But, once again, accuracy before everything! In the interests of
accuracy, I shall add that you, following Mach's example, 'strictly
distinguish' geometrical, or abstract, space, from physiological space.
And you adopt exactly the same attitude to the concept of time. Let us
see if this distinction saves you from the two absurdities which
threaten to immortalise your name.

In what way is physiological space related to geometrical space?

Physiological space \[you say\] is the result of development; in the
life of a child it only gradually crystallises out of the chaos of
visual and tactile elements. This development continues beyond the first
years of life: distance, size, as well as the forms of objects are more
stable in the perception of the adult than in that of the child. I
distinctly recall that, as a five-year-old boy, I conceived the distance
between the earth and the sky two or three times the height of a
two-storey house, and was very much surprised when, from roof level, I
found I was not noticeably nearer to the canopy of heaven. That is how I
became acquainted with one of the *contradictions* of physiological
space. These contradictions are less in the perception of the adult, but
they are always there. Abstract space is *free of contradictions.* In
it, one and the same object, not subjected to sufficient action, never
proves to be larger or smaller than another definite object, of this or
that form, and so on. This is space conforming strictly to law,
everywhere completely uniform. ^[\[129\]](#n129)^

Now what have you to say about time?

The relationship of physiological and abstract time is, in general, the
same as the relationship of the forms of space we have examined.
Physiological time as compared to abstract time lacks uniformity. It
flows unevenly, sometimes quickly, sometimes slowly; sometimes it
appears as though it had ceased to exist for consciousness, namely,
during deep sleep or a fainting fit. Besides, it is restricted by the
limits of personal life. Corresponding to all this, the 'temporal
magnitude' of one and the same phenomenon, taken in physiological time,
is also variable. One and the same process, not experiencing any
external action, may flow for us 'quickly' or 'slowly' and now and then
seems to be completely outside our physiological time. Not so with
abstract time ('the pure form of contemplation'): it is strictly uniform
and constant in its flow, and in it phenomena conform strictly to law.
In both its directions (past and future) it is infinite.
^[\[130\]](#n130)^

Abstract space and time, you say, are products of development. They
arise from physiological space and time, by the lack of uniformity
characteristic of the latter being eliminated, by continuity being
introduced into them, and, finally, by their mental extension beyond the
bounds of every given experience. ^[\[131\]](#n131)^ Very good. But
physiological space and time are also products of development. Therefore
we are again confronted with importunate questions:

1\. Does a child in whose life physiological space is only gradually
crystallised from the chaos of visual and tactile elements exist in
space?

2\. Does the child in whose life physiological time develops but
gradually exist in time?

Let's assume that we are entitled -- although, strictly speaking, we are
not -- to answer these questions as follows: the child in whose life
physiological space and time are formed only gradually, exists in
abstract space and abstract time. But obviously such a reply makes sense
only if we assume that abstract space and time have *already appeared*
as a result of development (that is, social experience). Therefore it is
still not clear how matters stood *before* they *appeared*. Common sense
inevitably suggests that prior to the appearance of abstract space and
time the child existed outside space and outside time. To us, the
profane, or even to *your* 'modern natural science', children existing
outside space and time are inconceivable. We can only conjecture that in
those truly sombre days before the formation of abstract space and time
children were, to be more precise, not children, but angels. It is
probably a great deal easier for angels to exist outside space and
outside time than it would be for children. However, in saying this, I
am not sure that I have not committed heresy. According to the Bible,
even angels seem to exist both in space and in time.

There is still one more equally confounded question closely connected
with the foregoing. If abstract time and abstract space are objective
forms created by people through 'countless utterances', is this process
of 'countless utterances' accomplished outside time and outside space?
If the answer is *yes*, again it does not make sense; if the answer is
*no*, it means that we have to distinguish not two types of space and
time (physiological and abstract time and physiological and abstract
space) but three. And then all your wonderful 'philosophical'
construction disperses like smoke and you enter, albeit somewhat
unsteadily, on the sinful ground of materialism, according to which
space and time are not only forms of contemplation, but also forms of
being.

No, Mr Bogdanov, here things do not turn out well with you at all. Of
course, it is very, very touching that at the tender age of five, when,
perhaps, your physiological space had not yet fully 'crystallised' and
your physiological time had not yet fully 'developed', you engaged in
measuring the distance between the earth and the sky. Such measurements
belong more to astronomy than to philosophy. It would therefore have
been better for you if you had remained an astronomer. You were not born
for philosophy, if one may say so without being either complimentary or
ironical. In this 'subject' you attain nothing but the most incredible
discomfiture.

Here is an example. You write:

We are so accustomed to conceive all other people of the past, present,
and future -- and even the animals -- as 'living in the same space and
time as ourselves'. But custom is not proof. It is incontestable that
*we* conceive these people and animals in *our* space and time, but
there is nothing to show that they conceive themselves and us *in
exactly the same* space and time. Of course, in so far as their
organisation in general resembles ours, and in so far as their
utterances are comprehensible to us, we may presume that they have
similar, but not identical, 'forms of contemplation' to ours.
^[\[132\]](#n132)^

Earlier in this letter, I deliberately reproduced your lengthy
'utterance' concerning the distinction between physiological space and
time and abstract space and time in order to contrast them with the
passage I have just cited. Do not think that I want to catch you out in
a contradiction. There are no contradictions here, your propensity for
them notwithstanding; this passage is fully corroborated by those
'utterances'. These and others make clear even to the most short-sighted
that you do not distinguish, and indeed, while you continue to uphold
your 'empiriomonism', you cannot distinguish, between the '*forms* of
contemplation' and its *objects*. You admit as incontestable that '*we*'
conceive people and animals in '*our*' time and space, but you question
whether '*they*' can conceive of themselves in the same time and space.
As an inveterate and incorrigible idealist, it just does not occur to
you that the question might be put quite differently, that you might be
asked: do those animals which do not conceive of themselves in any kind
of time or any kind of space exist at all in any kind of time and space?
And how is it with plants? I doubt very much whether you would attribute
to them any form of contemplation, although they also exist both in time
and in space. But they exist not only '*for us*', Mr Bogdanov, because
the history of the earth leaves us in no doubt at all that they existed
*before us.* In developing further his objection to DÃ¼hring which I
mentioned earlier, Engels wrote: 'According to Herr DÃ¼hring time exists
only through change; change in and through time does not exist.'
^[\[133\]](#n133)^ You repeat DÃ¼hring's mistake. To you, time and space
exist only because living beings perceive them. You refuse to admit the
being of time independent of anybody's thinking -- of that time in which
organisms developed, raising themselves little by little to the level of
'thinking'. The objective, physical world to you is only a conception.
And you are offended when you are called an idealist. It is indisputable
that everybody has the right to be a crank, but you, Mr Bogdanov, are
obviously and constantly abusing this unquestionable right.

### V

Indeed, and what exactly are these animal 'utterances'? Let us leave the
mammals, for instance, the donkey, who sometimes makes very loud
'utterances' although not entirely pleasing to 'our ears'; let us get
down again to the level of the amoeba. I invite you, Mr Bogdanov, to
make a resolute 'utterance' on this: can the amoeba 'give utterance'? In
my view, scarcely. But if it cannot 'give utterance', then, taking into
consideration that the physical world is the result of utterances, we
again reach this absurdity: when organisms were at the stage of
development corresponding to that of the amoeba, the physical world did
not exist. Further. Since matter enters into the composition of the
physical world, which had not yet come into being in the period
concerned, it must be acknowledged that the lower animals were
immaterial, on which I congratulate with all my heart both these
interesting animals and you, dear Sir!

But why lower animals? Human organisms, too, belong to the physical
world. And since the physical world is the *result* of development
('utterances' and so forth) we shall never and in no way avoid the
conclusion that *prior to the manifestation of this result* human beings
also had no organisms, that is to say, that the process of coordinating
experience must, at the very least, have been started by creatures who
were incorporeal. This, of course, is not bad in the sense that human
beings lose any reason to envy the amoebas, but this can hardly be
convenient for the 'Marxism' professed by you, dear Sir, and those who
think like you. In fact, while rejecting the materialism of Marx and
Engels, you try to persuade us that you support their materialist
explanation of history. But tell us, for the sake of Mach and Avenarius,
can there be a materialist explanation of *such* history which is
preceded by the 'pre-historical life'\... of incorporeal creatures?
^[\[134\]](#n134)^

Later, when I come to analyse your theory of 'substitution', I shall
have again to touch upon the question of what the human body is, and how
this body originates. Then it will become as clear as crystal that you
are 'supplementing' Mach in the spirit of a distorted idealism. Just
now, consider this. You think fit to deduce the physical, objective
world out of people's 'utterances'. But where did you find these people?
I assert that in recognising the existence of other people, you, dear
Sir, are being frightfully inconsistent, and have knocked the feet from
under your 'utterances' in the domain of philosophy. In other words,
that you have not the slightest logical right to repudiate *solipsism*.
This is not the first time I have had to reproach you with this, Mr
Bogdanov. In the preface to your Volume 3 of *Empiriomonism*, you tried
to reject this reproach, but failed. Here is what you wrote in this
regard:

Here I have to focus attention on yet another circumstance that is
characteristic of the school: in the 'criticism' of experience it
regards intercourse between people as a previously given moment, as a
sort of 'a priori', and in striving to create the most simple and most
exact picture of the world, this school also has in mind the general
applicability of this picture, its practical suitability for the
greatest possible number of 'fellow-men' for the longest possible length
of time. It is already clear from this how mistaken Comrade Plekhanov is
in accusing this school of a tendency to *solipsism*, to acknowledging
only individual experience as the Universum, as the 'all' that exists
for the cogniser. The recognition of the *equivalence* of 'my'
experience and the experience of my 'fellow-men', in so far as their
experience is accessible to me by way of their 'utterances', is
characteristic of empiric-criticism. Here we have something in the
nature of an 'epistemological democratism'. ^[\[135\]](#n135)^

It is obvious from this that you, Mr 'Epistemological Democrat', simply
did not understand the charge 'Comrade Plekhanov' made against you. You
regard the intercourse between people as a previously given moment, as a
sort of 'a priori'. But the question is: have you the logical right to
do this? I denied it, but instead of advancing reasons for your claim,
you put forward as proof that which has yet to be proved. An error such
as this is called in logic *petitio principii*. You must agree, dear
Sir, that *petitio principii* cannot serve as a support for any kind of
philosophical doctrine.

You continue:

It appears that out of all this school, the one whom our native
philosophers suspect most of 'idealism' and 'solipsism' is the true
father of the school, Ernst Mach (who, by the way, does not call himself
an empirio-criticist). Let's see how he pictures the world. To him, the
Universum is an infinite network of complexes consisting of elements
that are identical with the elements of sensation. These complexes
change, unite, disintegrate; they enter into various combinations,
according to various types of connection. In this network there are what
might be called 'key points' (my expression), places where the elements
are connected with each other more compactly and densely (Mach's
formulation). These places are called human 'egos'; there are less
complicated combinations similar to them -- the psyche of other living
beings. Various complexes enter into the connection of these complicated
combinations -- and then they turn out to be 'experiences' of various
beings: then this connection is broken -- the complex disappears from
the system of experiences of the given being; it may then enter into the
system anew, may be in a changed form, and so on. But, in any case, as
Mach emphasises, this or that complex does not cease to exist if it
disappears from the 'consciousness' of one individual or another; it
appears in other combinations, perhaps in connection with other 'key
points', with other 'egos'\... ^[\[136\]](#n136)^

In this 'utterance', dear Sir, you again reveal with irrepressible
energy a longing to lean upon *petitio principii*. Once more you accept
as proven a basic proposition that has still to be proved. Mach
'emphasises' that this or that complex does not cease to exist if it
disappears from the consciousness of this or that individual. That is
so. But what logical right has he to acknowledge that '*these or those*'
individuals exist? That is the whole question. Yet in spite of all your
verbosity, you give no answer at all to this basic question, and, as I
said previously, you cannot furnish an answer to it so long as you cling
to the views on experience that you have borrowed from Mach.

What does this or that person, 'this or that individual' represent for
me? A certain 'complex of sensations'. That is how your theory (that is,
of course, your teacher's theory) explains it. But if, according to this
theory, this or that individual is for me but a 'complex of sensations',
the question arises: what logical right have I to assert that this
individual exists *not only* in my perception, which is based on my
'sensations', *but also outside my conception*, that is to say, that he
has independent existence quite apart from my sensations and
perceptions? Mach's doctrine on 'experience' denies me this right. This
doctrine lays it down that if I assert that other people exist outside
myself, I pass beyond the boundaries of experience, I 'utter' a
*proposition that is above experience.* And you, my dear Sir, call a
proposition that is above experience, or, to use your own exact term:
met-empirical, a *metaphysical* proposition. So it turns out that you
and Mach are metaphysicians of the purest water. ^[\[137\]](#n137)^ That
is very bad. But what is even worse is that, though you are *a
metaphysician of the purest water*, you are quite unaware of the fact.
You swear by all the gods of Olympus that you and your tutors, Mach and
Avenarius, always stay within the orbit of experience, and from there
you look down on 'metaphysicians' with the greatest contempt. When
reading your works, and also of course, the works of your teachers, one
involuntarily recalls the Krylov fable:

A Monkey in a mirror viewing form and face

Nudged with her leg a Bear who chanced near the place.
^[\[138\]](#n138)^

Not only do you violate the most elementary requirements of logic, but
you make yourself extremely ridiculous by simulating the 'critical
attitude' of the monkey. If the Dauges, Valentinovs, Yushkeviches,
Bermans, Bazarovs, and other long-winded wiseacres whose names are known
to the Lord, if all this philosophical rabble (to use Schelling's
energetic expression) accept you as a more or less serious thinker
(although not always agreeing with you), everyone who knows the subject,
everyone who has studied philosophy not just in currently popular books,
must smile ironically when reading your onslaughts on the
'metaphysicians', and repeat to himself the lines from the same fable:

To count thy friends though thou dost yearn,\
T'were better, gossip, on thyself thy gaze to turn!

At any rate, you renounce solipsism. You admit the existence of
'fellow-men'. I take note of this and say: if 'these or those
individuals' both exist in my perception and at the same time have
separate being independent of my perception, then surely this means that
they exist not only 'for me', but also 'in themselves'. 'This or that
individual' thus turns out to be but a particular case of the notorious
'thing-in-itself', which has created such a furore in philosophy. And
what have you to say, honoured Sir, about the 'thing-in-itself'?

Among other things, this:

Each particular part of the complex may be lacking in our experience at
the given moment, but we nevertheless recognise the 'thing' for *the
very same* as a whole complex would be for us. Does this not mean that
all 'elements', all 'features' of a thing may be discarded, and it will
still remain, not as a phenomenon, but as 'substance'? Of course, this
is only an old error in logic. Pluck each hair off a man's head
separately, the man will not be bald; pluck all the hairs together, the
man will be bald. Such is also the process by which 'substance' is
created, the 'substance' which Hegel called, not without reason, the
'*caput mortuum*' of abstraction. If all the elements of the complex are
discarded, there will be no complex; nothing will remain but the *word*
denoting it. The word -- that is the 'thing-in-itself'.
^[\[139\]](#n139)^

Thus the 'thing-in-itself' is but an empty word, devoid of all content,
a *caput mortuum* of abstraction, as you repeat after Hegel, whose name,
however, you decidedly take in vain here. Well, I shall agree with you:
after all, I am an easy-going 'individual'. The 'thing-in-itself is an
empty word. But if this is the case, the individual 'in himself' is also
an empty word. And if an individual 'in himself' is an empty word, these
or those 'individuals' exist only in my perception, and if so, 'I' am
quite alone in the world and\... inevitably arrive at solipsism in
philosophy. *Solus ipse!* Yet you, Mr Bogdanov, reject solipsism. How is
it possible? Doesn't it again follow that in the mouthing of empty,
meaningless words it is precisely you, 'above all', who are guilty, and
not other 'individuals'? You crammed these empty words, devoid of all
meaning, into a lengthy article which you entitled, as if in mockery of
yourself, 'The Ideal of Cognition'. An extremely lofty ideal!

Speaking between ourselves, Mr Bogdanov, you are entirely at sea in
regard to philosophical matters. Therefore I shall try to explain my
thoughts to you by means of a graphic example.

You have probably read Hauptmann's play *Und Pippa tanzt!*. In Act II,
Pippa, on regaining consciousness after a fainting spell, asks: 'Wo bin
ich denn?' ^[\[140\]](#n140)^ To which Hellriegel replies: 'In Meinem
Kopfe!' ^[\[141\]](#n141)^

Hellriegel was right. Pippa really did exist in his head. But the
question now arises: was it *only* in his head that she existed?
Hellriegel, who on seeing her thought he himself was delirious, at first
assumed that Pippa did indeed exist *only* in his head. Of course, Pippa
cannot agree with this and protests: 'Aber sieh doch, ich bin doch von
Fleisch und Blut!' ^[\[142\]](#n142)^

Hellriegel gradually yields to her argument; he places his ear against
her chest (like a doctor, says Hauptmann) and exclaims: 'Du bist ja
lebendig! Du hast ja ein Herz, Pippa!' ^[\[143\]](#n143)^

Now, what happened here? To begin with, Hellriegel had a 'complex of
sensations' which led him to think that Pippa existed only in his
perception, and then a number of new 'sensations' (heartbeats, etc) were
added to this 'complex' and at once turned Hellriegel into a
metaphysician in the sense in which you, Mr Bogdanov, mistakenly use
this word. He admitted Pippa's existence outside the bounds of his
'experience' (again in your meaning of the word, Mr Bogdanov), that is
to say, that she had separate existence quite regardless of his
sensations. It is as simple as ABC. Let us proceed.

As soon as Hellriegel had recognised that Pippa had not been created by
his sensations, combined in a certain way, but that his sensations had
been sparked off by Pippa, he fell at once into what you, Mr Bogdanov,
not understanding what it is all about, call *dualism*. He began to
think that Pippa existed not only in his perception but also in herself.
Now, Mr Bogdanov, perhaps you too have guessed that there is no dualism
here at all, and that if Hellriegel had continued to deny Pippa's
existence in herself he would have arrived at that same solipsism which
you so strongly and so vainly strive to disavow.

That's what speaking popularly means! Having used this example from
Hauptmann's play, I am beginning to think that I shall at last be
understood even by many of those readers thanks to whom several editions
of your 'philosophical' works are dispersed over the broad face of the
Russian land. What I say is extremely simple. All that is needed to
understand me is a little effort.

O, children, learn your ABC,\
ABC, and learn it right,\
We shall all be happy,\
When we can read and write!

### VI

You say, dear Sir, that the thing-in-itself, deprived of all meaning by
Kant, has become cognitively useless. ^[\[144\]](#n144)^ And having said
this, you imagine yourself, as usual, to be a profound thinker. However,
it is not hard to understand that the truth you expressed here is a very
cheap one. Kant taught that the thing-in-itself is inaccessible to
knowledge. If it is inaccessible to knowledge, no one, even those who
know nothing about empiriomonism, should have the least difficulty in
guessing that it is cognitively useless. After all, isn't it one and the
same thing? What then follows? Not at all what you think, dear Sir. Not
that the thing-in-itself does not exist, but only that *Kant*'s
*teaching about it* was wrong. But you have so badly digested the
history of philosophy, and especially of materialism, that you
constantly forget that one can accept some other teaching about the
thing-in-itself than Kant's. Meanwhile, it is clear that if 'these or
those individuals' exist not only in my head, they represent
things-in-themselves *in relation to myself.* And if this is clear, it
should also be obvious that we have to take into account the mutual
relationship of subject and object. In as much as you spurn solipsism --
although, as I have already pointed out, you are always being drawn
involuntarily (that is, unnoticed by you) to its melancholy shores by
some mysterious force -- in as much as you are *not* a solipsist, you
too try to resolve the question of the relationship of object and
subject. Your absolutely incongruous theory of objectivity, which I
analysed above, is just such an endeavour to solve this question. But,
in doing so you restricted the scope of the question. You excluded from
the objective world all people in general, and, consequently, 'these or
those individuals' to whom you referred in talking yourself out of
solipsism. Again you had no logical right whatever to do this, since the
objective world for every separate person is the whole external world,
to which also belong, incidentally, all other persons, to the extent
that they exist not only in this person's mind. You forgot about this,
for the very simple reason that the point of view of the doctrine you
have accepted concerning experience is the point of view of solipsism.
^[\[145\]](#n145)^ But I again meet you halfway. I again admit you are
right in maintaining that 'these or those individuals' do not belong to
the objective world. I only beg you to explain to me what is the
relationship of 'these or those individuals' one to another and how they
communicate with one another? This question will not embarrass you, I
hope, but on the contrary will make you happy, since it offers you the
chance to reveal before all of us one of the most 'original' features of
your world-outlook.

You *naturally* (to use your own expression) take as the starting point
of the investigation of this question the concept of man as a definite
'complex of immediate experiences'. But for another person man appears
'above all as a *perception* amidst other perceptions, as a definite
visual-tactile-acoustic complex amidst other complexes'.
^[\[146\]](#n146)^ Here I might make the point again that if for person
A person B is above all nothing more than a definite
visual-tactile-acoustic complex, person A has the logical right to
recognise the independent, separate existence of person B only in the
case when he, person A, does not adhere to your (or rather Mach's)
teaching on experience. If he adheres to it, he must, at least, have the
honesty to admit that in declaring person B to have separate existence
from him, 'individual' A, he is 'uttering' a met-empirical, that is, a
metaphysical (I am using these terms in the sense you understand them)
proposition; otherwise he is rejecting the whole basis of Machism. But I
shall not insist on this, since I suppose the reader now understands
well enough this aspect of your inconsistency. The important point for
me now is to ascertain how one 'complex of immediate experiences'
(person B) 'appears to another' 'complex of immediate experiences'
(person A), as a 'perception amidst other perceptions', or as a definite
visual-tactile-acoustic complex amidst other complexes. In other words,
I should like to understand *how the process of the 'immediate
experience*' *of one 'complex of immediate experiences*' *by another
'complex of immediate experiences*' *is accomplished.* The matter
appears 'above all' to be obscure to the last degree. True, you try to
shed some light on it by explaining that one person becomes for another
a coordination of immediate experiences *thanks to the fact* that people
understand each other's 'utterances'. ^[\[147\]](#n147)^ But I have to
confess that I find it impossible to thank you for this 'thanks to the
fact', since 'thanks' to it the matter is not any clearer than it was
before. In view of this, I once again resort to my system of making
lengthy excerpts from your articles. They may perhaps assist me in
ascertaining what are your 'independent' discoveries in the sphere I am
now interested in.

Between complex A and complex B certain relationships are established, a
*mutual influence*, as you say. ^[\[148\]](#n148)^ Complex A is directly
or indirectly reflected in complex B; complex B is reflected, or, at
least, can be reflected in complex A. At the same time, you give the
quite timely explanation that although any given complex may be directly
or indirectly reflected in other analogous complexes, ^[\[149\]](#n149)^
'it is not reflected in them as it is, in its immediate form, but in the
form of this or that series of alterations of these complexes, in the
form of a new grouping of the elements entering into the complexes,
complicating their "inner" relationships'. ^[\[150\]](#n150)^

We shall keep these words of yours in mind; they contain an idea which
is absolutely necessary for the comprehension of your theory of
'substitution'. At the moment, let's turn to the elucidation of another
circumstance, which you, Mr Bogdanov, consider very important.

This is as follows. The interaction of 'living beings', you say, is not
accomplished directly, immediately; the experiences of one being do not
lie within the orbit of another's experience. One vital process is
'reflected' in another only indirectly. ^[\[151\]](#n151)^ And this is
accomplished through the intermediary of the environment.

This is not unlike a materialist theory. Feuerbach says in his
*VorlÃ¤ufigen Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie*: 'Ich bin Ich -- fÃ¼r
mich, und zugleich Du -- fÃ¼r Andere.' ('I am "I" for myself, and at the
same time "Thou" for others.') ^[\[152\]](#n152)^ But in his theory of
cognition, Feuerbach remains a consistent materialist: he does not
separate '*I*' (nor those '*elements*' into which '*I*' could be
divided) from body. He writes: 'I am a real and sensuous being, my body
belongs to my being: it might be said that my body in its totality \[in
seiner TotalitÃ¤t\] is my ego, my very being.' ^[\[153\]](#n153)^
Therefore, from Feuerbach's materialist standpoint, the interaction of
two people is 'above all' the interaction of two bodies organised in a
definite way. ^[\[154\]](#n154)^ This interaction sometimes takes place
directly, for example, when person A *touches* person B, and sometimes
through the intermediary of the *environment*, for example, when person
A *sees* person B. It need hardly be said that for Feuerbach the
environment of men could be only a *material* environment. But this is
much too simple for you: *vous avez changÃ© tout cela*.
^[\[155\]](#n155)^ So tell us, please, what is that environment through
the intermediary of which there occur, according to your 'original'
teaching, the reciprocal actions of those complexes of immediate
experiences which we profane creatures call *people*, and which you,
making allowances for our weakness, but not wishing to be infected by it
yourself, call '*people*' (that is, people in empirio-critical quotation
marks).

We need not wait for your reply. It is already here:

But what is 'environment'? This concept has meaning only in contrast to
that which has its own 'environment', or, in the present instance, to
the life process. If we regard the life process as a complex of
immediate experiences, the 'environment' will be all that does not enter
into this complex. But if this is that 'environment' thanks to which
some life processes are 'reflected' in others, it must represent the
totality of elements not entering into the organised complexes of
experiences -- totality of unorganised elements, a chaos of elements in
the proper meaning of the term. This is what appears to us in our
perceptions and cognition as the 'inorganic world'. ^[\[156\]](#n156)^

Thus, the reciprocal actions of the complexes of immediate experiences
are accomplished through the intermediary of the inorganic world, which
in turn is nothing else but a 'chaos of elements in the proper meaning
of the term'. Good. But the inorganic world, as everyone knows, is part
of the objective, physical world. What then is the physical world? Now
we know this excellently, owing to your revelations, Mr Bogdanov. You
have told us (and we have not forgotten) that 'in general, the physical
world is socially-coordinated, socially-harmonised, in a word, *socially
organised experience*'. ^[\[157\]](#n157)^ Not only have you said this,
but you have repeated it with the stubbornness of Cato insisting that
Carthage must be destroyed. Now before us there 'naturally' arise five
torturing questions.

**First**: Under which category of 'experiences' falls that fearful
catastrophe as a result of which 'socially-coordinated,
socially-harmonised, in a word, *socially organised experience*' has
been transformed into a 'chaos of elements in the proper meaning of the
term'?

**Second**: If the reciprocal actions of people (whom for the sake of
variety you call living beings -- of course, in empirio-critical
quotation marks) are not accomplished directly and immediately, '*but
only*' through the intermediary of the environment, that is, the
inorganic world which is part of the physical world; if, further, the
physical world is socially organised experience and as such is a product
of evolution (as we have also heard from you many times), how were the
reciprocal actions of people feasible *before this product of
development originated*, that is to say, prior to experience being
'socially organised', that experience which is the physical world,
including the *inorganic world*, that is to say, that same environment
which, according to you, is necessary in order that the complexes of
immediate experiences, or people, may influence one another?

**Third**: If the inorganic environment did not exist prior to
experience being 'socially organised', how could the *beginning* of the
organisation of this experience have been brought about? Have we not
been told that 'the reciprocal actions of living beings are not
accomplished directly and immediately'?

**Fourth**: If the reciprocal actions of people were out of the question
before the formation of the inorganic environment as the *result* of the
development indicated, how could any kind of world processes have come
about; how could anything of any kind arise apart from the isolated
complexes of immediate experiences which appeared from the Lord knows
where?

**Fifth**: What in fact could these complexes 'experience', at a time
when absolutely nothing existed and when, consequently, there was
nothing to 'experience'?

### VII

You yourself feel that here is something 'not quite right' again and
find it necessary 'to eliminate possible misunderstandings'. How do you
eliminate them?

*In our experience* \[you write\], the inorganic world is not a chaos of
elements, but a series of definite space-time groups; *in our
cognition*, the inorganic world is even transformed into an orderly
system, united by relationships in continuous conformity to law. But 'in
experience' and 'in cognition' means in somebody's *experiences*; unity
and order, continuity and conformity to law belong precisely to
experiences as the organised complexes of elements; when regarded
separately from this organised state, regarded '*an sich*', the
inorganic world is indeed a chaos of elements, a complete or almost
complete indeterminateness. This is by no means metaphysics, it is
simply the expression of the fact that the inorganic world is not life,
and of that fundamental monistic idea that the inorganic world is
distinguished from living nature, not by its material (those same
'elements' that are the elements of experience), but by its unorganised
state. ^[\[158\]](#n158)^

Not only does this 'utterance' not eliminate any misunderstandings; it
does the exact opposite: it has produced some that were not there
before. In referring to the 'fundamental monistic idea', you revert to
the distinguishing of *two* forms of being which, following the example
of Mach and Avenarius, cost you so much effort to criticise. You
distinguish being '*an sich*' from being in our cognition, or, to put it
another way, experienced by somebody, that is, in 'experience'. But if
this distinction is correct, then your theory, in accordance with your
own definitions, is met-empirical, that is, metaphysical. You yourself
sense this and therefore you declare, without the least vestige of
proof, 'this is by no means metaphysics'. No, dear Sir, in the light of
your doctrine of experience -- and on this doctrine is founded the whole
of 'empirio-criticism', the whole of Machism, and the whole of
'empiriomonism' -- as well as in the light of your criticism of the
'thing-in-itself', this is the pure unmistakable metaphysics. But you
could not avoid becoming a 'metaphysician' here, since you got yourself
entangled in hopeless contradictions by remaining under the spell of
your doctrine of experience. What can be said of a 'philosophy' which
only acquires some hope of salvation from absurdity when it repudiates
its own basis?

But you also feel that, in acknowledging a distinction between being 'in
experience' and being '*an sich*', your 'philosophy' is cutting its own
throat. Therefore, you resort to what might be described as a
terminological trick. You distinguish the world 'in experience' not from
the world in itself, but from the world '*an sich*' and fence in this
latter world with quotation marks. If 'this or that' individual points
out that here you are citing being-in-itself, which you yourself
declared to be 'cognitively useless', you will reply that although you
did use the old term signifying a 'cognitively useless' concept, you
gave it an entirely new meaning by placing it in quotation marks. Very
smart! It was no accident that in my first letter I likened you to
cunning monk Gorenflot.

By divesting being-in-itself of its Russian dress and investing it in a
German costume, and putting a screen of quotation marks round it, you
wished to forestall objections from 'this or that' inopportunely shrewd
individual; this is revealed in the note you made somewhat later, to be
exact, on page 159. ^[\[159\]](#n159)^ You 'recall' there that you by no
means used the expression '*an sich*' in a metaphysical sense. And you
prove this in the following way:

For certain physiological processes of other people, we substitute the
'immediate complexes' -- consciousness; criticism of psychological
experience compels us to extend the domain of this substitution, and we
regard all physiological life as the 'reflection' of immediate,
organised complexes. But the *inorganic processes* are not distinct in
principle from the physiological, which are only their organised
combination. Being in one continuous series with the physiological
processes, the inorganic processes must also, obviously, be regarded as
'reflection'. But of what? -- of immediate *unorganised* complexes. We
are *as yet unable* to carry out this substitution concretely in our
consciousness. What of it! We are often unable to do this in relation to
animals as well (the experiences of the amoeba) and even in relation to
other people ('incomprehension' of their psychology). But in place of
concrete substitution, we can formulate the *relationships* of these
cases ('life *an sich*' -- immediate, organised complexes, 'environment
*an sich*' -- unorganised complexes).

The significance of this new reservation of yours will be fully
disclosed only when we come to determine the use-value of your theory of
'substitution' which, as we have seen, is one of the foundations of your
claim to originality in the field of philosophy. However, it may already
be said that this reservation is 'cognitively useless'. Think it out for
yourself, Mr Bogdanov. What significance can your formulation of the
'*relationships*' of the 'cases' you have indicated have here? Let us
assume that this formulation -- 'life *an sich*' is immediate, organised
complexes; 'environment *an sich*' is the unorganised -- is quite
correct. What, then? After all, the question is not how 'life *an sich*'
relates to 'environment *an sich*', but how 'life *an sich*' and
'environment *an sich*' relate to life and environment 'in our
experience', in our 'cognition'. Absolutely no reply can be found to
this question in your new reservation. Therefore, neither that
reservation nor the artful device of changing the clothes of
being-in-itself from a Russian dress to a German costume will prevent
shrewd 'individuals' from exercising their right to declare that, if
momentarily you evade the irreconcilable contradictions inherent in your
'philosophy', it is only by admitting the 'cognitively useless'
distinction between being-in-itself and being-in-experience.
^[\[160\]](#n160)^ Like your tutor Mach, out of the most elementary
logical necessity, you burn that which you invite us to adore, and adore
that which you invite us to burn.

### VIII

Just one last word, and then I shall be able to wind up the list of your
mortal sins against logic. I go on to your theory of 'substitution'. It
is this particular theory which must explain to us, the profane, how one
man 'appears to another' as a definite 'visual-tactile-acoustic complex
amidst other complexes'.

We are already aware that there is interaction between the complexes of
immediate experiences (or, to put it simply, people). They influence one
another, 'are *reflected*' in one another. But how are they 'reflected'?
That is the whole question.

Here we shall have to recall that idea of yours, which I noted already,
that although each given 'complex' can be reflected in other analogous
complexes, it is reflected in them, not in its immediate form but in the
form of certain alterations of these complexes, 'in the form of a new
grouping of elements entering into the complexes, complicating their
inner relationships'. I remarked that this idea is absolutely necessary
for the comprehension of your theory of 'substitution'. The time has now
come to deal with it.

Expressing this important idea in your own words, Mr Bogdanov, I shall
say that the reflection of complex A in complex B is reduced to 'a
definite series of alterations of this second complex, alterations
connected with the content and structure of the first complex by
functional dependency'. ^[\[161\]](#n161)^ What does 'functional
dependency' mean in this instance? Only this, that in the interaction
between complex A and complex B, the content and structure of the first
complex corresponds to a definite series of alterations of the second
complex. No more and no less. This means that when I have the honour to
converse with you, my 'experiences' come into conformity with yours. How
is this conformity explained? There is nothing to explain it apart from
those same words 'functional dependency' -- and these explain absolutely
nothing. So I ask you, Mr Bogdanov, is there really anything to
distinguish this 'functional' conformity from that 'pre-established
harmony' which you reject with such supreme contempt, following your
teacher, Mach? Think again and you will see for yourself that there is
absolutely no difference between them and that, therefore, you have been
insulting old granny 'pre-established harmony' for no reason at all. If
you really wish to be frank (although I have little hope of that) you
will tell us that your reference to 'environment' stemmed from a vague
consciousness of a (for you) embarrassing resemblance between the old
theory of 'pre-established harmony' and your 'functional dependency'.
But after what I have said above, it is hardly necessary to explain that
in the present difficult case environment is 'cognitively useless', if
only for one reason that, since in your theory it is the *result* of the
interaction of complexes, it does not explain how such interaction is
*possible*, apart from 'pre-established harmony'.

To proceed.

Having expounded the clearly 'met-empirical' (that is, 'metaphysical')
proposition that the inorganic world '*an sich*' is something totally
distinct from the inorganic world 'in our experience', you continue:

If the unorganised 'environment' is the intermediate link in the
interactions of vital processes, if through its intermediary the
complexes of experiences are 'reflected' in one another there is nothing
new and strange in the fact that through its intermediary the given
vital complex is 'reflected' also in itself. Complex A, acting on
complex B, can, through the intermediary of B, exert influence on
complex C as well as on complex A, that is to say, on itself\... From
this point of view, it is perfectly understandable that the living being
can have 'external perception' of itself, can see, feel, hear itself,
and so on, that is to say, among the series of its own experiences can
find those that represent an indirect (through the intermediary of
'environment') reflection of this self-same series. ^[\[162\]](#n162)^

To translate all this into everyday language, it means that when a man
perceives his own body, he 'experiences' some of his own 'experiences',
which take on the form of a 'visual-tactile complex' because they are
being reflected through the intermediary of environment. This is utterly
incomprehensible '*an sich*'. Just try to understand how a man
'experiences' his own 'experiences' even if through the intermediary of
'environment', which, as we know already, explains absolutely nothing.
^[\[163\]](#n163)^ Here, Mr Bogdanov, you become a metaphysician in the
sense attributed to the word by Voltaire, who averred that when a man
says something he himself does not understand, he is dealing in
metaphysics. But the idea you have expressed, incomprehensible '*an
sich*', may be reduced to this: our body is nothing else but our
psychical experience reflected in a certain way. If this is not
idealism, what is?

You have supplemented Mach splendidly, Mr Bogdanov, I am not saying this
for fun. Mach as a physicist none the less occasionally wandered into
materialism. I demonstrated this in my second letter to you with the
help of some graphic illustrations. In this sense, Mach committed the
sin of dualism. You have corrected his error. You have made his
philosophy idealist from A to Z. We cannot but praise you for this.
^[\[164\]](#n164)^

Please do not think I am mocking you over this, Mr Bogdanov. Quite the
contrary; I am about to pay you a compliment -- perhaps even a very big
compliment. The arguments of yours that I have just been quoting remind
me of Schelling's teaching about the creative intellect which
contemplates its own activity but is not conscious of this process of
contemplation, and therefore conceives of its products as objects coming
from outside. Of course, with you this teaching of Schelling has changed
considerably and, indeed, has assumed the aspect, one may say, of a
caricature. But it must already be some consolation for you that you are
at least the caricature of a great man.

You should note, however, that in paying you this compliment, which, I
confess, may seem doubtful to you, I have no wish to infer in any way
that, in making your own supplement to Mach's 'philosophy', you were
aware that you were only changing someone else's idealist doctrine and a
fairly old one at that. No, I suppose that this old doctrine, thanks to
some properties of your 'environment', was 'reflected', quite without
your knowledge, in your head as a 'complex' of philosophical conclusions
from the main acquisitions of 'modern natural science'. But idealism is
still idealism, no matter whether he who preaches it is conscious of its
nature or not. While developing after your own fashion, that is,
distorting, the idealism you have unconsciously assimilated, you
'naturally' arrive at a purely idealist view of matter. And although you
reject the supposition that, in your opinion, the 'physical' is only the
'other-being' of the 'psychical', ^[\[165\]](#n165)^ in point of fact
this assumption corresponds fully to the truth. Your view of matter, and
of everything physical, is, I repeat, saturated through and through with
idealism. To become convinced of this, it will suffice to read, for
instance, your most profound observations relating to the domain of
physiological chemistry:

In a word, it should be regarded as most probable that the organised
living albumen is the physical expression ('or reflection') of immediate
experiences of a *psychical* character and, of course, the more
elementary they are, the more elementary is the organisation of this
living albumen in each given instance. ^[\[166\]](#n166)^

It is obvious that the chemist and physiologist who wished to take this
point of view would have had to create purely idealist 'disciplines', to
return to Schelling's 'speculative' natural science.

Now it is not difficult to understand what exactly takes place when one
person perceives the body of another person. But first of all we must
revert to the inverted commas which have such an outstanding part to
play in your 'philosophy', Mr Bogdanov. One person does not by any means
see the body of another person -- that is a materialism unworthy of
'modern natural science'! He sees the 'body', that is, the body in
inverted commas, although he notices the inverted commas only if he
belongs to the 'empiriomonistic' school. And the body in inverted commas
means that 'this has to be understood spiritually', as the Catechism
puts it, or psychically, as you and I put it, Mr Bogdanov. 'Body' is
nothing else but the peculiar reflection (reflection through the
intermediary of inorganic environment) of one complex of experiences in
another such complex. The psychical (in inverted commas and without
them) precedes both the 'physical' (and the physical) and the
'physiological' (and the physiological).

There, Mr Bogdanov, is your book-learning. There is the meaning of all
your philosophy!

Or to express it more modestly, there is the meaning of what bears your
grandiloquent title of *systematised, reformed substitution.*

From the point of view of systematised, reformed substitution \[you
announce\], all nature appears as an infinite series of 'immediate
complexes', the *material* of which is the same as the 'elements' of
experience, while their *form* is characterised by the most varying
degrees of organisation from the lowest, corresponding to the 'inorganic
world', to the highest, corresponding to man's 'experience'. These
complexes influence one another. Each individual 'perception of the
external world' is a reflection of some one of these complexes in a
definite, formed complex -- the living psyche, while 'physical
experience' is the result of the collectively organising process,
harmoniously uniting such perceptions. 'Substitution' gives a kind of
reverse reflection of reflection, more resembling the 'reflected' than
the first reflection: thus the melody *reproduced* by a phonograph is
the second reflection of the melody *perceived by it*, and bears a much
greater resemblance to the latter than the first reflection -- the
indentations and dots on the cylinder of the phonograph.
^[\[167\]](#n167)^

It is useless to engage in a philosophical discussion with anyone who
doubts even for a moment the idealist character of *such* a philosophy,
for he is quite hopeless from the point of view of philosophy.

I might describe you as the *enfant terrible* of Mach's school, if such
a ponderous 'complex of immediate experiences' could be compared to a
frolicsome and mischievous child. But, in any case, you have blurted out
the school's secret, saying openly what the school was too shy to speak
about in public. You have put the idealist 'dots' over the idealist
'i's' that have stamped Mach's 'philosophy'. And, I repeat, you did this
because Mach's (and Avenarius') 'philosophy' seemed to you to be
insufficiently monistic. You sensed that the monism of this 'philosophy'
was idealist monism. So you resolved to 'supplement' it in the idealist
spirit. In this case, your work-tool was the theory of objectivity
constructed by you. With its help, you easily fashioned all your other
philosophical -- shall we say, acquisitions. You yourself admit this in
the following passage, which, unfortunately for you, is distinguished by
a remarkable clarity, quite unlike the other passages that have come
from your ponderous pen:

Since the history of psychical development shows that objective
experience, with its connection with the nervous system, and its orderly
conformity to law, is the result of prolonged development, and is
crystallised only step by step from the torrent of immediate
experiences, it remained for us only to accept that the *objective*
physiological process is the 'reflection' of the complex of immediate
experiences, and not the other way round. The question further remained:
if it is 'reflection', then in what exactly? The reply we gave
corresponds to the social-monistic conception of experience we had
adopted. Recognising the universal significance of objective experience
as an expression of its socially organised state, we arrived at the
following empiriomonist conclusion: physiological life is the result of
the collective harmonisation of 'external perceptions' of the living
organism, each of which is the reflection of one complex of experiences
in another complex of experiences (or in itself). In other words,
*physiological life is the reflection of immediate life in the socially
organised experience of living beings*. ^[\[168\]](#n168)^

This last phrase: 'physiological life is the reflection of immediate
life in the socially organised experience of living beings' vouches both
for you being an idealist, and for you being an 'original' idealist.
Only an idealist can regard physiological processes as the 'reflection'
of immediate psychical experiences. And only the most muddled of
idealists can assert that 'reflections' pertaining to the domain of
*physiological life* are the result of socially organised experience,
that is to say, the product of *social life.*

But having let out the secret of 'empirio-criticism', you added
absolutely nothing to this 'philosophical' doctrine apart from some
utterly incongruous and irreconcilably contradictory fantasies. Reading
these fantasies, one goes through almost the same as Chichikov had to
'experience' when he took a night's lodging in Korobochka's house.
^[\[169\]](#n169)^ The feather-bed was so skilfully made up for him by
Fetinia that it almost touched the ceiling:

When, by standing up on a chair, he clambered into the feather-bed, it
sank under him almost to the floor, and the feathers, crowded out of
their confining covering, flurried to every corner of the room.

Your 'empiriomonist' fantasies too rise almost to the ceiling, they are
so stuffed with various learned terms and sham wisdom. But at the first
touch of criticism the feathers from your 'philosophical' feather-bed
start flying in all directions, while the astonished reader, swiftly
falling, feels himself descending into the murky depths of the most
vapid metaphysics. Just because of that, it is very easy to criticise
you: but it is an extremely dull business. That is why I left you alone
last year and undertook instead the criticism of your teacher. But since
you claimed to have your independent importance, I was compelled to deal
with your claim. I have demonstrated how inconsistent your 'theory of
objectivity' is, and to what extent your doctrine of 'substitution'
distorts the natural connection of phenomena. That is sufficient. To
pursue you further would be a sheer waste of time; the reader sees what
your 'independent' philosophy is worth.

I shall say just one thing more in conclusion. The regrettable thing is
not that such a 'complex of immediate experiences' as yourself, Mr
Bogdanov, could appear in our literature, but that this 'complex' could
play some part in it. Your books were read, some of those on philosophy
ran into several editions. One could even be reconciled to that, were
your books bought, read and approved only by obscurantists,
^[\[170\]](#n170)^ who do not deserve a better spiritual fare. But we
cannot be reconciled to the fact that people of an advanced mode of
thought read and accepted you seriously. That is a very bad sign. It
shows that we are passing through a period of unprecedented intellectual
decline. To accept you as a thinker capable of furnishing a
philosophical justification of Marxism, one would need to have
positively no knowledge either of philosophy or of Marxism. Ignorance is
always a bad thing. It is dangerous to all men at all times, but it is
especially so for those who wish to go forward. And for them it is
doubly dangerous to be ignorant during periods of social stagnation,
when they are called upon to do 'battle with spiritual weapons' with
increased energy. The weapons you have forged, Mr Bogdanov, are quite
unsuitable for advanced people; such weapons assure not victory but
defeat. Worse than that. Fighting with such weapons, advanced people are
themselves transformed into knights of reaction, opening up the way for
mysticism and all varieties of superstition.

Those abroad who hold the same views as ourselves are very much mistaken
in thinking, like my friend Kautsky, that there is no need to cross
swords over that 'philosophy' which is disseminated in Russia by you and
similar theoretical revisionists. Kautsky does not know the
relationships existing in Russia. He disregards the fact that the
theoretical bourgeois reaction which is now causing real havoc in the
ranks of our advanced intellectuals is being accomplished in our country
under the banner of philosophical idealism, and that, consequently, we
are threatened with exceptional harm from such philosophical doctrines,
which, while being idealist to the core, pose as the last word in
natural science, a science foreign to every metaphysical premise. The
struggle against such doctrines is not only not superfluous, it is
obligatory, just as obligatory as it is to protest against the
*reactionary* 'revaluation of values' which the prolonged efforts of
Russian *advanced* thought have produced.

I had intended to say something about your pamphlet *The Adventures of
One Philosophical School* (St Petersburg, 1908), but I am now pressed
for time and must renounce this intention. Besides there is no great
need to analyse this pamphlet. I hope that my three letters will be
quite sufficient to elucidate how the philosophical views of the school
to which I belong relate to your views, dear Sir, and particularly to
the views of your teacher, Mach. That is all I want. There are more than
enough people ready to carry on useless arguments, but I am not one of
them. Therefore I had better wait until you write something against me
and in defence of your teacher, or at least in defence of your own
'objectivity' and your own 'substitution'. Then we shall have another
talk!

GV Plekhanov

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes -- Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of
this edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1.]{.info}]{#n1} 'You asked for it, Georges Dandin!' As an epigraph to
each letter Plekhanov used the exclamation of the ill-starred peasant
Georges Dandin, the title character of MoliÃ¨re's play. The choice of the
epigraph is explained by the fact that by his 'Open Letter to Plekhanov'
Bogdanov provoked Plekhanov to criticise empiriomonism -- Editor.

[[2.]{.info}]{#n2} *Vestnik Zhizni* (*Herald of Life*) -- a scientific,
literary and political journal, the legal organ of the RSDLP
(Bolsheviks) which was published in St Petersburg from March 1906 to
September 1907. Besides articles devoted to current political problems,
the journal printed many items on literary criticism, art and philosophy
-- Editor.

[[3.]{.info}]{#n3} Literally: 'call a cat a cat' -- Editor.

[[4.]{.info}]{#n4} Pompadour -- a collective satirical character created
by MY Saltykov-Shchedrin in his *Messieurs et Mesdames Pompadours*, in
which the great Russian satirist branded high tsarist officials,
ministers and governors. The word became synonymous with petty tyranny
and arbitrary administration -- Editor.

[[5.]{.info}]{#n5} A Bogdanov, *Empiriomonism*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1905),
p 39. \['Beltov' was Plekhanov's pen name -- Editor.\]

[[6.]{.info}]{#n6} Quotation from Pushkin's poem *Poltava --* Editor.

[[7.]{.info}]{#n7} Vasili Kirillovich Tredyakovsky (1703-1769) --
Russian poet, philologist and literary theorist -- Editor.

[[8.]{.info}]{#n8} I have plenty to do without that; literally: I have
other cats to whip -- Editor.

[[9.]{.info}]{#n9} The reference is to Arturo Labriola's book *Reformism
and Syndicalism* -- Editor.

[[10.]{.info}]{#n10} The reference is to *god-building* -- a religious
philosophical trend which arose in Russia during the years of reaction
(1907-10) among a group of party intellectuals who deserted Marxism
after the defeat of the 1905-07 revolution. The god-builders (A
Lunacharsky, V Bazarov and others) advocated the establishment of a new,
'socialist' religion, trying to blend Marxism with religion -- Editor.

[[11.]{.info}]{#n11} See Engels' article 'Die Lage Englands', which was
first published in *Deutsch-FranzÃ¶sische JahrbÃ¼cher* and reprinted in
*Nachlass*, Volume 1, p 484. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p 462 -- Editor.\]

[[12.]{.info}]{#n12} They will soon do so. Our intellectuals'
infatuation with every fashionable anti-materialist 'ism' is a symptom
of the adaptation of their 'world-outlook' to the 'complex' of ideas
peculiar to the modern bourgeoisie. But as yet, many of the
intellectuals who oppose materialism still imagine themselves to be
spokesmen of the proletariat, whom they try to influence, sometimes not
without success.

[[13.]{.info}]{#n13} PB Struve, *Critical Notes on Russia*'s *Economic
Development* (Russian edition, First Issue, St Petersburg, 1894) --
Editor.

[[14.]{.info}]{#n14} Mikhail Petrovich Artsybashev (1878-1927) --
Russian novelist: his novels reflected the decadent trends during the
period of reaction (1907-10) -- Editor.

[[15.]{.info}]{#n15} Molchalin *--* a character from A Griboyedov's *Wit
Works Woe*, synonymous with servility and toadyism -- Editor.

[[16.]{.info}]{#n16} See his *Disquisitions Relating to Matter and
Spirit*, and his controversy with Price.

[[17.]{.info}]{#n17} See his remarkable attempts at a materialist
explanation of history, which I mentioned in the second of my *BeitrÃ¤ge
zur Geschichte des Materialismus.*

[[18.]{.info}]{#n18} Preface, *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3, pp. x-xi.

[[19.]{.info}]{#n19} Whoever says *A*, must say *B --* Editor.

[[20.]{.info}]{#n20} *Ludwig Feuerbach* (St Petersburg, 1906), p 30.
\[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow,
1973), p 337 -- Editor.\]

[[21.]{.info}]{#n21} Supplement 1 to Engels' *Ludwig Feuerbach* (St
Petersburg, 1906) p. 87. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Collected
Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p. 130 -- Editor.\]

[[22.]{.info}]{#n22} Ibid, p 88. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
*Collected Works*, Volume 4 (Moscow, 1975), p. 131 -- Editor.\]

[[23.]{.info}]{#n23} Avis \[advice\] for you, Mr Bogdanov, but
especially for your colleague, the Blessed Anatoly founder of the new
religion. \[*Blessed Anatoly* -- AV Lunacharsky -- Editor.\]

[[24.]{.info}]{#n24} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 2 (Moscow, 1973), p. 383 -- Editor.

[[25.]{.info}]{#n25} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 335 -- Editor.

[[26.]{.info}]{#n26} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), pp. 107-09 -- Editor.

[[27.]{.info}]{#n27} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] Allusion to Hobbes' reference to the people: *puer robustus
et malitiosus* (a strong and malicious child). I should say, by the way,
that even in Hobbes' system, materialism was far from being completely
deprived of revolutionary spirit. The ideologists of the monarchy even
at that time understood that monarchy by the grace of God was one thing,
whereas monarchy according to Hobbes was quite another. Lange rightly
said: 'Dass jede Revolution, welche Macht hat, auch berechtigt ist,
sobald es ihr gelingt, irgend eine neue Staatsgewalt herzustellen, folgt
aus diesem System von selbst; der Spruch "Macht geht vor Recht" ist als
Trost der Tyrannen unnÃ¶thig, da Macht und Recht geradezu identisch sind;
Hobbes verweilt nicht gern bei diesen Konsequenzen seines Systems und
malt die Vortheile eines absolutistischen ErbkÃ¶nigtums mit Vorliebe aus;
allein die Theorie wird dadurch nicht geÃ¤ndert.' (FA Lange, *Geschichte
des Materialismus*, Volume 1 (Leipzig, 1902), p. 244) \['that every
revolution which is strong enough is also justified, as soon as it
succeeds, in establishing a new form of state power follows of itself
from this system: tyrants need not comfort themselves with the proverb
"Might comes before Right" since might and right are actually identical.
Hobbes is reluctant to dwell on the consequences of his system, and
prefers to paint the advantages of an absolute hereditary monarchy; but
that does not modify the theory.'\] The revolutionary role of
materialism in the world of antiquity was mentioned by Lucretius,
writing eloquently apropos of Epicurus: 'When human life lay foully on
the earth, before all eyes, 'neath Superstition crushed, who from the
heavenly quarters showed her head and with appalling aspect lowered on
men; Then did a Greek first lift eyes to hers -- first brave her face to
face. Him neither myth of gods, nor thunderbolts, nor sky with roar and
threat could quell\...' Even Lange, who, in general, is not well
disposed to materialism, recognised that idealism had a protective role
to play in Athenian society.

[[28.]{.info}]{#n28} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 113 -- Editor.

[[29.]{.info}]{#n29} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack.\]* 'Notre morale, notre religion, notre sentiment de
nationalitÃ©', says Maurice BarrÃ¨s, 'sont choses Ã©croulÃ©es,
constatais-je, auxquelles nous ne pouvons emprunter des rÃ¨gles de vie,
et en attendant que nos maÃ®tres nous aient refait des certitudes, il
convient que nous nous en tenions Ã  la seule rÃ©alitÃ©, au Moi. C'est la
conclusion du premier chapitre (assez insuffisant, d'ailleurs) de *Sous
l*'*oeil des Barbares.*' (Maurice BarrÃ¨s, *Le Culte du Moi. Examen de
trois idÃ©ologies* (Paris, 1892)) \['Our morality, our religion, our
national sentiment have already suffered collapse, I noted. We cannot
draw rules of life from them, and until our teachers have restored our
confidence in these matters, it is fitting that we should cling to our
only reality, our ego. This is the conclusion of the first chapter of
the (not very adequate, by the way) book *From the Barbarian Point of
View*.'\] It is very clear that such sentiments must predispose those
who hold them to idealism, and to its weakest variety at that --
subjective idealism. People whose whole outlook is closed to everything
except their precious ego, cannot have any sympathy for materialism. Yet
there are people who consider materialism to be an *immoral* doctrine!
It is not necessary to remind those who have even the slightest
acquaintance with contemporary French literature, where BarrÃ¨s, with his
*cult of the ego*, finally landed.

[[30.]{.info}]{#n30} I say 'varied', because in eighteenth-century
French materialism there were several distinct trends, although all were
akin to one another.

[[31.]{.info}]{#n31} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] Confirmation of this may be found in a speech by the famous
naturalist J Reinke on 10 May 1907 in the Prussian Upper Chamber about
the League of Monists founded by Haeckel. This Kiel botanist tries in
every possible way to convince himself and his audience that the
'fanatic' Haeckel causes his displeasure by the scientific
groundlessness of the 'materialist monism' he preaches. (That is how
Reinke, quite correctly, describes Haeckel's teaching.) However, anyone
who takes the trouble to read Reinke's speech carefully will find that
he is defending, not science, but what he calls 'the light of the old
world-outlook' (*Licht der alten Weltanschauung*). There is no need to
enlarge upon the social relations in which there arose this 'light', so
pleasing to Reinke and scientists such as he. (Reinke's speech was
reproduced in a pamphlet, *Haeckels Monismus und seine Freunde*, von J
Reinke (Leipzig, 1907).)

[[32.]{.info}]{#n32} *Ludwig Feuerbach* (St Petersburg, 1906), p. 43, my
italics -- GP. \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 347 -- Editor.\]

[[33.]{.info}]{#n33} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3, p. 11.

[[34.]{.info}]{#n34} *Ludwig Feuerbach*, p. 41. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 346 --
Editor.\]

[[35.]{.info}]{#n35} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3 (St Petersburg, 1906), p.
xiii.

[[36.]{.info}]{#n36} He laughs best who laughs last -- Editor.

[[37.]{.info}]{#n37} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] On this matter, see the articles: 'Conrad Schmidt Versus Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels', and 'Materialism or Kantianism?' in my work
*A Critique of Our Critics* (St Petersburg, 1906), pp. 167-202. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow,
1976), pp. 379-97, 398-414 -- Editor.\]

[[38.]{.info}]{#n38} Of course, absolute idealism, too, does not share
the materialist view on matter; but its teaching on matter as the
'other-Being' of spirit does not interest us here, just as it was of no
interest to me in my dispute with the neo-Kantians.

[[39.]{.info}]{#n39} The *Works* of George Berkeley DD, formerly bishop
of Cloyne, Volume 1 (Oxford, 1871), pp. 157-58.

[[40.]{.info}]{#n40} Ibid.

[[41.]{.info}]{#n41} Ibid, p. 200.

[[42.]{.info}]{#n42} Feuerbach's *Werke*, Volume 2, p. 308. I may be
asked: does that *not exist* which exists only in thought? It exists, I
reply slightly changing Hegel's expression, subsisting as the
*reflection of real existence.*

[[43.]{.info}]{#n43} *Herrn Eugen DÃ¼hrings UmwÃ¤lzung der Wissenschaft*,
fifth edition, p. 31. \[Frederick Engels, *Anti-DÃ¼hring* (Moscow, 1975),
p. 55 -- Editor.\]

[[44.]{.info}]{#n44} *Analysis of Sensations*, translated by G Kotlyar,
published by Skirmunt, p. 33.

[[45.]{.info}]{#n45} According to Priestley, matter is the object of any
of our senses (*Disquisitions*\..., 1777, p. 142). \[The last six words
are in English in the original -- Editor.\]

[[46.]{.info}]{#n46} *La MatiÃ¨re, Memoire prÃ©sentÃ© a l*'*Institute de
France*, p. 5. The paper was read in April this year.

[[47.]{.info}]{#n47} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] When characterising Plato's theory of knowledge, Windelband
said: 'If notions include knowledge which, although formed by
perceptions, does not develop from them and remains essentially distinct
from them, then ideas, which are the objects of notions, must possess,
together with the objects of perceptions, an independent and higher
reality. But the objects of perceptions in all cases are bodies and
their movements, or as Plato put it in plain Greek, the *visible* world;
consequently, ideas, as the object of cognition expressed in notions,
must represent an independent, separate reality, the *invisible* and
incorporeal world.' (*Plato*, p. 84) This will suffice for anyone to
understand why, in contrasting materialism to idealism, I defined matter
as the source of our sensations. In doing so I was emphasising the main
feature which distinguishes the materialist theory of knowledge from the
idealist. Mr Bogdanov did not understand this, and burst out laughing
when he should have thought the matter over. My opponent says that all
one can make out of my definition of matter is that it is not spirit.
This again proves that he is not familiar with the history of
philosophy. The concept 'spirit' developed by way of abstraction from
the properties of material objects. It is a mistake to speak of matter
as non-spirit. We have to say: spirit (that is, of course, the notion of
spirit) is non-matter. Windelband asserts (p. 85) that the peculiarity
of Plato's theory of knowledge 'consists of the demand that the higher
world must be an invisible or immaterial world'. This demand could
arise, obviously, only a very long time after man, on the basis of
experience, had formed a notion of the world as '*visible*' and
material. The 'peculiarity' of the materialist criticism of idealism
consisted in the revelation that it was inconsistent to demand the
existence of a higher 'world' -- 'invisible' and 'immaterial'. The
materialists affirmed that there exists only the material world which we
-- in one way or another, directly or indirectly -- perceive with the
aid of our senses, and that there is and can be no other knowledge apart
from experience.

[[48.]{.info}]{#n48} *Ludwig Feuerbach* (St Petersburg, 1906), p. 118.
\[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1
(Moscow, 1974), p. 459 -- Editor.\]

[[49.]{.info}]{#n49} About this contradiction of Kant's see my *A
Critique of Our Critics*, p. 167. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), p. 379 *et seq* --
Editor.\]

[[50.]{.info}]{#n50} In fact, animals are also capable of experience,
but there is no need to deal with this here, since what I have said
about human experience suffices to make my point clear.

[[51.]{.info}]{#n51} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] 'Kein Objekt ohne Subjekt', said Schuppe, whose 'immanent
philosophy' in its basis is identical with the teaching of Mach and
Avenarius.

[[52.]{.info}]{#n52} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] 'Therefore the kernel of Plato's philosophy is *dualism*,
established in this philosophy between two types of cognition --
thinking and perception -- and similarly between their two objects --
the immaterial and the material world.' (W Windelband, *Plato*, pp.
85-86)

[[53.]{.info}]{#n53} 'Das Ding an sich hat Farbe erst an das Auge
gebracht, Geruch an die Nase, und so weiter', Hegel says. (Hegel,
*Wissenschaft der Logik*, Volume 1, Book 2 (NÃ¼rnberg, 1813)) \['the
Thing in itself has colour only in relation to the eye, smell in
relation to the nose, and so forth.'\]

[[54.]{.info}]{#n54} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] But this is precisely why Messrs the empiriomonists and
'empirio-symbolists' try to answer it. I examine the attempt made by J
Petzoldt and P Yushkevich to answer this, in the article *Cowardly
Idealism* to be found in this work. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), pp. 424-54 -- Editor.\]

[[55.]{.info}]{#n55} *A Critique of Our Critics*, pp. 193-94. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow,
1976), pp. 398-414 -- Editor.\]

[[56.]{.info}]{#n56} Plekhanov makes a concession to agnosticism when he
asserts that the first distinctive feature of space and time is
subjectivity. In actual fact, space and time are objective, real forms
of matter reflected by the human mind -- Editor.

[[57.]{.info}]{#n57} On the question of the identity of being and
thinking I may now refer to my work *Fundamental Problems of Marxism*
(St Petersburg, 1908), pp. 9 *et sec*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow, 1976), p. 125 *et seq* --
Editor.\]

[[58.]{.info}]{#n58} *A Critique of Our Critics*, pp. 233-34. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow,
1976), p. 419 -- Editor.\]

[[59.]{.info}]{#n59} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] In mentioning this contribution of Hegel's, I am not saying
that he was the first to *notice* this distinction in the concepts of
'*appearance*' and '*form*'; I am only stating that he *defined this
distinction* better than other great idealists.

[[60.]{.info}]{#n60} Venevitinov, *Collected Works* (St Petersburg,
1855), p. 125. Dmitri Vladimirovich Venevitinov (1805-1827) -- Russian
poet, active member of a study group in philosophy known as 'Lovers of
Wisdom' -- Editor.

[[61.]{.info}]{#n61} See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical
Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p. 454 -- Editor.

[[62.]{.info}]{#n62} Pages 102-03 of the foreign edition; 111-12 of the
Petersburg edition. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical
Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), pp. 454-55 -- Editor.\]

[[63.]{.info}]{#n63} I became convinced of the unsatisfactory nature of
this terminology when I reread *Critique of Pure Reason*, where I
noticed the following passage in the first edition: 'In order that the
noumen signify a real object which is not to be confused with all
phenomena, it is not sufficient for me to free my thought of all
conditions of sensuous contemplation. Besides, I must have some grounds
for recognising another form of contemplation apart from sensuous, in
which a similar object could be given, otherwise my thought would be
empty although free from contradictions.' (*Critique of Pure Reason*
translation by NM Sokolov, p. 218, Note). I wished to emphasise that no
other form of contemplation apart from the sensuous is possible, but
this does not prevent us from knowing things through the impressions
they produce on us. But you of course did not understand this, Mr
Bogdanov. What a lot of trouble you give me! Now you see what it means
to begin studying philosophy straight from Mach!

[[64.]{.info}]{#n64} *Ludwig Feuerbach*, St Petersburg edition, p. 112.
\[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1
(Moscow, 1974), p. 455 -- Editor.\]

[[65.]{.info}]{#n65} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] In saying this, I do not mean that my critics would be right
if I continued to hold to the old terminology. No, even in this case,
their views would remain completely unfounded, as are all the objections
made by the idealists against the materialists. Here the difference may
be one of degree only, but it must be recognised that my honourable
opponents have revealed an extreme degree of weakness. Nevertheless, I
have no doubt that my rejection of a term I once employed was
responsible for drawing these gentlemen's attention for the first time
to something which they began to portray as the weakest side of 'my'
materialism. I am very happy to have given them an opportunity to
distinguish themselves. But I regret very much that even an opponent of
idealism such as VI Ilyin thought it necessary to have a go at my
hieroglyphics in his book *Materialism*, etc; why should he have placed
himself on this occasion in the same bracket with people who had given
the most undeniable and obvious proof that they had not invented
gunpowder! \[In expounding and defending the Marxist theory of
knowledge, Plekhanov made a mistake when he asserted that man's
perceptions are not copies of real things and processes of nature, but
conventional signs, hieroglyphs. Lenin remarked in his *Materialism and
Empirio-Criticism* that 'Plekhanov was guilty of an obvious mistake in
his exposition of materialism', that 'Machists fastened with glee on
Plekhanov's "hieroglyphs," palming off their renunciation of materialism
as a criticism of "hieroglyphism\"' (VI Lenin, *Collected Works*, Volume
14, pp. 238 and 232) -- Editor.\]

[[66.]{.info}]{#n66} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3, p. xv.

[[67.]{.info}]{#n67} *Ludwig Feuerbach*, Notes, pp. 112-13. \[See Georgi
Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1974), p.
455 -- Editor.\]

[[68.]{.info}]{#n68} 'Ein Ding hat *Eigenschaften*; sie sind *erstlich*
seine bestimmten Beziehungen auf *anderes\...* Aber *zweitens* ist das
Ding in diesem Gesetztsein *an sich\...* Ein Ding hat die Eigenschaft,
dies oder jenes im Andern zu bewirken und auf eine eigenthÃ¼mliche Weise
sich in seiner Beziehung zu Ã¤ussern.' (Hegel, *Wissenschaft der Logik*,
Volume 1, Book 2, pp. 148-49) \['A Thing has *properties*. These are,
*firstly*, its determinate relations to *others\...* But, *secondly*, in
this positedness, the Thing is *in itself\...* A Thing has the property
of effecting this or that in another, and of disclosing itself in a
peculiar manner in its relation.'\]

[[69.]{.info}]{#n69} *Critique of Pure Reason*, p. xv.

[[70.]{.info}]{#n70} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] Now some of those who think like Mach, for example, J
Petzoldt, wish to dissociate themselves from Verworn, themselves
admitting his idealism. Verworn is indeed an idealist, but he is the
same kind of idealist as Mach, Avenarius and Petzoldt. He is only more
consistent than they are; he is not scared of the idealist conclusions
which frighten them and which they try to evade by the most ridiculous
sophisms.

[[71.]{.info}]{#n71} *Werke*, Volume 10, p. 193.

[[72.]{.info}]{#n72} *Werke*, Volume 2, pp. 348-49.

[[73.]{.info}]{#n73} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] According to Spinoza, the thing (*res*) is the body
(*corpus*) and at the same time the idea of the body (*idea corporis*).
But since he who is conscious of himself, also is conscious of his own
consciousness, the thing is a body (*corpus*), the idea of a body (*idea
corporis*) and finally the idea of the idea of the body (*idea ideae
corporis*). It can be seen from this how close Feuerbach's materialism
is to Spinoza's teaching.

[[74.]{.info}]{#n74} Cf *Fundamental Problems of Marxism*, p. 9 *et
seq*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 3
(Moscow, 1976), p. 125 *et seq* -- Editor.\]

[[75.]{.info}]{#n75} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 101 -- Editor.

[[76.]{.info}]{#n76} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 101 -- Editor.

[[77.]{.info}]{#n77} Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p. 102 -- Editor.

[[78.]{.info}]{#n78} Plekhanov put in inverted commas the expression
from Heine's poem *To Lazarus --* Editor.

[[79.]{.info}]{#n79} See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical
Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp. 379-414 -- Editor.

[[80.]{.info}]{#n80} Ernst Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p. 34, note.

[[81.]{.info}]{#n81} *Erkenntnis und Irrthum* (Leipzig, 1905), Foreword,
pp. vi-vii.

[[82.]{.info}]{#n82} Ibid, p. 9.

[[83.]{.info}]{#n83} Ibid, p. 7.

[[84.]{.info}]{#n84} Mach says in another part of *Analysis of
Sensations* (p. 265, Russian edition): 'The various sense-perceptions of
*one* person, as well as the sense-perceptions of *various* people, are
dependent *on each other* in conformity to law. This is what matter
consists of.' Perhaps. However, the whole question here is: is there,
from Mach's point of view, another dependence besides that which
corresponds to established harmony?

[[85.]{.info}]{#n85} Hans Cornelius, whom Mach regards as a person
holding the same views as himself, admits outright that he knows of no
scientific way out of solipsism. (See his *Einleitung in die
Philosophie* (Leipzig, 1903), p. 323, especially the Note.)

[[86.]{.info}]{#n86} See *Erkenntnis und Irrthum*, p. 6.

[[87.]{.info}]{#n87} Ibid, p. 29.

[[88.]{.info}]{#n88} \[Note to the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] This much must be added: of course, *Fichte was not the only
one* to make this distinction. It *foisted itself*, so to speak, *not
only on all idealists, but even on solipsists.*

[[89.]{.info}]{#n89} Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p. 197.

[[90.]{.info}]{#n90} Ibid.

[[91.]{.info}]{#n91} Ibid.

[[92.]{.info}]{#n92} Ibid, pp. 141-42.

[[93.]{.info}]{#n93} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] I say 'only from the pen of a materialist', since this phrase
of Mach's assumes that consciousness, that is to say, by the way, also
'the phenomena of will', is defined by 'being' (the material structure
of those organisms in which the phenomena referred to are observed). It
is nonsense, therefore, to say that this being is only being in the
perception, or in the sensation of beings revealing the 'phenomena of
will'; being is certainly also 'being-in-itself'. With Mach it appears,
on the one hand, that matter is but one of the conditions
('experiences') of consciousness and, on the other hand, that matter,
that is to say, the material structure of the organism, determines those
of his 'experiences' which our thinker calls phenomena of will.

[[94.]{.info}]{#n94} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] Certain 'chemical and living conditions' exist. The
adaptation of the organism to them is 'manifested', by the way, in
'taste and smell', or, in the character of the sensations peculiar to
this organism. It may well be asked: can one now assert, without lapsing
into the most glaring contradiction, that the above-mentioned 'chemical
and living conditions' are only a complex of sensations peculiar to that
organism? Apparently, no. But, according to Mach, this not only may, but
must, be said. Mach holds stolidly to the 'philosophical' proposition
that the earth rests on whales, the whales swim on water, and the water
is on the earth. It is to this conviction that he is obliged for the
great discovery which so delighted my young friend Friedrich Adler (see
his pamphlet *Die Entdeckung der Weltelemente*, Sonderabdruck aus no 5
der Zeitschrift *Der Kampf* (Vienna, 1908)). Incidentally, I have not
lost hope that one day my young friend will ponder somewhat more deeply
the basic questions of philosophy, and will himself smile at his present
naive infatuation with Mach.

[[95.]{.info}]{#n95} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*\] Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p. 85.

[[96.]{.info}]{#n96} \[Note from the collection *From Defence to
Attack*.\] For the 'penetrating reader', with whom NG Chernyshevsky
fought at one time in his novel *What Is To Be Done?*, I shall add the
following qualification. I do not at all wish to say that Mach and
like-minded thinkers *consciously* adjust their would-be philosophical
views to the 'spiritual' needs of the contemporary bourgeoisie. In cases
such as this, the adaptation of social (or class) consciousness to
social (or class) being takes place for the most part unperceived by
individuals. Besides, in the present case, the adaptation of
consciousness to being was accomplished a long time before Mach began
his 'Sunday walks' in the domain of philosophy. Mach's guilt lay only in
the fact that he did not have time to take a critical attitude to the
predominant philosophical trend of his time. But this sin is committed
by many, even more gifted people than he.

[[97.]{.info}]{#n97} Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p. 49 of the
Russian translation. In the fourth German edition the passage concerned
is on page 39.

[[98.]{.info}]{#n98} Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p, 74.

[[99.]{.info}]{#n99} Ibid, Note.

[[100.]{.info}]{#n100} Page 36 of the fourth edition.

[[101.]{.info}]{#n101} 'Oh, thing-in-itself, How I love you: You, thing
of all things!' -- Editor.

[[102.]{.info}]{#n102} Mach, *Analysis of Sensations*, p. 203.

[[103.]{.info}]{#n103} *Sovremennik* (*The Contemporary*) -- a
scientific, political and literary monthly published in St Petersburg
from 1836 to 1866. Among its contributors were NG Chernyshevsky, VG
Belinsky, and MY Saltykov-Shchedrin. It was the best journal of the time
expressing the aspirations of the revolutionary democrats and exerting a
considerable influence on progressive elements in Russia -- Editor.

[[104.]{.info}]{#n104} A Bogdanov, *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3 (St
Petersburg, 1906), p. xii.

[[105.]{.info}]{#n105} Here I shall add just one small point: in the
preface to the second edition of *Anti-DÃ¼hring*, Engels said: 'Marx and
I were pretty well the only people to rescue conscious dialectics from
German idealist philosophy and apply it in the materialist conception of
nature and history.' (F Engels, *Philosophy, Political Economy,
Socialism* (St Petersburg, 1907), p. 5). \[Frederick Engels,
*Anti-DÃ¼hring* (Moscow, 1975), p. 15 -- Editor.\] As you see, the
materialist explanation of *nature* was to Engels as equally necessary a
part of a correct world-outlook as the materialist explanation of
*history*. This is too often and too readily forgotten by those with an
inclination to eclecticism, or, what is almost the same thing, to
theoretical 'revisionism'.

[[106.]{.info}]{#n106} Naturally, dear Sir, I disclaim all
responsibility for your original style.

[[107.]{.info}]{#n107} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1 (Moscow, 1903), p. 18.

[[108.]{.info}]{#n108} Ibid, pp. 18-19.

[[109.]{.info}]{#n109} Ibid, pp. 19-20.

[[110.]{.info}]{#n110} Ibid, p. 20.

[[111.]{.info}]{#n111} Ibid.

[[112.]{.info}]{#n112} Ibid, pp. 22-23.

[[113.]{.info}]{#n113} Ibid, p. 23.

[[114.]{.info}]{#n114} Ibid, pp. 32-33.

[[115.]{.info}]{#n115} Ibid, p. 33.

[[116.]{.info}]{#n116} Ibid, p. 34.

[[117.]{.info}]{#n117} Ibid, p. 41, note.

[[118.]{.info}]{#n118} Ibid, p. 34, note.

[[119.]{.info}]{#n119} You have changed all that -- Editor.

[[120.]{.info}]{#n120} See above. I remind you, dear Sir, that this
profound thought was expressed by you on page 33 of the third edition of
Volume 1 of *Empiriomonism.*

[[121.]{.info}]{#n121} Vladimir Mikhailovich Shulyatikov (1872-1912) --
Russian literary critic and philosopher; opposed idealism from positions
of vulgar sociology, thereby distorting Marxism -- Editor.

[[122.]{.info}]{#n122} I do not invent a hypothesis -- Editor.

[[123.]{.info}]{#n123} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 8.

[[124.]{.info}]{#n124} You know very little about the history of the
views that were prevalent in the social sciences of the nineteenth
century. If you knew it, you would not bring together Mach and Marx on
the sole grounds that the Austrian professor of physics explains the
origin of science by 'the needs of practical life\... technique'. This
is a long way from being a new idea. Littre said as early as the 1840s:
'Toute science provient d'un art correspondant, dont elle se dÃ©tache peu
Ã  peu, le besoin suggÃ©rant les arts et plus tard la rÃ©flexion suggÃ©rant
les sciences; c'est ainsi que la physiologie, mieux dÃ©nommÃ©e biologie,
est nÃ©e de la mÃ©decine. Ensuite et Ã  fur et Ã  mesure les arts reÃ§oivent
des sciences plus qu'ils ne leur ont d'abord donnÃ©.' \['Every science
originates from a corresponding art, from which it is detached little by
little; the need suggests the art and then later reflection suggests the
science. In this way, physiology, more exactly called biology, was born
of medicine. Then, gradually, the arts receive from science more than
they initially gave to it.'\] (Quoted by Alfred Espinas, *Les origines
de la technologie* (Paris, 1897), p. 12)

[[125.]{.info}]{#n125} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 30. Your italics.

[[126.]{.info}]{#n126} Ibid, p. 31.

[[127.]{.info}]{#n127} Engels, op. cit, p. 39. \[Frederick Engels,
*Anti-DÃ¼hring* (Moscow, 1975), p. 63 -- Editor.\]

[[128.]{.info}]{#n128} The expression is taken from a Russian chronicle,
according to which the Slav tribes appealed to the Varangians saying:
'Our land is great and fertile, but there is no order in it. Come and
rule us.' Modern historical science has proved the untenability of this
allegation -- Editor.

[[129.]{.info}]{#n129} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 25.

[[130.]{.info}]{#n130} Ibid, pp. 26-27.

[[131.]{.info}]{#n131} Ibid, p. 28.

[[132.]{.info}]{#n132} Ibid, p. 32, note.

[[133.]{.info}]{#n133} Engels, op. cit, p. 40. \[Frederick Engels,
*Anti-DÃ¼hring* (Moscow, 1975), p. 64 -- Editor.\]

[[134.]{.info}]{#n134} In an article that was not to your liking, 'A New
Variety of Revisionism', Lyubov Axelrod reminded you, Mr Bogdanov, of
Marx's jocular remark that no one had yet devised the art of catching
fish in waters where there were none to be found (*Philosophical Essays*
(St Petersburg, 1906), p. 176). Unfortunately, this reminder did not
cause you to change your mind. Right up to the present you go on
maintaining that people, coordinating their experiences in the sphere of
fishing and 'making utterances' to one another regarding this useful
occupation, have created both fish and water. Very fine historical
materialism!

[[135.]{.info}]{#n135} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 3 (St Petersburg, 1906),
pp. xviii-xix.

[[136.]{.info}]{#n136} Ibid, p. 19.

[[137.]{.info}]{#n137} In the article 'Self-Knowledge of Philosophy',
you say: 'Our Universum is above all the *world of experience.* But this
is not only a world of *immediate* experience -- no, it is much wider.'
(*Empiriomonism*, Volume 3, p. 155) Really, 'much wider'! So much wider
that a 'philosophy' supposedly based on experience relies, in fact, on a
purely dogmatic doctrine of 'elements' that is very closely connected
with idealist metaphysics.

[[138.]{.info}]{#n138} From Ivan Krylov's fable 'The Mirror and the
Monkey' -- Editor.

[[139.]{.info}]{#n139} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, pp. 11-12, note.

[[140.]{.info}]{#n140} Where am I then? -- Editor.

[[141.]{.info}]{#n141} In my head! -- Editor.

[[142.]{.info}]{#n142} Don't you see, I am made of flesh and blood! --
Editor.

[[143.]{.info}]{#n143} Yes, you are alive, you have a heart, Pippa! --
Editor.

[[144.]{.info}]{#n144} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 2 (St Petersburg, 1906),
p. 9.

[[145.]{.info}]{#n145} When I say 'experience', I have in mind one of
two things: *either* my personal experience or not only my personal
experience, but also the experience of my 'fellow-men'. In the first
instance I am a solipsist, because in my personal experience I am always
alone (*solus ipse*). In the second instance, I steer clear of
solipsism, because I cross the bounds of personal experience. But by
accepting the existence of 'fellow-men' independent of myself, I thereby
affirm that these have *being in themselves*, separate and apart *from
my perception of them, from my personal experience.* In other words, by
recognising the existence of 'fellow-men', I, or better to say: you and
I, Mr Bogdanov, declare to be sheer nonsense that which you, Mr
Bogdanov, say *against* being-in-itself, that is to say, we overthrow
the entire philosophy of 'Machism', 'empirio-criticism',
'empiriomonism', etc, etc, etc.

[[146.]{.info}]{#n146} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 121.

[[147.]{.info}]{#n147} 'Finally, thanks to the fact that people mutually
"understand" one another's "utterances" man becomes also for others a
coordination of immediate experiences, a "psychical process\"', etc --
ibid, p. 121.

[[148.]{.info}]{#n148} Ibid, p. 124.

[[149.]{.info}]{#n149} On the following page of the same book, you state
the contrary, as I have said above, that the interaction of 'living
beings' (and of the complexes) does not take place directly and
immediately (ibid, p. 125). This is one of your innumerable
contradictions that are not worth examination.

[[150.]{.info}]{#n150} Ibid, p. 124.

[[151.]{.info}]{#n151} Ibid, p. 125.

[[152.]{.info}]{#n152} Plekhanov is mistaken. This thesis, as well as
two others cited below, are actually from Feuerbach's 'GrundsÃ¤tze der
Philosophie der Zukunft' ('Fundamental Principles of the Philosophy of
the Future'), *Werke*, Volume 2 (Leipzig, 1846), p. 322 -- Editor.

[[153.]{.info}]{#n153} *Werke*, Volume 2, p. 325.

[[154.]{.info}]{#n154} 'Nicht dem Ich, sondern dem Nicht-Ich in mir, um
in der Sprache Fichtes zu reden, ist ein Objekt, das heisst, anderes Ich
gegeben; denn nur da, wo ich aus einem Ich in ein Du umgewandelt werde,
wo ich leide, entstehet die Vorstellung einer *ausser* mir seienden
AktivitÃ¤t, das heisst, ObjektivitÃ¤t. Aber nur durch den Sinn ist Ich --
Nicht-Ich.' (*Werke*, Volume 2, p. 322) \['the object, that is to say,
the other "*I*," is not given to the "*I*," but to the Non-\"I" in me,
if this may be expressed in Fichte's language; indeed, it is only where
I am transformed from "I" into "Thou," where I suffer, impressions are
formed of activity *outside me*, that is to say, of objectivity. But it
is only through the faculty of sensation that "*I*" am Non-\"*I*."\]

[[155.]{.info}]{#n155} You have changed all that -- Editor.

[[156.]{.info}]{#n156} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 125.

[[157.]{.info}]{#n157} This passage will be found on page 33 of Volume 1
of *Empiriomonism*, and the italics are yours, Mr Bogdanov.

[[158.]{.info}]{#n158} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, pp. 125-26.

[[159.]{.info}]{#n159} *Empiriomonism*, article 'Universum'
('Empiriomonism of the Separate and Continuous').

[[160.]{.info}]{#n160} I say you evade irreconcilable contradictions
*momentarily* because you are not destined to evade them for any length
of time. Actually, if the inorganic world '*an sich*' is a chaos of
elements, whereas '*in our cognition* it is even transformed into an
orderly system, united by relationships in continuous conformity to
law', it is a case of one of two things: *either* you yourself do not
know what you are talking about, *or* you, who imagine yourself to be an
independent thinker of the latest pattern, revert in the most
disgraceful way to the point of view of old Kant, who asserted that
reason prescribed its laws to external nature. Truly, truly I say unto
you, Mr Bogdanov: until the end of your days you will continue to drift
without rudder or sail from one contradiction to another. I am beginning
to suspect that your 'philosophy' is that very chaos of elements of
which, you tell us, the inorganic world is composed.

[[161.]{.info}]{#n161} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p. 124.

[[162.]{.info}]{#n162} Ibid, p. 126.

[[163.]{.info}]{#n163} We can 'experience' our own 'experiences' only by
recollecting something that we have undergone previously. But you, Mr
Bogdanov, are talking about something *quite different*.

[[164.]{.info}]{#n164} You found that the recognition by Mach and
Avenarius of the 'psychical' and 'physical' as two separate series was
tantamount to the recognition of a certain 'duality'. You wished to
eliminate this duality. Those numerous and profound 'why's' with which
you pestered Mach and Avenarius were very transparent hints that you
knew the secret of how to get rid of the embarrassing duality. In fact,
you said so outright. Now we know the secret: you declare the 'physical'
to be the other-being of the 'psychical'. This is, indeed, *monism*.
Unfortunately it is *idealist* monism.

[[165.]{.info}]{#n165} I have placed these three words in inverted
commas because they were thus enclosed by you in the hope of foiling any
attempt by the reader to understand them in a direct, that is to say, a
correct sense. See *Empiriomonism*, Volume 2, p. 26.

[[166.]{.info}]{#n166} Ibid, p. 30. Elsewhere you say: 'To every living
cell there corresponds, from our point of view, a certain, even though
insignificant, complex of experiences.' (*Empiriomonism*, Volume 1, p.
134) Those who would have thought that in saying this, you were alluding
to the 'cellular souls' of Haeckel, would have made a serious error. In
your view, the conformity between the 'living cell', and even an
insignificant complex of experiences consists in this, that the cell is
but the 'reflection' of this complex, that is, once again its
other-being.

[[167.]{.info}]{#n167} *Empiriomonism*, Volume 2, p. 39.

[[168.]{.info}]{#n168} Ibid, p. 136; your italics.

[[169.]{.info}]{#n169} Chichikov, Korobochka *--* characters from
Nikolai Gogol's *Dead Souls* -- Editor.

[[170.]{.info}]{#n170} William James, in trying to substantiate his
religious point of view, says: 'Concrete reality is composed exclusively
of individual experience.' (*L'expÃ©rience religieuse*, Paris and Geneva,
1908, p. 417) This is equivalent to the assertion that 'complexes of
immediate experiences' underlie all reality. James is not mistaken in
thinking that such assertions throw the door wide open to religious
superstitions.

Â 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
