---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1907

### On A. Pannekoek's Pamphlet

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 93-97.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'Plekhanov's review of Pannekoek's pamphlet was
published in the journal *Sovremennaya Zhizn* (*Modern Life*) no.1,
1907. This was a Menshevik journal published in Moscow in 1906-07.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anton Pannekoek, *Socialism and Religion* (translated from the German by
A Ratner, edited by P Rumyantsev, Cheap Library of the Znaniye Society,
no 121, price five kopeks, 1906).

Mr P Rumyantsev, who edited the Russian translation of this pamphlet,
wrote a brief foreword to it. Here it is in full.

This pamphlet represents a lecture delivered in Bremen by Dr Anton
Pannekoek of Leiden, Holland, on 14 September 1905, to a very large
meeting of workers and sponsored by the Education Committee of the
Bremen Trades Cartel and the Social-Democratic Union. The consistency of
the author's views on historical materialism, the lucidity and popular
style of his presentation, prompt us to recommend the pamphlet to
Russian readers, especially since such a large gap is felt in our
literature on the relationship of socialism to religion.

There is indeed a large gap in literature -- and not only Russian
literature -- on the question of the relationship of socialism to
religion. Therefore, it can be said with certainty that this pamphlet
will be read by very many people; that is why I think it my duty to
devote special attention to it here.

I shall begin by saying that Anton Pannekoek is not pronounced
Panne*kek* but Panne*kuk*, since the Dutch 'oe' is like our Russian 'u'.
So now we may pronounce his name properly.

Pannekoek's pamphlet does not bridge any gaps for the simple reason that
it contains too many gaps itself. You cannot plug a hole with a hole, as
some wiseacre remarked. And if Mr Rumyantsev deems it necessary to
recommend Pannekoek's pamphlet to Russian readers he is simply
confirming the presence of numerous gaps in his own world-outlook.

Anton Pannekoek undoubtedly possesses a sufficiently remarkable ability
as well as good intentions. He belongs to the left -- *Marxist* -- wing
of Dutch Social-Democracy. But *even though* he is a 'Dr' or, more
truly, *because* he is one, he did not graduate from a strict Marxist
school. This was already noticeable from the philosophical articles with
which he transgressed in the columns of *Neue Zeit* ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ two
years ago; the articles were very poor. And this pamphlet on socialism
and religion is conclusive evidence that our young Dutch Marxist has
mastered little of his teacher's method.

He says:

There are two scientific systems for which we are indebted to Karl Marx
and which, taken together, provide the foundation of our ultimate aim.
They are political economy and historical materialism. (p 29).

But that is not at all so. There is *one 'system*', *the system of
dialectical materialism*, which includes both political economy and the
scientific explanation of the historical process and much else besides.
Anyone who has studied *Capital* understands that this outstanding work
is nothing but *the materialist explanation of economic relations in
bourgeois society*, which itself is of a transient, that is, *historical
nature*. Many people describe *Capital* as an *historical* work, but by
far not all of these comprehend the whole profound meaning of this
description. Anton Pannekoek is obviously among those who are completely
blind to the fact that Marx's fundamental economic views are permeated
throughout with the materialist conception of history. For a Marxist,
this is an unpardonable failing.

Further, in speaking of 'bourgeois materialism', A Pannekoek launches on
talk about the bourgeois Enlighteners who 'hoped by disseminating
knowledge to tear the masses away from the priests and the feudal
lords'. Perhaps you think he means the famous French materialists --
Holbach, Diderot and Helvétius? You are wrong. He has in mind 'the now
rather outmoded popular writings of L Büchner' (p 22). It is simply
ridiculous. He asserts that 'there was no trace of sociology' in
'bourgeois materialism'. That is untrue as regards Helvétius, in whose
works one can find extremely interesting and remarkable rudiments of the
materialist conception of history. But A Pannekoek went through a poor
school and therefore has not the slightest notion about French
materialism. He attributes to the materialists the 'establishment' of
the truth that 'ideas are born in the brain-matter' (p 29). The
classical materialists expressed themselves otherwise.

Let us go on to religion. On page 8 of Pannekoek's pamphlet there is the
following remark:

In the question we are now discussing, we understand by religion that
which has always been its essential feature: the belief in *a
supernatural being* who is supposed to govern the world and to direct
the destinies of men.

That, too, is wrong and in two respects. Firstly, the majority of
religions ascribed the governing of the world not to *one* but to *many*
supernatural beings (polytheism). And secondly, belief in the existence
of such beings still *does not constitute the main distinctive feature
of religion*. Our author has a poor conception of the process which one
English researcher called 'the making of religion'. ^[\[2\]](#n2)^

Religion begins only when a tribe starts to believe that between the
tribe and the particular supernatural being or beings there is a certain
relationship which is binding not only on the people but even on those
beings. The main distinctive feature of religion is *belief in a god or
gods*. Pannekoek is very much mistaken if he imagines that god means the
same thing as a supernatural being. Of course, every god is a
supernatural being; but not every supernatural being by far is
considered a god. *To become a god, such a being must go through an
entire evolution*.

Note the grounds upon which Pannekoek makes his hapless reference to the
distinctive feature of religion. There are people who say that because
the contemporary proletariat displays much selflessness and devotion to
a lofty ideal, it cannot be said, as Pannekoek does by the way, that
this class is becoming less and less religious. These people cannot even
conceive of *non-religious* morality. Pannekoek's reply to them is that
morality and religion are two distinct things and that the essential
feature of religion is belief in supernatural beings. Then he goes on:

Hitherto, all of man's lofty and moral impulses were closely connected
with this belief and were displayed in the garb of religion. This can be
readily understood when one considers that the whole world-outlook was
embodied in religion, so that everything beyond the pale of everyday
life sought refuge in religion; for everything the origin of which was
unknown, a supernatural explanation was sought and believed to be found
in religion. The fact that the virtues and moral urges which are
recognised by all men occupy first place in religious teaching does not,
however, constitute the essential and particular feature of religion;
its essence is rather the justification which it provides for them, the
way in which it explains them as emanations of God's will. *We* know a
*natural* cause of the higher moral urges of the proletariat; we know
they stem from its special class position.

So, 'we' explain the higher moral 'urges' of the *proletariat* by a
*natural* cause. Commendable, indeed. And how do 'we' explain the moral
'urges' of the *other classes in society?* By *supernatural* causes?
Probably and even certainly not. But if not, then we should speak, not
of the proletariat, but in general of the *man* whom Marx called *social
man*. Marxists do, in fact, consider that the development of the
morality of social man is conditioned by the development of the social
relations, which in turn is conditioned by the development of the social
forces of production. And precisely because Marxists are convinced of
this, Pannekoek's assertion that 'virtues' are explained 'as emanations
of God's will', sounds highly strange to them. Surely it would follow
from this that virtues arise on a *completely idealist* basis. I am
willing to concede that this is not confusion of thought, but simply an
unfortunate expression (perhaps even an unfortunate translation: I do
not have the original at hand); but no matter how the muddle has arisen
it is there and will only mislead the reader. Then, what is 'this
religion' Pannekoek talks about? The one whose distinctive feature is
belief in supernatural beings? But did he himself not say that this
essential feature belongs to *all religions*? Why then 'this' religion?
Again an extremely unfortunate expression, which confuses the author's
meaning. Finally -- *and this, of course, is the most important point*
-- it is again clear from our last extract that Pannekoek is completely
unfamiliar with the historical process of the formation of religion. He
thinks that 'hitherto' morality was always 'closely connected with this
religion', that is, with belief in supernatural beings. But that is
wrong. *In the first stages of social development, morality existed
quite independently of belief in supernatural beings*. Confirmation of
this may be found in the Russian translation of Tylor's *Primitive
Culture*. If Pannekoek knew this fact, he had only to cite it in order
to refute those who unreasonably affirm that there cannot be morality
without religion. But he did not know this, although he ought to have
known it, so he had to launch into perplexing arguments that
demonstrated only too plainly that he himself, to use a German
expression, was not sitting firmly in the saddle.

On page 23 of his pamphlet, Pannekoek says: 'This exposition will
suffice to show that the old bourgeois materialism and the new bourgeois
religiosity ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ are both directly opposed to the proletarian
world-outlook.' In regard to *religiosity*, this is correct, but in
relation to *bourgeois materialism* it is totally incorrect.

According to Pannekoek, there is no trace of sociology in 'bourgeois
materialism'. I said earlier that this was not quite so, now I shall
take it for granted and shall ask: does this prove that 'bourgeois
materialism' is *opposed* to the world-outlook of the proletariat? No,
it does not. It proves only that 'bourgeois materialism' was *one-sided*
in comparison with present-day dialectical materialism. We cannot speak
of *opposition*. 'Bourgeois materialism', or to be more exact, the
classical materialism of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, did
not 'die away', as Pannekoek assures us, but was reborn in the 'system'
of Marx.

Pannekoek's final conclusion is that there will be no place under
socialism for belief in supernatural forces. This is right, but it has
been known since Marx's time. Pannekoek confined himself to advancing
several incorrect postulates as proof of this correct idea and revealed
his utter ignorance of the subject. That is not enough.

I have far from exhausted all Pannekoek's errors. But those I have dealt
with do indicate the need to approach this pamphlet sceptically. In
offering it to their Russian readers, the publishers of the Cheap
Library indeed presented them with an article that is truly too 'cheap'.

The reader will see that there is nothing to thank Mr Rumyantsev for
either. We have very many people around just now editing and
'recommending' works on subjects about which they themselves have not
the faintest idea. These people, zealously disseminating their
self-opinionated ignorance among the public, are the curse of our
popular -- mostly translated -- literature.

### Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor'.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. *Die Neue Zeit* (*New Times*) -- a theoretical
journal of German Social-Democracy published in Stuttgart from 1883 to
1923. In 1885-94 Engels published a series of his works in it and gave
constant advice to its editorial board, often criticising it for
deviations from Marxism. From the late 1890s the journal began
systematic publication of revisionist articles. Plekhanov has in mind
two articles by Pannekoek: 'Historischer Materialismus und Religion'
('Historical Materialism and Religion') published in nos 31 and 32, 1904
(Year 22, Part 2, pp 133 and 180) and 'Klassenwissenschaft und
Philosophie' ('Class Sciences and Philosophy') published in no 19, 1905
(Year 23, Part 1, p 604) -- Editor.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. The words 'The making of religion' are written by
Plekhanov in English -- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Prior to this he had said correctly that religiosity
is spreading among the contemporary bourgeoisie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
