---
layout: default
title: 
---
Plekhanov 1916

### Preface to Abram Deborin's Book *An Introduction to the Philosophy of Dialectical Materialism*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Source]{.info}: Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*,
Volume 3 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976), pp. 577-99.\
[Transcribed]{.info}: for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Moscow Editor's Note: 'The Preface was written at the end of 1915 and
published in the book A Deborin, *An Introduction to the Philosophy of
Dialectical Materialism* (with a Preface by GV Plekhanov, Zhizn i
Znaniye Publishers, Petrograd, 1916. Abram Moiseyevich Deborin
(1881-1963) -- Soviet philosopher; author of works on dialectical
materialism and the history of philosophy.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

What is the task of philosophy? Its task, says E Zeller, is 'to
investigate scientifically the ultimate basis of cognition and being,
and to comprehend all existing reality in its connection with that
basis'. ^[\[1\]](#n1)^ That is correct. However, a new question arises
at once: can the 'basis of cognition' be considered as something
separate from the 'basis of being\'? That question must be answered
decisively in the negative. Our *ego* contrasts itself to the external
world (*non-ego*), but at the same time it feels its connection with
that external world. Consequently, when man begins to philosophise, that
is to say, when he conceives the desire to find a consistent
world-outlook for himself, he immediately comes up against the question
of what is the relation of *ego* to *non-ego*, of 'cognition' to
'being', of 'spirit' to 'nature'. True, there was a time when
philosophers did not discuss such questions. This was in the initial
period of the development of ancient Greek philosophy. For instance,
Thales ^[\[2\]](#n2)^ taught that water is the primary substance from
which all things come and to which all things return. But he did not ask
himself: what relation has consciousness to that primary substance? Nor
did Anaximenes ^[\[3\]](#n3)^ ask himself the same question when he
averred that the primary substance was not water but air. However, the
time arrived when even Greek philosophers could no longer evade the
question of the relationship of *ego* to *non-ego*, of consciousness to
being. And then the question became the cardinal problem of philosophy.
And it remains so even now.

Various philosophical systems give various answers to it. But if we
consider the replies given by these various systems we shall see that
they are far from being as different as they appear at first sight. All
of them can be divided into two compartments.

The first embraces those philosophical constructions which take as their
starting point the *object*, or *being*, or again, *nature*. Here, the
thinkers have to explain how to the *object* is added the *subject*, to
*being* -- *consciousness*, to *nature* -- *spirit*. Since they do not
all explain this in the same way, the result is that, in spite of their
having the same point of departure, their systems are not quite the
same.

The other compartment takes in all philosophical constructions which
take as their starting point the *subject, consciousness, spirit*.
Obviously, here the thinker has to explain how to the *subject* is added
the *object*, to *consciousness* -- *being*, to *spirit* -- *nature*.
And according to the *manner in which* they fulfil this task,
philosophical systems that come into this compartment differ from one
another.

He who takes the object as his starting point, if only he has the
ability and courage to think consistently, arrives at one of the
varieties of the *materialist world-outlook*.

He who takes the *subject* as his starting point and again if only he is
prepared to think the matter out to the end, will turn out to be an
*idealist* of one shade or another.

And those people who are incapable of consistent thought stop half-way
and are content with a mish-mash of idealism and materialism. Such
inconsistent thinkers are called *eclectics*.

To this it may be objected that there are also adherents of '*critical*'
*philosophy*, who are equally far from materialism as from idealism and
yet are free of the weaknesses commonly associated with the eclectic
mode of thought. I recall such an objection being advanced against me by
Professor Chelpanov. ^[\[4\]](#n4)^ But I refer the reader to Chapter
Six of Deborin's book ('the Transcendental Method'). There he will see
just how unfounded this objection is. Deborin clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that the 'critical' philosophy of Kant suffers from
*dualism*. And since *dualism is always eclectic*, it is only by a
misconception that one can cite Kant in refutation of my contention that
every consistent thinker is bound to choose between idealism and
materialism.

Fichte already pointed out the inconsistency of Kantianism, although it
is true that he initially ascribed this to Kant's followers rather than
to Kant himself. 'Your Earth', he said to them, 'rests on an elephant,
and the elephant, in turn, rests on the Earth. Your thing-in-itself,
which is a pure thought, has to act upon the ego.' Convinced that Kant
himself was free of this contradiction -- indeed an unquestionable and
unpardonable one -- Fichte declared that the true meaning of the
'Kantianism of Kant' lies in idealism (namely, in Fichte's *Theory of
Knowledge*). Kant disagreed with this, and protested in print against
such an interpretation of his philosophy. He described Fichte's idealist
system as resembling an apparition: 'When you think you have got hold of
it, there is nothing there but yourself, and of this self there is
nothing but a hand stretched out to catch.' ^[\[5\]](#n5)^ After that
there was nothing Fichte could do but reproach Kant himself with
inconsistency, which he did, calling him '*ein Dreiviertelskopf*'
(literally, three-fourths of a head).

### II

Now let us proceed. It is quite obvious that if each of us is a subject
for himself (*I*), to other people he can only be an object (*thou*). It
is no less obvious that people do not exist outside nature but within
it. It would appear, therefore, that it is precisely nature (being,
object) that must be taken as the starting point of all philosophical
systems. How can one explain the origin of those philosophical systems
in which the starting point is *spirit* and not *nature*?

For an answer to this question we must turn first of all *to the history
of culture*.

The famous English ethnologist, Edward B Tylor, said a long time ago
that the very essence of spiritualist philosophy, as opposed to
materialist philosophy, stems from primitive animism. ^[\[6\]](#n6)^
Some might consider this as paradoxical. Then again others may remark
that, generally speaking, ethnologists are not very competent in the
history of philosophy. To such readers I would say that the
ethnologist's opinion in this case is shared, at least partly, by one
very famous historian of philosophy. In his very talented work,
dedicated to 'Greek thinkers', Theodor Gomperz recognises that Plato's
doctrine on ideas bears a significant resemblance to the conceptions of
some primitive tribes, conceptions which have their origin in animism.
^[\[7\]](#n7)^ But why resort to authorities? We can see what is going
on with our own eyes. What is animism? It is an attempt on the part of
the savage to explain natural phenomena. No matter how feeble and
ineffectual this attempt may be, it is inevitable in primitive man's
conditions of life.

In his struggle for existence, primitive man performs certain acts that
bring about certain happenings. Thus he comes to look upon himself as
the *cause* of these occurrences. By analogy with himself, he thinks
that all other phenomena spring likewise from the actions of creatures
who like himself have certain sensations, needs, passions, reason and
volition. But as he cannot see these creatures, he comes to accept them
as '*spirits*' which in ordinary circumstances are imperceptible to his
senses, and act directly upon these senses only in exceptional cases.
*Religion*, the subsequent development of which is determined by the
course of social development, stems from this animism.

Gods are those spirits that primitive man believes are disposed towards
him and whom he therefore worships. He believes that one or several of
these spirits *created* the world. True, what interests the primitive
hunter is not *who created the animals*, the hunting of which provides
him with the means of existence, but *where the animals come from*. The
primitive hunter finds the answer to this principal question in his
cosmogony. Stories of the world's creation only come later, when with
the development of the productive forces man's productive activity
extends, and he becomes more and more accustomed to the idea of
*creation*. It is quite natural that the activity of the world's creator
(or creators) seems to primitive man similar to his own productive
activity. Thus, according to the myth of one American tribe, man was
fashioned from clay. In Memphis they believed that the god Ptah *built*
the world as a mason builds a house; in Sais it was said that the world
had been *woven* by a goddess, etc.

We see that *cosmogony* is closely related to *technique*. But that by
the way. ^[\[8\]](#n8)^ Here I have but one remark to make: once belief
in the world having been created by some spirit or other was
established, this paved the way for all those philosophical systems
which have *spirit* (the *subject*) as their starting point, and, hence,
in some way or other define the existence of *nature* (the *object*). It
is in this sense that we can and must admit that spiritualist philosophy
-- and every idealist philosophy -- in its opposition to materialism,
springs from primitive animism.

Needless to say, the creative spirit of the idealists -- for example,
the absolute spirit of Schelling or Hegel -- bears very little
resemblance to the god of the American tribe I mentioned above who was
said to have fashioned man out of clay. The gods of primitive tribes
were completely like people, except that they had greater power. But
there is nothing human in Schelling's or Hegel's absolute spirit, apart
from consciousness. In other words, the conceptions of spirits which
primitive man had underwent a very long process of *distillation* (as
Engels expressed it), ^[\[9\]](#n9)^ before merging into the conception
of the absolute spirit as formulated by the great German idealists. But
the long process of 'distillation' could bring no *essential* change in
animist ideas: *in essence* they remained unaltered.

### III

Animism is the first expression we know of man's consciousness that
there is a causal connection between natural phenomena. It explains
natural phenomena with the aid of *myths*. But although such
explanations satisfy the curiosity of primitive man, they do not at all
increase his power over nature.

Let us take an example. A Fijian falls ill and lies down on the ground,
shouting loudly to persuade his soul to return to his body. Of course,
the arguments which he addresses to his soul exert no influence at all
on the pathological processes taking place in his body. In order to
acquire the possibility of influencing these processes in the desired
way, man had first to observe organic life from the standpoint of
science. To observe natural phenomena from the standpoint of science
means to explain them, not by the action of this or that spiritual
being, but by the laws of nature itself. Man succeeds in increasing his
power over nature only to the extent that he notices the law-governed
connection between phenomena. A scientific view of a particular field of
natural phenomena completely excludes an animist view of nature. As one
historian of Greece correctly remarked, he who knows the true cause of
the apparent motion of the sun round the earth will not tell the story
of Helios who every morning mounts his fiery chariot to climb the steep
celestial path, and in the evening descends into the west to rest. This
means that in explaining the cause of the sun's apparent motion round
the earth he would take as his starting point not the subject, but the
object, and would address himself not to spirit, but to nature.

This is exactly how the Greek thinkers of the Ionian school acted.
^[\[10\]](#n10)^ He who taught that the beginning of all things was
water or air, obviously started from the object and not from the
subject. In exactly the same way, when Heraclitus ^[\[11\]](#n11)^ said
that the cosmos was not created by any gods or men, 'but it was forever,
it is and always will be eternal fire, regularly flaring up and
regularly dying away', even with the greatest will in the world it was
impossible to impose on him an animist view of the world as the product
of the activity of a spirit or spirits. Recalling E Zeller's definition
of the task facing philosophy, we can say that to the thinkers of the
Ionian school the ultimate basis of *cognition* stemmed from the
ultimate basis of *being*. This is true to such an extent that, for
example, Diogenes of Apollonia, ^[\[12\]](#n12)^ who maintained that all
things are varieties of air, believed that this primary matter possesses
*reason* and '*knows much*'.

The scientific view of natural phenomena has such enormous advantages
over the animist view that Greek philosophy had perforce to proceed in
its further development from the object instead of the subject, that is
to say, to be materialist and not idealist. Yet we know that, at least
from the time of Socrates, Greek philosophy quite definitely took the
path of idealism. And in our days, idealism has become the dominant
philosophy. Nowadays the specialists in philosophy -- especially the
assistant-professors -- do not even think it necessary to argue with the
materialists. They are convinced that to criticise materialism is as
superfluous as knocking at an open door. The classical country of this
majestic contempt for materialism was and, of course, remains Germany,
with its innumerable teachers of philosophy who are described very aptly
by Schopenhauer. ^[\[13\]](#n13)^ And since the vast majority of our
Russian intelligentsia are trailing along behind those German teachers
of philosophy (for our intelligentsia has an interest in philosophy) it
is not surprising that here in Russia the philosophical people
^[\[14\]](#n14)^ (as Joseph Priestley once called them) have become
accustomed to look down on us, the impenitent materialists. This is the
explanation of a fact our readers are well aware of, that so many
attempts have been made in Russia to provide the teaching of Marx and
Engels with a new philosophical basis. All these attempts were dictated
by the desire to reconcile the *materialist* explanation of history with
one or other of the brands of the *idealist* theory of cognition. These
attempts were foredoomed to failure, because eclecticism had always been
as barren as the virgin who had devoted herself to God. Apart from this,
the writers had neither knowledge nor philosophical talent. It is not
worthwhile discussing them, although their writings deserve mention as
being very typical of the period.

### IV

Why did idealism triumph over materialism, notwithstanding the obvious
advantages of the scientific view of nature over the animist?

There are two main reasons for this.

First of all, for a very long time natural science made such slow
progress that it could not eject animism from all its positions. While
gradually becoming accustomed to seeing some fields of phenomena from
the point of view of science, people continued to cling to their animist
views in other more extensive fields. Consequently, their world-outlook
in general remained animist. When social life began to grow complex and
relations between separate societies became more frequent, there even
came into existence a quite new field of phenomena which for a long time
would not yield to scientific research, and, consequently, was
interpreted animistically by reference to the activity of some god or
other. The tragedies of Euripides ^[\[15\]](#n15)^ often end with the
words: 'In many a shape is the Gods' will wrought, and much They
accomplish that none foreknows. What men deemed sure, They bring to
naught, and what none dreamed of They dispose\...' In the struggle of
forces within a given nation, as well as in international wars and in
trading relations, that which was considered to be impossible, was and
is very often accomplished, while that which was expected remains
unaccomplished. This to a very large extent supported and still supports
belief in the existence of 'celestial powers' and the tendency to seek
aid from them. Such belief and such a tendency are to be remarked even
among those prominent thinkers who have acted as leaders of civilised
mankind in the progress towards a scientific understanding of the world.
The fathers of the scientific philosophy of nature -- the Ionian
thinkers -- continued to believe in the existence of gods.
^[\[16\]](#n16)^

Besides this, we should bear in mind the following. Although animist
conceptions arise and continue to exist for some time, quite
independently of the view which the savage may have of his obligations
towards the society to which he belongs, nevertheless this view begins
to combine fairly early with the animist conceptions. Subsequently, at
higher stages of culture, animist conceptions are wrought into more or
less orderly systems of religious beliefs and become very firmly welded
with people's conceptions of their mutual obligations. People begin to
regard these obligations as commandments of the gods. Religion
*sanctifies* the morality established in the given society, as well as
all its other '*mainstays*'.

In the Laws of Manu, we read that the creator of the universe fashioned
people of different social classes out of different parts of his body.
From his mouth (said to be the most noble part -- GP) he made the
Brahmans; from his arms, the Kshatriya; from his thigh, the Vaisya; and
lastly, from his feet, the Sudra. ^[\[17\]](#n17)^ It is the creator's
wish that the lower classes should always be obedient to the upper
classes, ^[\[18\]](#n18)^ and he goes on to explain that the existing
division of society into classes must remain as immutable as the
seasonal sequence of the year. ^[\[19\]](#n19)^

This sanctification of a given social order by a given religion makes
the latter a major conservative force. Consequently, religion is very
dear to the heart of all conservatives. And if there are in the ruling
class of a given society people studying questions of theory in general
and philosophy in particular, they will doubtless be sworn enemies of
any philosophical doctrine which, extending the conception of natural
conformity to law to the whole understanding of the world, undermines
the very foundation of religious beliefs. Lucretius made the following
rapturous utterance in praise of the materialist Epicurus for rendering
harmless faith in the gods:

When human life lay foully on the earth\
Before all eyes, 'neath Superstition crushed,\
Who from the heavenly quarters showed her head\
And with appalling aspect lowered on men,\
Then did a Greek first lift eyes to hers --\
First brave her face to face. Him neither myth\
Of gods, nor thunderbolt, nor sky with roar\
And threat could quell\...

Such praise presupposes one of two things: either that he who utters it
is hostile to the prevailing social order, or that he is firmly
convinced in the unshakeable firmness of that order and considers it
superfluous to defend it with 'spiritual weapon'. Taken as a whole, not
a single ruling class has ever revolted against its own rule. On the
other hand, in present-day European society, which has undergone so many
upheavals, the ruling classes have not the slightest reason to believe
in the unshakeable firmness of the existing order of things. As a
result, they do not scorn the use of the 'spiritual weapon', and their
ideologists make every possible effort to purge philosophy of all
'destructive' elements.

In transitional periods of social development, when a particular class
has just attained victory, even though incomplete, over the class above
it, and when the excitement of thought aroused by the struggle has not
as yet abated -- in such transitional periods of social development
philosophical hypocrisy begins to be considered a duty which a thinking
person owes to 'respectable' society. This, too, may appear incredible,
but it is true nevertheless. Just take the trouble to read the following
passage written by a man who could not have been farther from the
materialist explanation of the history of philosophy. He is speaking of
England at the end of the seventeenth century and in the first half of
the eighteenth century:

If free-thinking had at first to wrest a place from the church
authorities for its own development, with the passage of time voices
were heard within it speaking against the unrestricted rule of freedom
of thought\... The esoteric view withdrew ever further from positive
religion and, partly under the reverse influence of French literature,
even began to adopt the temporal scepticism inherent in the latter. On
the other hand, the exoteric doctrine adapted itself more and more to
the purely political or police conception of religion\... It was
precisely in the upper classes of English society that this internally
self-contradictory situation\... became apparent. ^[\[20\]](#n20)^

### V

Windelband quite rightly selects Lord Bolingbroke (1662-1751)
^[\[21\]](#n21)^ as the most striking spiritual expression of this
situation. Bolingbroke was the author of *Letters on the Study and Use
of History*, first published in 1738.

Being himself as critical and believing as little in the Bible as any
deist \[we read further in Windelband's book\], he \[Bolingbroke -- GP\]
declares all literature disseminating such views to be revolutionary,
and calls this literature a plague of society. He does not hide his
opinion that free-thinking is a right which belongs solely to the ruling
class: and he turns all the egoism of social exclusiveness against\...
the popularisation of free thought. He believes that in the salons it is
permissible to ridicule the narrowness and absurdity of positive
religion, and he himself is not above jibing frivolously at it. But in
the life of society, religion is an indispensable force that cannot be
shaken without endangering the foundation of the state -- the obedience
of the masses. ^[\[22\]](#n22)^

Windelband found that, in essence, Bolingbroke 'had only enough courage
to divulge the secret of high society of his time -- a secret that was
not confined even to this one epoch'. And this is true, of course. But
this being true, the history of philosophical ideas in a society divided
into classes must be seen in the light of the materialist proposition
that it is not thinking that determines being, but, on the contrary,
being that determines thinking. The present universal triumph of the
idealist world-outlook will then be more of an argument *against* that
world-outlook than in *favour of it*.

Is there anyone who is unaware that the class struggle in West European
society is daily becoming more and more acute? Is there anyone who does
not understand that the defence of the existing social order must, for
this reason, be of ever growing importance in the eyes of the ruling
classes?

Windelband reproaches Bolingbroke with being a '*conscious hypocrite*'
and says that it is easy to notice the 'short-sightedness of his
argumentation'. He is right here too. When the leading ideologists of
the upper classes recommend to the 'masses' 'truths' which they
themselves deride in their own circle, the danger arises of their own
real mode of thought becoming known to the people and spreading among
them. And then the 'obedience of the masses', this 'foundation of the
state', may really be shaken. From the point of view of the social
order, the prevalence of the 'esoteric view' among the upper-class
ideologists is very inexpedient. The maintenance of the social order is
more likely to be assured if these ideologists renounce that view and
conclude an honest peace with 'positive religion'. But can we make such
a demand of them? No matter how great their store of 'conscious
hypocrisy', we cannot coerce them into sharing beliefs they do not
possess. And this means that they must be inoculated afresh with these
beliefs, and for this their concepts will have to be refashioned and,
most important, an attempt must be made to demolish the main theoretical
basis of their 'esoteric view' which is so dangerous to social peace.

What was the essence of that British free-thinking which even its own
supporters among the privileged had begun to regard as dangerous? In the
final analysis, it amounted to the conviction that all phenomena of
nature are invariably subordinated to her own laws. In other words, it
consisted in the materialist view of nature. It is easy to verify this
by acquainting oneself with the works of such a prominent free-thinker
as John Toland (1670-1722); his teaching is thoroughly permeated with
the spirit of materialism. ^[\[23\]](#n23)^ Therefore it was against
materialism that war had first to be declared by those English guardians
of order who found that the dissemination of the 'esoteric view', even
if confined to the upper strata of society, was harmful from the
standpoint both of the Church of England and of social peace.

When a particular need arises which is of great significance to society
as a whole or to a particular social class, people will almost always be
found who are sincerely prepared to accept the responsibility of
satisfying this need. In England, George Berkeley (1684-1753)
^[\[24\]](#n24)^ stepped into the breach against free-thinking. But his
main concern in this struggle was precisely to destroy the materialist
basis of free-thinking.

Berkeley subsequently became a Bishop. But from notes dating back to the
years of his studies, it may be seen that already in his youth he had
set himself the task of forging a good 'spiritual weapon' for the
defence of traditional beliefs. While still a student, he worked out his
famous principle of *esse est percipi* (to be is to be in perception).
It is not hard to see what induced him to elaborate and defend this
principle. He says in his *Commonplace Book*: 'Opinion that existence is
distinct from perception is of horrible consequence: it is the
foundation of Hobbes's doctrine, etc' -- that is, of materialism -- GP.
^[\[25\]](#n25)^ Elsewhere in the same *Commonplace Book*, the young
student says: 'Matter once allowed, I defy any man to prove that God is
not Matter.' ^[\[26\]](#n26)^ There was only one way of avoiding such a
'horrible consequence', and that was *not to admit the existence of
matter*. ^[\[27\]](#n27)^ This was achieved through the principle that
*being is equal to being in perception* (*esse est percipi*). From this
followed the soothing conclusion that matter itself is but one of our
perceptions, and that we have no right to say: this is God's doing and
that is Nature's. 'The cause of all natural things is only God', said
the future Bishop. ^[\[28\]](#n28)^ And we have to admit that he was not
mistaken when he wrote: 'My doctrines rightly understood, all that
philosophy of Epicurus, Hobbes, Spinoza, etc, which has been a declared
enemy of religion comes to the ground.' ^[\[29\]](#n29)^ I should think
so! If there is no matter, there is no materialism.

### VI

But there was one thing that did not turn out so well. It seemed to
Berkeley that to have a good understanding of his doctrine was to be
convinced of its indisputable correctness. In point of fact, it simply
meant exposing its inconsistency.

If *esse est percipi* -- and this principle of Berkeley remained with
him till the end of his days -- then God shares the same fate as matter:
like matter, God exists only in our perceptions. Thus, not only does
materialism come to the ground, but religion as well. Berkeley's
doctrine, therefore, brings us by a new route to that same 'horrible
consequence' which our well-intentioned author wished to avoid. Berkeley
did not notice this contradiction, or did not wish to notice it. He was
blinded by the desire to defend his traditional beliefs at all cost.

Kant, too, was blinded by the same desire. His 'critical' system was,
indeed, an attempt to reconcile certain views inherited from his
Protestant predecessors with the conclusions of the really critical
thought of the eighteenth century. Kant thought they could be reconciled
by separating the domain of *belief* from the domain of *knowledge:
belief* to be related to *noumena*, and the rights of science to be
restricted to *phenomena*. ^[\[30\]](#n30)^ And he, too, did not hide
from his readers why it was necessary for him to limit the rights of
science. In the preface to the second edition of his *Kritik der reinen
Vernunft*, he says outright that he was induced to do this by a desire
*to make room for belief*. ^[\[31\]](#n31)^

Voltaire was an irreconcilable enemy of the *Catholic Church*: remember
his motto: '*Écrasons l\'infâme!*' ^[\[32\]](#n32)^ But Voltaire, too,
like Kant, was convinced that room had to be left for *belief*. While
waging a bitter war against Catholicism, he was a deist, and preached
*theism*, that is to say, belief in a god who rewarded people for good
conduct and punished them for bad. It is sufficient to acquaint oneself
even a little with his arguments in favour of such a faith, to grasp why
he thought it was necessary. Mallet du Pan tells us in his
*Reminiscences* that once at supper d\'Alembert and Condorcet began to
defend atheism in the presence of Voltaire. ^[\[33\]](#n33)^ The 'old
man of Ferney' hurriedly sent his servants out of the room and
exclaimed: 'Now, gentlemen, continue your speeches against God; but as I
don't want to be murdered and robbed tonight by my servants, I prefer
them not to hear you.' This reminds us of the remark made by the same
Voltaire about Bayle, ^[\[34\]](#n34)^ whom he regarded as the apostle
of atheism: 'If he had had to manage five or six hundred peasants, he
would not have failed to proclaim to them that there is a god who
rewards and punishes.' In this respect the celebrated French Enlightener
is reminiscent of the Englishman Bolingbroke who, in general, greatly
influenced Voltaire's ideas. In making room for belief in God in the
interests of public order, Voltaire was probably not averse to
'*conscious hypocrisy*'.

Voltaire was an ideologist of the French third estate, which was
fighting for its emancipation against the spiritual and temporal
aristocracy. From the point of view of sociology, it is a highly
important fact that class antagonism, the germ of which lay hidden
within the third estate, found expression even before the Revolution, in
the concern of the French Enlighteners to elaborate a world-outlook
which, on the one hand, would be free of obsolete religious and all
other prejudices and, on the other, would command the obedience of the
economically destitute mass of the population. Only an insignificant
section of the eighteenth-century French Enlighteners were not affected
by this circumspection, and, indeed, ridiculed it. Where the 'patriarch'
stopped to glance uneasily over his shoulder at his servants and his
Ferney peasants, the materialists went right on to the end. Even before
the Revolution, materialism was far from being the dominant trend in the
philosophical thought of the enlightened French bourgeoisie. And after
the Revolution the latter would have nothing to do with materialism.
Phlegmatic, prudent and mealy-mouthed *eclecticism* was much more
congenial to it.

When I say that the history of philosophy, like the history of all
ideologies, fully confirms the materialist proposition that it is not
consciousness which determines being, but being which determines
consciousness, I have no wish to infer that philosophers have always
striven *consciously* to turn their systems into a 'spiritual weapon' to
further the interests of their class. That would be an unwarranted
assertion. True, Windelband has already told us that there are periods
when '*conscious hypocrisy*' plays a very great part in the destiny of
philosophical ideas. But we shall be more prudent if we regard such
periods as *exceptional*. The individual does not necessarily have to be
a 'conscious hypocrite' when striving to coordinate his views with the
interests of his class. All that he needs is the sincere conviction that
the given class interest coincides with the interests of society as a
whole. When there is this conviction -- and it comes naturally to
individual persons under the influence of their environment -- then the
best instincts of man: allegiance to the whole, selflessness, etc,
dispose him to think those ideas *mistaken* which threaten to bring a
'*horrible consequence*' to his class (remember the young Berkeley),
and, on the other hand, to recognise as *true* those ideas which promise
*to be useful* to this class. What is useful to a particular social
class is *true* in the eyes of the individuals who compose it. Of
course, so long as the class in question lives by exploiting another
class or classes, this psychological process of identifying the useful
with the *true* will always presuppose a certain measure of *unconscious
hypocrisy*, which obliges it to turn away from everything likely to
hinder this process. And as a given ruling class approaches its decline,
this measure increases more and more, with *unconscious* hypocrisy being
joined by conscious hypocrisy. What has been said here is thoroughly
borne out by the example of contemporary *pragmatical* philosophy, to
which Deborin devotes some instructive pages.

But whatever the role of conscious or unconscious hypocrisy in the
psychological process of identifying what is useful with what is true,
this process is inevitable in the course of social development, and we
shall understand nothing in the history of ideas in general and the
history of philosophical ideas in particular if we lose sight of it.
^[\[35\]](#n35)^

### VII

Kant's 'critical' philosophy is guilty of *dualism*. This was already
clear to Fichte. But if the dualism of the Königsberg thinker is a
*defect* from the standpoint of *theory*, from the *practical* point of
view it was very *convenient* for the ideologists of the present-day
bourgeoisie in the West European countries. While representing the
latest edition of the fairly old *doctrine of two truths*, it enabled
the ideologists of the ruling class to be *materialists in science* and
simultaneously to cling to *idealism* in the sphere of those concepts
which are said to be outside the bounds of scientific cognition. The
Kantian variety of the doctrine of two truths is very widespread in
*Germany*. British scientists, who are not too well acquainted with
Kant, more readily associate the doctrine of two truths *with the
philosophy of Hume*. I have often used the example of Huxley
^[\[36\]](#n36)^ in my articles; I did so because it is a very
instructive one.

On the one hand, the celebrated naturalist stated:

Surely no one who is cognisant of the facts of the case, nowadays,
doubts that the roots of psychology lie in the physiology of the nervous
system. What we call the operations of the mind are functions of the
brain, and the materials of consciousness are products of cerebral
activity. ^[\[37\]](#n37)^

The most 'extreme' materialists never went beyond this. Besides this, we
find Huxley admitting that contemporary physiology leads by the most
direct route to materialism, in so far as one may apply this designation
to a theory which declares that apart from substance possessing
extension there is no other thinking substance. This is avowed
materialism, and, moreover, in its most correct expression, that is to
say, Spinozism stripped of its theological garb.

But this same naturalist, as though in alarm at his own boldness, tries
to emasculate his purely materialist view with this qualification: 'But
it is, nevertheless, true that the doctrine contains nothing
inconsistent with the purest idealism.' ^[\[38\]](#n38)^

Huxley tries to prove this by arguing that in essence we know only our
sensations:

A brain may be the machinery by which the material universe becomes
conscious of itself. But it is important to notice that, even if this
conception of the universe and of the relation of consciousness to its
other components should be true, we should, nevertheless, be still bound
by the limits of thought, still unable to refute the arguments of pure
idealism. The more completely the materialistic position is admitted,
the easier is it to show that the idealistic position is unassailable,
if the idealist confines himself within the limits of positive
knowledge. ^[\[39\]](#n39)^

Such ideas would help to reconcile the 'respectable' British public to
Huxley's theories on natural science. ^[\[40\]](#n40)^ They may have set
his own mind at rest, to the extent that he still preserved traces of
animist views -- and he apparently held them pretty firmly, as did
almost all Britons of the nineteenth century who in their own fashion
were very free-thinking; but it is incomprehensible that he should think
of them as being 'unassailable'.

The reader will remember that in denying the existence of matter
independently of perception, Berkeley would have had, *if he had wished
to think logically*, to arrive at denial of the existence of God.
Huxley, in trying to make his materialist conclusions less frightening
by adopting the main principle of idealism, found himself in a similar
situation: to be logical, our biologist would have had to negate the
existence of organic life and nature in general independently of
perception.

Organic life is unthinkable without the exchange of substances between
the organism and its environment. If Descartes said: 'I think, therefore
I am', the naturalist can and is bound to say: 'I exist, consequently,
nature, too, exists apart from my perception of it.' Of course, I can
declare that in the final analysis I am not an organism but only a sum
of certain sensations and conceptions. This was the 'positive knowledge'
that Huxley had in mind\... But it probably did not occur to him how
easy it was to reduce this type of 'positive knowledge' to absurdity.

Let us take for granted that Berkeley was right, that is, that in fact
being is equal to being in perception (*esse est percipi*). But if this
is true, not only matter, not only nature, and not only God have no
existence outside my perception. All my fellow-men, too, have no
existence; their being is also equal to being in my perception. Nothing
and nobody exists except myself and various states of my consciousness
-- such is the only correct conclusion to be drawn from the basic
idealist principle which proclaims that being is equal to being in
perception.

Nothing and nobody! Do you understand what that means, reader? It means
that you are not the offspring of your parents, but they are your
offspring, since their being reduces itself to being in your perception.
If the idealists are capable of waving materialism aside only by
conjuring up such stupidities, which can be taken seriously only, say,
by the inmates of Chekhov's *Ward No 6*, ^[\[41\]](#n41)^ then in
*theory* the cause of idealism is hopelessly lost.

The doctrine that nothing and nobody exists except myself and my
perceptions is called *solipsism*. It can be seen that solipsism is
unavoidable where the starting point is *individual consciousness*, that
is to say, where the thinker adheres to *subjective* idealism.

### VIII

Since solipsism is so obviously absurd, let us leave the domain of
*subjective* idealism, and have a look at the form which the dispute
between idealism and materialism takes when being in perception is
regarded from the standpoint of that *super-individual consciousness* to
which the idealists appeal when they lack the courage to admit to
solipsism.

And first of all, what is super-individual consciousness? Where does it
spring from? If being is equal to being in perception, then I have
decidedly no (NB: *logical*) right to talk of some kind of
*super-individual consciousness* that allegedly exists *outside* my
*individual* consciousness. Here is a repetition of Berkeley's error,
when he first said that there is no being of any kind independent of
perception, and then declared that God has being independently of
perception.

*The idealist who recognises the existence of super-individual
consciousness will remain a dogmatist, no matter how much he reiterates
the need for criticism.* However, we shall be complaisant here too. Let
us acknowledge this *dogma*, and see what follows.

The dogmatic teaching of super-individual consciousness had its most
systematic exposition in the works of Schelling and Hegel. Their
absolute spirit is nothing else than super-individual consciousness
which is supposed to embrace both the object and the subject, both
nature and (subjective) spirit. But to Schelling this meant that *the
universe is only the self-contemplation of this spirit*. According to
Hegel's teaching, in which so much space is allotted to the (impersonal,
'absolute') *logical process*, the universe is the self-thought of the
*absolute spirit*. Essentially, this is one and the same thing. And if
Huxley, in waving the materialists aside, had thought to seek salvation
on the basis of absolute idealism, he would have been forced to tell us:

As a *biologist*, I admit, of course, the existence both of living
organisms and their material environment. But as a *philosopher*, I
think that the material environment surrounding the organisms, the
organisms themselves, as well as myself, the biologist, who with great
endeavour and success is studying their comparative anatomy and
elaborating the theory of their development -- in short, all that was,
is or will be -- was, is or will be only in the self-contemplation or
self-thought of the absolute spirit.

Seriously to accept such an 'apparition' (recall Kant's opinion of
Fichte's system) is again out of the question. Schelling's and Hegel's
systems had their own great merits. They contributed very much indeed to
thinking mankind. But they made that great contribution not because they
proclaimed the universe to be a process taking place in the absolute
spirit. On the contrary, that was their weakest side, which to a very
large extent depreciated the brilliant discoveries made by these
outstanding authors when they addressed their attention to the real
world.

Once more: in a theoretical sense, all attempts to talk one's way out of
materialism by appealing to the basic principle of idealism (*esse est
percipi*, without the subject there is no object, etc) are foredoomed to
abject failure. If, in spite of this, these attempts were stubbornly
repeated, are still being repeated, and will for long go on being
repeated, it is not a matter of theory at all. The stubborn repetition
of these theoretically hopeless attempts is to be explained by the
*socio-psychological cause* given above.

But how can the basic question of philosophy be resolved by thinkers who
for one reason or another have not themselves experienced the influence
of this cause? That is what we shall now see.

### IX

The idealists and neo-Kantians reproach the materialists with
'*reducing*' *psychical* phenomena to material phenomena. FA Lange says
that 'materialism is constantly faced with the insurmountable obstacle
of explaining how conscious sensation can arise from material motion'.
^[\[42\]](#n42)^ Lange as an historian of materialism should, however,
have known that the materialists have never promised to answer this
question. They assert only -- to use Huxley's above-mentioned and
extremely apt expression -- that apart from substance possessing
extension there is no other thinking substance and that, like motion,
consciousness is a function of matter. *This* materialist idea was
already expressed -- true, extremely naively -- in the teaching of
Diogenes of Apollonia, who maintained that the primary matter -- air,
according to his teaching -- was endowed with consciousness and 'knew
much'. La Mettrie, ^[\[43\]](#n43)^ who is looked on as a 'most crude
materialist', declined to explain *whence* came the capacity of matter
to have sensation. He accepted this capacity as a fact, he believed it
was as much an attribute of matter as its capacity for motion. La
Mettrie's views on this subject were very close to Spinoza's, which is
not surprising, since he was influenced by Descartes in elaborating his
theory; but, *like Spinoza*, he rejected the *dualism* of the great
Frenchman. In his work *L\'Homme-plante*, he says that of all living
creatures, man is the one which has the most soul and the plant is the
one which has the least. But he gives us to understand at the very same
time that the 'soul' of the plant does not at all resemble the soul of
man. 'The beautiful soul, which concerns itself with no objects, no
desires, has no passions, no vices, no virtues and above all, no needs,
would not be burdened even with the care of providing food for its
body!' By this he meant that to the various forms of material
organisation correspond various degrees of 'animation'. ^[\[44\]](#n44)^

In my controversy with Bernstein, ^[\[45\]](#n45)^ I gave documentary
proof that the most brilliant representative of another trend in
eighteenth-century French materialism, Diderot, held the point of view
of 'modern Spinozists' (his own expression), who 'proceed from the basic
principle that matter is capable of sensation', and are convinced that
only matter 'exists' and that its existence is an adequate explanation
of all phenomena. ^[\[46\]](#n46)^ To avoid unnecessary repetition, I
shall add just this: the materialist Moleschott, who at one time was
also very well known in Russia, tried to incorporate the same view in
his own works, giving it, by the way, the characteristic title of
*material-spiritual* view (*stoffgeistige Anschauung*). ^[\[47\]](#n47)^

With the present universal domination of idealism, it is quite natural
that the history of philosophy should be expounded from the idealist
standpoint. As a consequence, Spinoza has long since been listed among
the idealists; so that some reader will probably be very surprised that
I understand Spinozism in the materialist sense. But this is the only
correct way to understand it.

Already in 1843 Feuerbach expressed the quite justified conviction that
Spinoza's teaching was an 'expression of the materialist trend of the
recent epoch'. Of course, Spinoza too did not escape the influence of
his time. As Feuerbach remarked, his materialism was clad in
*theological costume*. ^[\[48\]](#n48)^ The important point was,
however, that he eliminated the dualism of spirit and nature. If Spinoza
does refer to nature as God, one of the attributes of his God is
*extension*. Therein lies the cardinal distinction between Spinozism and
idealism. ^[\[49\]](#n49)^

The dualism of spirit and nature is also eliminated in idealism.
Absolute idealism preached the *identity of subject and object in the
womb of the absolute*. But this identity was achieved by declaring that
the existence of the object was nothing more than its existence in the
'*self-contemplation*' (or self-thought) of the absolute spirit. Here
too, in the final analysis, *to be* meant '*to be in perception*' (*esse
est percipi*). It was on this basis that the idealists could speak of
the *identity of subject and object*.

*Materialists assert, not the identity of subject and object, but their
unity*. 'I' am not only a subject, but also an object: each given 'I' is
a *subject* for itself and an *object* for another. That, 'which for me,
or subjectively, is a purely spiritual, immaterial, insensible act, in
itself, or objectively, is a material, sensible act' (Feuerbach).

If this is the case, *we have no right to speak of the unknowability of
the object*.

### X

The 'critical' doctrine of the unknowability of the object (the
thing-in-itself), which is closely associated with the name of Kant, is
in fact a very old theory. It came to modern philosophy from Plato's
idealism which, in turn, took it from primitive animism, as we have seen
above.

In Plato's *Phaedo*, Socrates asserts that the soul contemplates
existence through the body 'as through prison bars but not with its own
unhindered vision', and is therefore 'wallowing in utter ignorance'.
^[\[50\]](#n50)^ In another part of the same conversation, he expresses
himself even more definitely: 'So long as we have the body, and the soul
is contaminated by such an evil, we shall never attain completely what
we desire, which I take to be the truth.' ^[\[51\]](#n51)^ Truth is
inaccessible to cognition 'through the body', that is to say, through
our external senses, through this prison of the soul -- all Plato's
doctrine of cognition is constructed on this. And this same proposition
was -- *without criticism* -- assimilated by the father of 'critical'
philosophy, as it was even earlier assimilated by the idealists of
modern times and even of the Middle Ages (the 'Realists').

The doctrine of the unknowability of things-in-themselves makes sense
only if seen in the light of this -- *absolutely primitive* -- theory of
cognition. Deprived of its decrepit basis, the doctrine of unknowability
inevitably leads into insoluble contradictions, in struggling with which
the thoughtful Kant earned Fichte's description of a
'*Dreiviertelskopf*'.

Cognition presupposes the presence of two things: first, that which is
*cognised*, and second, that which *cognises*. *That which cognises* is
known as the *subject*. In order that an object be known to a larger or
lesser measure to the subject, it must exert some action upon the
subject. 'In so far as the human body is affected in any way by a given
external body, thus far it perceives the external body', says Spinoza.
^[\[52\]](#n52)^

For the human body, the *result* of the action of an external body upon
it will be *objectively* purely *material* (change in the state of
certain tissues) and *subjectively* it will be *psychical* (a certain
perception). But in both cases, it will be a state of *that which
cognises*, that is to say, *the subject*. *In this sense, all knowledge
is subjective*. *To be cognised means to be for another*. But it does
not at all follow from this that true cognition of the object is
inaccessible to the subject, or, in other words, that *being for another
does not* correspond to *being-in-itself*. It was possible to assume
this only as long as the cognitive *ego* was regarded as something
immaterial, standing *outside nature*. This, however, is entirely wrong.
'My body as a whole', said Feuerbach rightly, 'is my *Ego*, my true
essence. It is not an abstract being that thinks \[and, consequently,
knows the external world -- GP\] but this real being, this body.' This
body is part of the cosmos. If it is acted upon by external objects in
such a manner and not otherwise, then -- *both from the objective and
subjective aspects* -- this is conditioned by the *nature of the whole*.
As Huxley aptly put it, the human brain is the organ of the
self-consciousness of the cosmos. But the body that possesses this organ
lives in a definite material environment, and if the brain could not
know at least some of the properties of that environment, it would be
impossible for the human organism to exist. In order *to exist*, people
must be able *to foresee* at least some phenomena. *This foresight
presumes true knowledge at least of some properties of that whole of
which the cognitive subject constitutes a small part*. ^[\[53\]](#n53)^

Finally, those eclectically-minded 'thinkers' who strive to combine the
*materialist* explanation of history *with an idealist* theory of
cognition overlook the fact that if the *object* were unknowable to the
*subject*, neither the development of society nor its very existence
would be possible: both one and the other presuppose the existence of a
certain number of *objects-subjects*, capable of coordinating their
actions in one way or another, that is to say, of *knowing one another*.

The material by which we get to know nature and one another is provided
to us by our external senses. Our reason introduces a certain order into
the material provided: it combines some phenomena and separates others.
It was on this basis that Kant spoke of reason dictating its laws to
nature. In fact, reason only adduces, 'develops', what is dictated to it
by nature:

We separate that which is separate in nature \[said Feuerbach\], and
connect that which is connected in nature. We subordinate the phenomena
and things of nature to one another, in the relationship of basis and
consequence, cause and effect, because this is their factual, sensuous,
objective, real inter-relationship. ^[\[54\]](#n54)^

The scientific theory of evolution teaches us that matter existed not
only before people and their ideas, or living creatures generally
existed, but even before the earth itself and the solar system were
formed.

We are told also that many naturalists are nowadays inclined to *a
conception of the world based on energy*. More than that. The German
chemist Ostwald, ^[\[55\]](#n55)^ a well-known exponent of energetics,
has for long been applying himself to the 'overcoming of scientific
materialism' ('*Überwindung des wissenschaftlichen Materialismus*'). But
this is a mere misunderstanding. The good chemist Ostwald hopes to
'overcome' materialism by means of energetics only because he is too
*poorly versed in philosophy*.

I do not consider this conception of the world based on energy a
satisfactory one. I think it is weak in *many* respects. The theory of
cognition based on energy, in my opinion, entangles itself in insoluble
and, one might say, disgraceful contradictions. ^[\[56\]](#n56)^ But
when someone opposes this conception of the world based on *energy* to
the *materialist*, I can only shrug my shoulders.

Joseph Priestley, who was not only a remarkable chemist but, as distinct
from Ostwald, also a subtle thinker, refused to attribute to matter the
property of impenetrability or solidity. His theory was that matter has
only two properties: attraction and repulsion. ^[\[57\]](#n57)^ By his
own admission, his view on matter was taken from Boscovich.
^[\[58\]](#n58)^ In other words, the material particle, as Priestley saw
it, was but the centre of certain forces. But this point of view, which
was *essentially* very close to the conception based on energy, did not
hinder Priestley from persistently defending materialism. And we shall
agree that he was fully entitled to do so if we recall the definition
the materialists have given and still give to matter: it is that which
in one way or another, directly or indirectly, acts on our external
senses. ^[\[59\]](#n59)^

Instead of the words 'our senses' it would be better to say: 'on the
senses of living organisms'. Be that as it may, '*energy*', too, will
come under this definition, as long as it is not thought of as something
that does not act upon the senses of living beings.

This means that *the conception of the world based on energy may be
opposed to the mechanical* ^[\[60\]](#n60)^ *but not in the least to the
materialist*.

Some German idealists, and with them all others of all kinds and sorts,
as Herzen used to say, also grab at the latest discoveries in chemistry
as an argument against materialism. Deborin does very well to expose the
bankruptcy of this type of spurious argument. I should like to add a few
words of my own to what he has said about this (see pages 244-45).

Professor NA Shilov put it very well when he said that, in accepting in
principle the possibility of the motion and fluctuation of electrons
'more or less closely connected with atoms and molecules, the electronic
theory thereby, obviously, already acknowledges the electron as a
component part of matter'. The same naturalist rightly thinks that
modern chemical discoveries suggest the idea of the existence of some
*materia prima*, 'more subtle than the atoms themselves'.
^[\[61\]](#n61)^ It should be noted, however, that the phenomena taking
place 'within the atom' are the best possible confirmation of the
*dialectical view of nature*.

Hegel once reproached 'ultimate physics' ('*die endliche Physik*') that
it held too firmly to definitions based on abstract reasoning. One of
the main errors resulting from this was, he said, that 'ultimate
physics' negated the possibility of the transformation of elements.
^[\[62\]](#n62)^ Later, at the end of the 1850s, Engels, who was then
studying comparative anatomy and physiology, remarked that if 'the old
man' ('*der Alte*') had been writing his *Philosophy of Nature* 'today'
(1858), the facts would come flowing to him from every side, to confirm
the correctness of his dialectical conception of the processes of
nature. ^[\[63\]](#n63)^ What would Engels say nowadays, when there have
been such astonishing discoveries of the transformation of matter, going
on 'within the atom', which not so long ago was considered to be quite
immutable?

Everything is fluid; everything changes. One cannot enter the same
stream twice. Now we see the truth of this more clearly than ever
before!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Notes

Notes are by Plekhanov, except those by the Moscow editors of this
edition of the work, which are noted 'Editor', or the MIA, which are
suitably noted.

[[1]{#n1}]{.info}. See E Zeller, *An Outline of the History of Greek
Philosophy* (Moscow, 1913), p 1. Eduard Zeller (1814-1908) -- German
philosopher, specialist in the history of Greek and German philosophy --
Editor.

[[2]{#n2}]{.info}. Thales (late seventh century-early sixth century BC)
-- Greek materialist philosopher -- Editor.

[[3]{#n3}]{.info}. Anaximenes (585-525 BC) -- Greek spontaneous
materialist philosopher -- Editor.

[[4]{#n4}]{.info}. Georgi Ivanovich Chelpanov (1862-1936) -- Russian
psychologist and idealist philosopher -- Editor.

[[5]{#n5}]{.info}. *Kant*'s *Werke*, published by Hartenstein, Volume
10, pp 577-78. There are more details about this in the article
'Materialism or Kantianism', contained in my collection of articles, *A
Critique of Our Critics*. \[See Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected
Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), pp 398-414. Johann
Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814) -- German philosopher, subjective idealist,
exponent of classical German philosophy -- Editor. Available at
[Materialism or Kantianism](../1898/materialism-kantianism.htm) --
MIA.\]

[[6]{#n6}]{.info}. Edward Burnett Tylor, *La civilisation primitive*,
Volume 1 (Paris, 1876), p 493. \[Edward Burnett Tylor (1832-1917) --
English anthropologist, student of primitive culture -- Editor.\]

[[7]{#n7}]{.info}. Not having at hand the German original, I am quoting
from the French translation -- see pages 414-15 of Volume 2 of the
Lausanne edition, 1905. \[Theodor Gomperz (1832-1912) -- German
positivist philosopher and philologist, historian of ancient literature
-- Editor.\]

[[8]{#n8}]{.info}. For more details of this, see my first article 'On
Religious Seekings' in the collection *From Defence to Attack*. \[See
Georgi Plekhanov, *Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 3 (Moscow,
1976), pp 306-413 -- Editor. Available at [On Religious
Seekings](../1909/religion/index.htm) -- MIA.\]

[[9]{#n9}]{.info}. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected Works*,
Volume 3 (Moscow, 1973), p 346 -- Editor.

[[10]{#n10}]{.info}. The Ionian school was the earliest materialist
trend in Greek philosophy which arose in the sixth to fourth centuries
BC in the cities along the Ionian coast of Asia Minor; its main
representatives were Thales, Anaximander, Anaxagoras and Heraclitus --
Editor.

[[11]{#n11}]{.info}. Heraclitus of Ephesus (c 530-470 BC) -- Greek
materialist philosopher, one of the founders of dialectics -- Editor.

[[12]{#n12}]{.info}. Diogenes of Apollonia (fifth century BC) -- Greek
materialist philosopher -- Editor.

[[13]{#n13}]{.info}. *Parerga und Paralipomena: Über die
Universitätsphilosophie*.

[[14]{#n14}]{.info}. Plekhanov here gives the English phrase: the
philosophical people -- Editor.

[[15]{#n15}]{.info}. Euripides (c 480-406 BC) -- Greek poet and
dramatist -- Editor.

[[16]{#n16}]{.info}. True, Thales is believed to have said that gods,
like everything else, are made from water. This legend shows that
Thales' contemporaries thought that his ideas on gods were unlike their
own.

[[17]{#n17}]{.info}. *Book I*, paragraph 31.

[[18]{#n18}]{.info}. *Book IX*, paragraphs 313-36.

[[19]{#n19}]{.info}. *Book I*, paragraph 30.

[[20]{#n20}]{.info}. See W Windelband, *History of Modern Philosophy and
Its Relation to General Culture and the Individual Sciences*, Volume 1
(Russian translation, edited by Mr A Vvedensky, St Petersburg, 1908), pp
238-39 -- Editor.

[[21]{#n21}]{.info}. Henry St John Bolingbroke (1678-1751) -- English
statesman and writer -- Editor.

[[22]{#n22}]{.info}. Windelband, *History of Modern Philosophy*, Volume
1, pp 238-39.

[[23]{#n23}]{.info}. Toland wrote of himself and his like-minded
associates: 'We, free-thinkers.' It is even said that he was the first
to whom the appellation 'free-thinker' was given. \[John Toland
(1670-1722) -- Irish materialist philosopher -- Editor.\]

[[24]{#n24}]{.info}. George Berkeley (1685-1753) -- Irish philosopher,
subjective idealist -- Editor.

[[25]{#n25}]{.info}. *Le Journal philosophique de Berkeley*, étude et
traduction par Raymond Gourg (Paris, 1908), pp 107-08.

[[26]{#n26}]{.info}. Ibid, p 123.

[[27]{#n27}]{.info}. For Berkeley, according to Stephen, 'to destroy
matter was to free the soul' (*History of English Thought in the
Eighteenth Century*, Volume 1 (London, 1881), p 39).

[[28]{#n28}]{.info}. Ibid, p 89.

[[29]{#n29}]{.info}. Ibid, p 125.

[[30]{#n30}]{.info}. This is extremely well explained in *Philosophical
Essays*, by *Orthodox* (LI Axelrod) (St Petersburg, 1906, in Russian),
which I urgently recommend to the attention of readers.

[[31]{#n31}]{.info}. 'Ich musste also das *Wissen* aufheben, um zum
*Glauben* Platz zu bekommen.' ('I therefore had to restrict the domain
of *knowledge* to make room for *belief*.') (*Kritik der reinen
Vernunft*, herausgegeben von Dr K Kehrbach, Verlag von Reclam, Vorrede
zur zweiten Ausgabe, pp 25-26)

[[32]{#n32}]{.info}. Literally, 'Crush infamy' -- MIA.

[[33]{#n33}]{.info}. Jacques Mallet du Pan (1749-1800) -- French
political figure and publicist; Jean le Rond D\'Alembert (1717-1783) --
French mathematician and philosopher, one of the Encyclopaedists; Jean
Antoine Condorcet (1743-1794) -- French Enlightener, worked out an
idealist theory of historical progress stemming from the continual
advancement of the human mind; François Marie Arouet de Voltaire
(1694-1778) -- French deist philosopher, satirist, opposed absolutism
and Catholicism -- Editor.

[[34]{#n34}]{.info}. Pierre Bayle (1647-1706) -- French philosopher,
sceptic, critic of theological dogmatism -- Editor.

[[35]{#n35}]{.info}. Even the neo-Kantian Lange admits that 'there is no
philosophy that develops out of itself', but 'there are only
philosophising people who together with their teachings are essentially
children of their time' (*History of Materialism*, translated by NN
Strakhov, second Russian edition, p 39). This, by the way, is simply a
repetition of Hegel's well-known idea that the philosophy of a
particular age is its expression in ideas. Only this need be added: in
human history the character of each particular age, in the last
analysis, is determined by the character of its social relations.

[[36]{#n36}]{.info}. Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895) -- British
naturalist, follower of Darwin; David Hume (1711-1776) -- Scottish
philosopher, subjective idealist -- Editor.

[[37]{#n37}]{.info}. Thomas Huxley, *Hume, sa vie, sa philosophie*
(translated by Compayré, Paris, 1880), p 108. \[Thomas Huxley, *Hume*
(London, 1879), p 80 -- Editor.\]

[[38]{#n38}]{.info}. Ibid, pp 108-09. \[Ibid, p 80 -- Editor.\]

[[39]{#n39}]{.info}. Ibid, p 111. \[Ibid, pp 81-82 -- Editor.\]

[[40]{#n40}]{.info}. See how his biographer, P Chalmers Mitchell, in
*Life of Thomas Henry Huxley*, approves of this point (Chapter 13, pp
210-22).

[[41]{#n41}]{.info}. *Ward Six* was a short story written in 1892 by
Anton Chekhov (1860-1904). It is set in an asylum and investigates the
relationships between the staff and inmates -- MIA.

[[42]{#n42}]{.info}. *History of Materialism*, p 653. \[Friedrich Albert
Lange (1828-1875) -- German philosopher, neo-Kantian -- Editor.\]

[[43]{#n43}]{.info}. Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709-1751) -- French
physician and materialist philosopher -- Editor.

[[44]{#n44}]{.info}. It is worth noting that Du Bois-Raymond, in his
speech on La Mettrie (Berlin, 1875), not only correctly presented this
view of La Mettrie's, but acknowledged it as the *monist* view which is
now held by very many naturalists. This speech could serve as the reply
to the same Du Bois-Raymond's much-talked-of speech on the limits to
cognisance of nature.

[[45]{#n45}]{.info}. See Georgi Plekhanov, 'Bernstein and Materialism',
*Selected Philosophical Works*, Volume 2 (Moscow, 1976), p 335 --
Editor. \[Available at [Bernstein and
Materialism](../1898/07/bernsteinmat.html) -- MIA.\]

[[46]{#n46}]{.info}. 'II ne faut pas confondre les spinosistes anciens
avec les spinosistes modernes. Le principe général de ceux-ci, c\'est
que la matière est sensible', and so on. \['One should not confuse the
old Spinozists with the modern Spinozists. The main principle of the
latter is that matter is sensible.\'\] (*Encyclopedie*, Volume 15, p
474) Then follows a brief exposition of Diderot's own views. \[Dénis
Diderot (1713-1784) -- French materialist philosopher, an ideologist of
the French bourgeois revolution of the eighteenth century, head of the
Encyclopaedists -- Editor.\]

[[47]{#n47}]{.info}. *Für meine Freunde*. *Lebenserinnerungen von
Jacques Moleschott* (Giessen, 1901), pp 222, 230, 239. \[Jacob
Moleschott (1822-1893) -- Dutch philosopher and physiologist,
representative of vulgar materialism -- Editor.\]

[[48]{#n48}]{.info}. The brilliant Diderot understood this; hence the
reason why, as we have seen, he did not wish to confuse the 'modern
Spinozists' with the 'old'.

[[49]{#n49}]{.info}. Berkeley said (see above) that recognition of the
existence of matter independently of consciousness leads inevitably to
recognition of extension in God, and this, in his opinion, was the
essence of materialism.

[[50]{#n50}]{.info}. *Phaedo*, translated by Dmitri Lebedev (Moscow,
1896), pp 60-61. \[HN Fowler's translation, Look Classical Library,
London, 1914, pp 289, 229-231 -- Editor.\]

[[51]{#n51}]{.info}. Page 23 of the same \[Russian\] translation.

[[52]{#n52}]{.info}. *Ethics*, translated by VI Modestov, fourth Russian
edition, p 86. As this part of *Ethics* is extremely important, I give
it here in the original: 'At quatenus corpus humanum a corpore aliquo
externo aliquo modo afficitur, eatenus corpus externum percipit.'
(Benedicti de Spinoza, *Opera quae supersunt omnia*, Volume 2 (Jena,
1803), p 104). It would be useful to compare this with the following
words of Engels: 'Von Körpern, ausser der Bewegung, ausser allem
Verhältnis zu den anderen Körpern ist nichts zu sagen.' \['\... of
bodies out of motion, out of all relation to other bodies, nothing can
be asserted.\'\] (*Briefwechsel zwischen Friedrich Engels und Karl
Marx*, herausgegeben von A Bebel und Ed Bernstein, Volume 4 (Stuttgart,
1913), p 344) \[Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Selected
Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), p 264 -- Editor.\]

[[53]{#n53}]{.info}. 'Pour établir la valeur de nos sensations', as
Pierre Delbet says very well, '\... il suffit, que pour une même
excitation la réaction céllulaire soit la même, et aucun esprit
scientifique ne saurait douter un instant qu\'elle le soil. Si elle est
la même pour une même excitation\... la répétition du phénomène entraîne
nécessairement à établir une concordance entre l\'excitation et la
réaction, de telle sorte que cette réaction devient révélatrice de
l\'excitation. Ainsi s\'établit une connaissance du monde extérieur qui
ne peut pas être trompeuse.' \['In order to establish the significance
of our sensations\... it suffices that one and the same irritation
should produce one and the same cellular reaction, and not one
scientific mind could doubt for a minute that it is so. If the sensation
is one and the same with one and the same irritation\... the repetition
of this phenomenon necessarily leads to the establishment of such
concord between irritation and reaction that from the reaction we may
judge the irritation that produced it. Thus there is established a
knowledge of the external world which cannot be deceptive.\'\] (*La
Science et* la *Réalité* (Paris, 1913), p 90)

[[54]{#n54}]{.info}. 'Kritische Bemerkungen zu den Grundsätzen der
Philosophie (aus dem handschriftlichen Nachlass), *Feuerbach*'s *Werke*,
Volume 2 (Stuttgart, 1904), pp 322-23.

[[55]{#n55}]{.info}. Wilhelm Friedrich Ostwald (1853-1932) -- German
chemist and idealist philosopher, exponent of energism, a variety of
Machism -- Editor.

[[56]{#n56}]{.info}. It would be very desirable that Deborin in the
second edition of his *Introduction* devote a special chapter to a
criticism of this conception of the world based on energy, and to
gnosiology based on it.

[[57]{#n57}]{.info}. '\... matter is a substance possessed of the
properties of attraction and repulsion only.' (*Disquisitions Relating
to Matter and Spirit* (second edition, Birmingham, 1782), p 32) \[Joseph
Priestley (1733-1804) -- English chemist and materialist philosopher --
Editor.\]

[[58]{#n58}]{.info}. *Disquisitions Relating to Matter and Spirit*, pp
23-24. \[Ruggiero Giuseppe Boscovich (Ruder Josip Boskovic, 1711-1787)
-- Croatian mathematician, astronomer and physicist -- Editor.\]

[[59]{#n59}]{.info}. It is easy to understand the origin of this
definition: the spiritualists considered, as is generally known, that
the 'spirit' did not act upon the senses.

[[60]{#n60}]{.info}. See the interesting book by Abel Key,
*L*\'*Energétique et le Méchanisme* (Paris, 1908).

[[61]{#n61}]{.info}. 'Within the Atom', *Priroda*, February 1915, pp 182
and 179. \[Nikolai Alexandrovich Shilov (1872-1930) -- Russian professor
of chemistry -- Editor. *Materia prima*: first or prime matter -- MIA.\]

[[62]{#n62}]{.info}. *Naturphilosophie*, p 286, and Zusatz, \[Hegel's\]
*Werke*, Volume 7, pp 172-73.

[[63]{#n63}]{.info}. See his letter to Marx of 14 July 1858 (the
above-cited *Briefwechsel*, Volume 2, pp 278-79. \[Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels, *Selected Correspondence* (Moscow, 1975), p 101 --
Editor.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Plekhanov Archive](../index.htm)
