---
layout: page
title: Letter to *Vorwärts* and *Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung*
permalink: /1913/mar/22.md
parent: Marx & Engels Selected Works
---

## [V. I.](../../1913/mar/x01.htm "The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism")   [Lenin](../../1913/mar/26.htm "Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism")

### Big Achievement of the Chinese Republic {#big-achievement-of-the-chinese-republic .title}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ Published:]{.info style="text-indent: 0%"} *Pravda* No. 68, March 22,
1913. Signed: *W.*. Published according to the *Pravda* text.\
[Source:]{.info} [*Lenin Collected Works*](../../cw/index.htm#volume19),
Progress Publishers, [1977](../../cw/v19pp77.txt), Moscow,
[Volume 19](../../cw/volume19.htm#1913-mar-22), pages [29-30]{.pages}.\
[Translated:]{.info} The Late George Hanna\
[Transcription\\Markup:]{.info} [R.
Cymbala](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/rcymbala.htm)\
[Public Domain:]{.info} Lenin Internet Archive (2004). [You may freely
copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make
derivative and commercial works. Please credit "Marxists Internet
Archive" as your source.]{.infobloc_copyleft} •
[README](../../readme.htm)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#v19pp77:29}

[We]{onmouseover="window.status=' 19 . 029 . v19pp77 '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} know that the great Chinese Republic,
established at the cost of such sacrifice by progressive democrats among
the Asian masses, recently encountered very grave financial
difficulties. The six "Great" Powers, which are considered civilised
nations, but which in reality follow the most reactionary policies,
formed a financial consortium which suspended the granting of a loan to
China.

[The]{onmouseover="window.status=' 19 . 029 . v19pp77 '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} point is that the Chinese revolution did
not evoke among the European bourgeoisie any enthusiasm for freedom and
democracy---only the proletariat can entertain that feeling, which is
alien to the knights of profit; it gave rise to the urge to *plunder*
China, partition her and take away some of her territories. This
"consortium" of the six Powers (Britain, France, Russia, Germany, Japan
and the United States) was trying to make China bankrupt in order to
weaken and undermine the republic.

[The]{onmouseover="window.status=' 19 . 029 . v19pp77 '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} *collapse* of this reactionary consortium
is a big success for the young republic, which enjoys the sympathy of
the working masses the world over. The President of the United States
has announced that his government will no longer support the consortium
and will officially *recognise* the Republic of China in the near
future. The American banks have now *left* the consortium, and America
will give China much-needed financial support, opening the Chinese
market to American capital and thereby facilitating the introduction, of
reforms in China.

[Influenced]{onmouseover="window.status=' 19 . 029 . v19pp77 '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} by America, Japan has also changed her
policy towards China. At first, Japan would not even allow Sun Yat-sen
to enter the country. Now the visit has taken place, and all Japanese
democrats enthusiastically welcome an []{#v19pp77:30}   alliance with
republican China; the conclusion of that *alliance* is now on the order
of the day. The Japanese bourgeoisie, like the American, has come to
realise that it stands to profit more from a policy of peace with China
than from a policy of plundering and partitioning the Chinese Republic.

[The]{onmouseover="window.status=' 19 . 030 . v19pp77 '"
onmouseout="window.status=''"} collapse of the robber consortium is, of
course, a defeat of no mean importance for Russia's reactionary foreign
policy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#notes}

### Notes

[]{#footnotes} []{#endnotes}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {align="center"}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    [[Works Index](../../index.htm)]{.footer}   \|   [[Volume 19](../../cw/volume19.htm#1913-mar-22)]{.footer} \|   [[Collected Works](../../cw/index.htm#volume19)]{.footer}   \|   [[L.I.A. Index](../../../index.htm)]{.footer}
     [[\< backward](../../1913/mar/x01.htm "The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism")]{.footer}      [[forward \>](../../1913/mar/26.htm "Old Problems and the Senile Decay of Liberalism")]{.footer}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

 
