---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Patriotism and Labour

### (1897)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **Shan Van Vocht**, August 1897.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is Patriotism? Love of country, someone answers. But what is meant
by 'love of country'? "The rich man," says a French writer, "loves his
country because he conceives it owes him a duty, whereas the poor man
loves his country as he believes he owes it a duty." The recognition of
the duty we owe our country is, I take it, the real mainspring of
patriotic action; and our 'country', properly understood, means not
merely the particular spot on the earth\'s surface from which we derive
our parentage, but also comprises all the men, women and children of our
race whose collective life constitutes our country's political
existence. True patriotism seeks the welfare of each in the happiness of
all, and is inconsistent with the selfish desire for worldly wealth
which can only be gained by the spoliation of less favoured
fellow-mortals.

Viewed in the light of such a definition, what are the claims to
patriotism possessed by the moneyed class of Ireland? The percentage of
weekly wages of £1 per week and under-received by the workers of the
three kingdoms is stated by the Board of Trade report to be as follows:
England, 40; Scotland, 50; and Ireland, 78 per cent. In other words,
three out of every four wage-earners in Ireland receive less than £1 per
week. Who is to blame? What determines the rate of wages? The
competition among workers for employment. There is always a large
surplus of unemployed labour in Ireland, and owing to this fact the
Irish employer is able to take advantage of the helplessness of his
poorer fellow-countrymen and compel them to work for less than their
fellows in England receive for the same class of work.

The employees of our municipal Corporations and other public bodies in
Ireland are compelled by our middle-class town-councillors -- their
compatriots -- to accept wages of from 4s. to 8s. per week less than
English Corporations pay in similar branches of public service. Irish
railway servants receive from 5s. to 10s. per week less than English
railway servants in the same departments, although shareholders in Irish
railways draw higher dividends than are paid on the most prosperous
English. In all private employment in Ireland the same state of matters
prevails. Let us be clear upon this point. There is no law upon the
statute book, no power possessed by the Privy Council, no civil or
military function under the control of Prime Minister, Lord Lieutenant,
or Chief Secretary which can, does or strives to compel the employing
class in Ireland to take advantage of the crowded state of the labour
market and use it to depress the wages of their workers to the present
starvation level.

To the greed of our moneyed class, operating upon the social conditions
created by landlordism and capitalism and maintained upon foreign
bayonets, such a result is alone attributable, and no amount of
protestations should convince intelligent workers that the class which
grinds them down to industrial slavery can, at the same moment, be
leading them forward to national liberty. True patriotism seeks the
welfare of each in the happiness of all, and is inconsistent with the
selfish desire for worldly wealth which can only be gained by the
spoliation of less favoured fellow-mortals. It is the mission of the
working class to give to patriotism this higher, nobler, significance.
This can only be done by our working class, as the only universal,
all-embracing class, organizing as a distinct political party,
recognizing in Labour the cornerstone of our economic edifice and the
animating principle of our political action.

Hence the rise of the Irish Socialist Republican Party. We are resolved
upon national independence as the indispensable groundwork of industrial
emancipation, but we are equally resolved to have done with the
leadership of a class whose social charter is derived from oppression.
Our policy is the outcome of long reflection upon the history and
peculiar circumstances of our country. In an independent country the
election of a majority of Socialist representatives to the Legislature
means the conquest of political power by the revolutionary party, and
consequently the mastery of the military and police forces of the State,
which would then become the ally of revolution instead of its enemy.

In the work of social reconstruction which would then ensue, the State
power -- created by the propertied classes for their own class purposes
-- would serve the new social order as a weapon in its fight against
such adherents of the privileged orders as strove to resist the gradual
extinction of their rule.

Ireland not being an independent country, the election of a majority of
Socialist Republicans would not, unfortunately, place the fruits of our
toil so readily within our grasp. But it would have another, perhaps no
less important, effect. It would mean that for the first time in Irish
history a clear majority of the responsible electorate of the Irish
nation -- men capable of bearing arms - had registered at the
ballot-boxes their desire for separation from the British Empire. Such a
verdict, arrived at not in the tumultuous and, too often, fickle
enthusiasm of monster meetings, but in the sober atmosphere and judicial
calmness of the polling-booth, would ring like a trumpet-call in the
ears alike of our rulers and of every enemy of the British imperial
system. That would not long survive such a consummation. Its enemies
would read in the verdict thus delivered at the ballot-box a passionate
appeal for help against the oppressor, the moral insurrection of the
Irish people, which a small expeditionary force and war material might
convert into such a military insurrection as would exhaust the power of
the empire at home and render its possessions an easy prey abroad. How
long would such an appeal be disregarded?

Meanwhile, there is no temporary palliative of our misery, no material
benefit which Parliament can confer that could not be extorted by the
fear of a revolutionary party seeking to create such a situation as I
have described, sooner than by any action of even the most determined
Home Rule or other constitutional party. Thus, alike for present
benefits and for future freedom, the revolutionary policy is the best. A
party aiming at a merely political Republic and proceeding upon such
lines, would always be menaced by the danger that some astute English
Statesman might, by enacting a sham measure of Home Rule, disorganize
the Republican forces by an appearance of concessions, until the
critical moment had passed. But the Irish Socialist Republican Party, by
calling attention to evils inherent in that social system of which the
British Empire is but the highest political expres sign, founds its
propaganda upon discontent with social iniquities which will only pass
away when the Empire is no more, and thus implants in all its followers
an undying, ineradicable hatred of the enemy, which will remain
undisturbed and unmollified by any conceivable system of political
quackery whatever.

An Irish Socialist Republic ought, therefore, to be the rallying cry of
all our countrymen who desire to see the union and triumph of Patriotism
and Labour.

**Editorial Note:**

Whilst in full sympathy with Mr Connolly's views on the labour and
social questions, we are absolutely opposed to the scheme he puts
forward for the formation of an Irish Republican party in the British
Parliament. Any conscientious Republican would stick at the oath of
allegiance and no reliance could be placed on what John O'Leary calls
"double-oathed" men. John Mitchel allowed himself to be returned as a
representative, but absolutely refused to entertain the idea of claiming
his seat. He looked upon his election merely as a declaration in favour
of his unalterable rebel principles. We would like to have this question
debated.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.8.2003
