---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Plekhanov](../../index.htm)

 

## G.V. Plekhanov

# Second Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democrats

### (1887)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Written:** 1887\
**Source:**Georgi Plekhanov: **Selected Philosopohical Works**, Vol I.\
**Publisher:** Progress Publishers, 1974.\
**Transcribed:** [Sally Ryan](../../../../admin/volunteers/steering.htm)
for marxists.org in 2000.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Russian Social-Democrats, like the Social-Democrats in other
countries, aim at the complete emancipation of labour from the yoke of
capital. This emancipation can be achieved by the transfer to social
ownership of *all the means and objects* of production, a transfer which
will entail:

a\) the abolition of the present commodity production (i.e., the
purchase and sale of products on the market) and

b\) its replacement by a new system of social production according to a
previously drawn-up plan with a view to satisfying the requirements both
of society as a whole and of each one of its members within the limits
permitted by the condition of the productive forces at the given time.

This communist revolution will give rise to the most radical changes in
the whole constitution of social and international relationships.

Replacing the present mastery of the product over the producer by that
of the producer over the product, it will introduce consciousness where
there now reigns blind economic necessity; by simplifying and giving
purpose to all social relationships it will at the same time provide
each citizen with the real economic possibility of participating
directly in the discussion and decision of all social matters.

This direct participation of citizens in the management of social
affairs presupposes the abolition of the present system of political
representation and its replacement by *direct popular legislation.*

Moreover, the international character of the impending economic
revolution may now already be foreseen. Given the present development of
international exchange, it is possible to consolidate this revolution
only by all or at least several of the civilised societies taking part
in it. Hence follows the *solidarity of interests between producers of
all countries,* already recognised and proclaimed by the International
Working Men\'s Association.

But as the emancipation of the workers must be the matter of the workers
themselves, as the interests of labour in general are diametrically
opposed to the interests of the exploiters, and as, therefore, the
higher classes will always hinder the above described reorganisatlon of
the social relationships, the necessary preliminary condition for this
reorganisation is the *seizure of political power by the working class
in each of the countries concerned.* Only this temporary domination of
the working class can paralyse the efforts of counter-revolution and put
an end to the existence of classes and their struggle.

This political task introduces an element of variety into the programmes
of the Social-Democrats in the different states, according to the social
conditions in each of them individually.

The practical tasks, and consequently the programmes of the
Social-Democrats, are bound to be, naturally, more complicated in
countries where modern capitalist production is as yet only striving to
become dominant and where the working masses are oppressed by a double
yoke-that of rising capitalism and that of obsolescent patriarchal
economy. In such countries the Social-Democrats must strive for such
forms of social structure, as transitional stages, as are already in
existence in the advanced countries and are necessary for the further
development of the working-class party. Russia is in precisely such a
position. Capitalism has achieved enormous success there since the
abolition of serfdom. The old system of natural economy is giving place
to commodity production and thereby opening up an enormous home market
for large-scale industry. The patriarchal, communal forms of peasant
land tenure are rapidly disintegrating, the village commune is being
transformed into a mere means of enslaving the peasant population to the
state and in many localities it is also an instrument for the
exploitation of the poor by the rich. At the same time, binding to the
land the interests of an enormous section of the producers, it hinders
their intellectual and political development by limiting their outlook
to the narrow bounds of village traditions. The Russian revolutionary
movement, whose victory would be first and foremost profitable to the
peasants, finds among them hardly any support, sympathy or
understanding. The main bulwark of absolutism is precisely the political
indifference and intellectual backwardness of the peasantry. An
inevitable consequence of this is the powerlessness and timidity of
those educated sections of the higher classes whose material,
intellectual and moral interests are in contradiction with the present
political system. Raising their voice in the name of the people, they
are surprised to see the people indifferent to their calls. Hence the
instability of our intelligentsia\'s political outlooks and occasionally
their discouragement and complete disappointment.

Such a state of affairs would be absolutely hopeless if the movement of
Russian economic relationships referred to had not created new
opportunities of success for those defending the interests of the
working people. The disintegration of the village commune is creating in
our country a new class of industrial proletariat. Being more receptive,
mobile and developed, this class responds to the call of the
revolutionaries more easily than the backward rural population. Whereas
the ideal of the village commune member lies in the past, under
conditions of patriarchal economy, the political complement of which was
tsarist autocracy, the lot of the industrial worker can be improved only
thanks to the development of the more modern and free forms of communal
life. In this class our people find themselves for the first time under
economic conditions which are common to all civilised peoples and it is
therefore only through the intermediary of this class that the people
can take part in the progressive strivings of civilised humanity. On
these grounds the Russian Social-Democrats consider as their first and
principal obligation the formation of a revolutionary workers\' party.
The growth and development of such a party, however, will find a very
powerful obstacle in modern Russian absolutism.

That is why the struggle against absolutism is obligatory even for those
working-class groups which are now the embryo of the future Russian
Workers\' party. The overthrow of absolutism must be the first of their
political tasks.

The principal means for the political struggle of the workers\' groups
against absolutism, in the opinion of the Russian Social Democrats, is
agitation among the working class and the further spread of socialist
ideas and revolutionary organisations among that class. Closely bound
together in a single harmonic whole, these organisations, not content
with isolated clashes with the government, will not delay in passing, at
the convenient time, to general and resolute attacks upon it and in this
they will not stop even at so-called acts of terrorism if that proves to
be necessary in the interests of the struggle.

The aim of the struggle of the workers\' party against absolutism is to
win a democratic constitution which shall guarantee:

1\) The right to vote and be elected to the Legislative Assembly as well
as to the provincial and communal self-government bodies, for every
citizen who has not been sentenced by court to deprivation of his
political rights for certain shameful activities strictly specified by
law.

2\) A money payment fixed by law for the representatives of the people,
which will allow them to be elected from the poorest classes of the
population.

3)Universal, civil, free and compulsory education, the state being
obliged to provide poor children with food, clothing and school
requisites.

4\) Inviolability of the person and home of citizens.

5\) Unlimited freedom of conscience, speech, the press, assembly and
association.

6\) Freedom of movement and of employment.

7\) Complete equality of all citizens irrespective of religion and
racial origin.

8\) The replacement of the standing army by general arming of the
people.

9\) A revision of all our civil and criminal legislation, the abolition
of division according to estates and of punishments incompatible with
human dignity.

Basing itself on these fundamental political demands, the workers\'
party puts forward a number of immediate economic demands, such as:

1\) Radical revision of our agrarian relations, i.e., the conditions for
the redemption of land and its allotment to peasant communes. The right
to renounce allotments and leave the village communes for those peasants
who find this convenient for themselves, etc.

2\) The abolition of the present system of dues and the institution of a
progressive taxation system.

3\) Legislative regulation of relations between workers (in town and
country) and employers, and the organisation of the appropriate
*inspection with representation of the workers.*

4\) State assistance for production associations organised in all
possible branches of agriculture, the mining and manufacturing
industries (by peasants, miners, factory and plant workers, craftsmen,
etc.).

These demands are as favourable to the interests of the peasants as to
those of the industrial workers; hence, aiming at their implementation,
the workers\' party will open for itself a broad road for an approach to
the agrarian population. The proletarian ejected from the countryside as
an impoverished member of the village commune will return there as a
Social-Democratic agitator. His appearance in that role will change the
present hopeless fate of the village commune. The disintegration of the
latter is unavoidable only as long as this very disintegration has not
created a new popular force capable of putting an end to the reign of
capitalism. That force is the working class and the poorest peasantry
drawn in its wake.

*Note.* As is seen from above, the Russian Social-Democrats presume that
the work of the intelligentsia, particularly under present-day
conditions of social and political struggle, must be aimed first at the
most advanced part of the working population, which consists of the
industrial workers. Having secured the powerful support of this section,
the Social-Democrats may have far greater hope of success in extending
their action to the peasantry, especially when they have won freedom of
agitation and propaganda. Incidentally, it goes without saying that even
at present, people who are in direct touch with the peasantry could, by
their work among them, render an important service to the socialist
movement in Russia. The Social-Democrats, far from rejecting such
people, will exert all their efforts to agree with them on the basic
principles and methods of their work.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 21.8.2003
