---
layout: default
title: 
---
## V. I. Lenin

### Draft Theses on

# National and Colonial Questions

### For The Second Congress Of The Communist International[^\[1\]^](#fw01){#bk01}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Written:]{.info style="text-indent: 0%"} 5 June, 1920\
[First Published:]{.info} Published in June, 1920; Published according
to the manuscript and checked against the text of the proof-sheet, as
amended by V. I. Lenin\
[Source:]{.info} Lenin's [*Collected Works*](../../cw/index.htm), 2nd
English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, [Volume
31](../../cw/volume31.htm), pages 144-151\
[Translated:]{.info} Julius Katzer\
[Transcription\\HTML Markup:]{.info} [David
Walters](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/walters.htm) & [R.
Cymbala](../../../../../admin/volunteers/biographies/rcymbala.htm)\
[Copyleft:]{.info} V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.
Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the
terms of the [GNU Free Documentation
License](../../../../../admin/legal/fdl.htm)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In submitting for discussion by the Second Congress of the Communist
International the following draft theses on the national and the
colonial questions I would request all comrades, especially those who
possess concrete information on any of these very complex problems, to
let me have their opinions, amendments, addenda and concrete remarks *in
the most concise form* (*no mree than two or three pages* ),
particularly on the following points:\
`    `Austrian experience;\
`    `Polish-Jewish and Ukrainian experience;\
`    `Alsace-Lorraine and Belgium;\
`    `Ireland;\
`    `Danish-German, Italo-French and Italo-Slav relations;\
`    `Balkan experience;\
`    `Eastern peoples;\
`    `The struggle against Pan-Islamism;\
`    `Relations in the Caucasus;\
`    `The Bashkir and Tatar Republics;\
`    `Kirghizia; Turkestan, its experience;\
`    `Negroes in America;\
`    `Colonies;\
`    `China-Korea-Japan.

N. Lenin

June 5, 1920

1\) An abstract or formal posing of the problem of equality in general
and national equality in particular is in the very nature of bourgeois
democracy. Under the guise of the equality of the individual in general,
bourgeois democracy proclaims the formal or legal equality of the
property-owner and the proletarian, the exploiter and the exploited,
thereby grossly deceiving the oppressed classes. On the plea that all
men are absolutely equal, the bourgeoisie is transforming the idea of
equality, which is itself a reflection of relations in commodity
production, into a weapon in its struggle against the abolition of
classes. The real meaning of the demand for equality consists in its
being a demand for the abolition of classes.

2\) In conformity with its fundamental task of combating bourgeois
democracy and exposing its falseness and hypocrisy, the Communist Party,
as the avowed champion of the proletarian struggle to overthrow the
bourgeois yoke, must base its policy, in the national question too, not
on abstract and formal principles but, first, on a precise appraisal of
the specific historical situation and, primarily, of economic
conditions; second, on a clear distinction between the interests of the
oppressed classes, of working and exploited people, and the general
concept of national interests as a whole, which implies the interests of
the ruling class; third, on an equally clear distinction between the
oppressed, dependent and subject nations and the oppressing, exploiting
and sovereign nations, in order to counter the bourgeois-democratic lies
that play down this colonial and financial enslavement of the vast
majority of the world's population by an insignificant minority of the
richest and advanced capitalist countries, a feature characteristic of
the era of finance capital and imperialism.

3\) The imperialist war of 1914-18 has very clearly revealed to all
nations and to the oppressed classes of the whole world the falseness of
bourgeois-democratic phrases, by practically demonstrating that the
Treaty of Versailles of the celebrated "Western democracies" is an even
more brutal and foul act of violence against weak nations than was the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk of the German Junkers and the Kaiser. The League
of Nations and the entire post war policy of the Entente reveal this
truth with even greater clarity and distinctness. They are everywhere
intensifying the revolutionary struggle both of the proletariat in the
advanced countries and of the toiling masses in the colonial and
dependent countries. They are hastening the collapse of the
petty-bourgeois nationalist illusions that nations can live together in
peace and equality under capitalism.

4\) From these fundamental premises it follows that the Communist
International's entire policy on the national and the colonial questions
should rest primarily on a closer union of the proletarians and the
working masses of all nations and countries for a joint revolutionary
struggle to overthrow the landowners and the bourgeoisie. This union
alone will guarantee victory over capitalism, without which the
abolition of national oppression and inequality is impossible.

5\) The world political situation has now placed the dictatorship of the
proletariat on the order of the day. World political developments are of
necessity concentrated on a single focus---the struggle of the world
bourgeoisie against the Soviet Russian Republic, around which are
inevitably grouped, on the one hand, the Soviet movements of the
advanced workers in all countries, and, on the other, all the national
liberation movements in the colonies and among the oppressed
nationalities, who are learning from bitter experience that their only
salvation lies in the Soviet system's victory over world imperialism.

6\) Consequently, one cannot at present confine oneself to a bare
recognition or proclamation of the need for closer union between the
working people of the various nations; a policy must be pursued that
will achieve the closest alliance, with Soviet Russia, of all the
national and colonial liberation movements. The form of this alliance
should be determined by the degree of development of the communist
movement in the proletariat of each country, or of the
bourgeois-democratic liberation movement of the workers and peasants in
backward countries or among backward nationalities.

7\) Federation is a transitional form to the complete unity of the
working people of different nations. The feasibility of federation has
already been demonstrated in practice both by the relations between the
R.S.F.S.R. and other Soviet Republics (the Hungarian,
Finnish[^\[2\]^](#fw02){#bk02} and Latvian[^\[3\]^](#fw03){#bk03} in the
past, and the Azerbaijan and Ukrainian at present), and by the relations
within the R.S.F.S.R. in respect of nationalities which formerly enjoyed
neither statehood nor autonomy (e.g., the Bashkir and Tatar autonomous
republics in the R.S.F.S.R., founded in 1919 and 1920 respectively).

8\) In this respect, it is the task of the Communist International to
further develop and also to study and test by experience these new
federations, which are arising on the basis of the Soviet system and the
Soviet movement. In recognising that federation is a transitional form
to complete unity, it is necessary to strive for ever closer federal
unity, bearing in mind, first, that the Soviet republics, surrounded as
they are by the imperialist powers of the whole world---which from the
military standpoint are immeasurably stronger---cannot possibly continue
to exist without the closest alliance; second, that a close economic
alliance between the Soviet republics is necessary, otherwise the
productive forces which have been ruined by imperialism cannot be
restored and the well-being of the working people cannot be ensured;
third, that there is a tendency towards the creation of a single world
economy, regulated by the proletariat of all nations as an integral
whole and according to a common plan. This tendency has already revealed
itself quite clearly under capitalism and is bound to be further
developed and consummated under socialism.

9\) The Communist International's national policy in the sphere of
relations within the state cannot be restricted to the bare, formal,
purely declaratory and actually non-committal recognition of the
equality of nations to which the bourgeois democrats confine
themselves---both those who frankly admit being such, and those who
assume the name of socialists (such as the socialists of the Second
International).

In all their propaganda and agitation---both within parliament and
outside it---the Communist parties must consistently expose that
constant violation of the equality of nations and of the guaranteed
rights of national minorities which is to be seen in all capitalist
countries, despite their "democratic" constitutions. It is also
necessary, first, constantly to explain that only the Soviet system is
capable of ensuring genuine equality of-nations, by uniting first the
proletarians and then the whole mass of the working population in the
struggle against the bourgeoisie; and, second, that all Communist
parties should render direct aid to the revolutionary movements among
the dependent and underprivileged nations (for example, Ireland, the
American Negroes, etc.) and in the colonies.

Without the latter condition, which is particularly important, the
struggle against the oppression of dependent nations and colonies, as
well as recognition of their right to secede, are but a false signboard,
as is evidenced by the parties of the Second International.

10\) Recognition of internationalism in word, and its replacement in
deed by petty-bourgeois nationalism and pacifism, in all propaganda,
agitation and practical work, is very common, not only among the parties
of the Second International, but also among those which have withdrawn
from it, and often even among parties which now call themselves
communist. The urgency of the struggle against this evil, against the
most deep-rooted petty-bourgeois national prejudices, looms ever larger
with the mounting exigency of the task of converting the dictatorship of
the proletariat from a national dictatorship (i.e., existing in a single
country and incapable of determining world politics) into an
international one (i.e., a dictatorship of the proletariat involving at
least several advanced countries, and capable of exercising a decisive
influence upon world politics as a whole). Petty-bourgeois nationalism
proclaims as internationalism the mere recognition of the equality of
nations, and nothing more. Quite apart from the fact that this
recognition is purely verbal, petty-bourgeois nationalism preserves
national self-interest intact, whereas proletarian internationalism
demands, first, that the interests of the proletarian struggle in any
one country should be subordinated to the interests of that struggle on
a world-wide scale, and, second, that a nation which is achieving
victory over the bourgeoisie should be able and willing to make the
greatest national sacrifices for the overthrow of international capital.

Thus, in countries that are already fully capitalist and have workers'
parties that really act as the vanguard of the proletariat, the struggle
against opportunist and petty-bourgeois pacifist distortions of the
concept and policy of internationalism is a primary and cardinal task.

11\) With regard to the more backward states and nations, in which
feudal or patriarchal and patriarchal-peasant relations predominate, it
is particularly important to bear in mind:

first, that all Communist parties must assist the bourgeois-democratic
liberation movement in these countries, and that the duty of rendering
the most active assistance rests primarily with the workers of the
country the backward nation is colonially or financially dependent on;

second, the need for a struggle against the clergy and other influential
reactionary and medieval elements in backward countries;

third, the need to combat Pan-Islamism and similar trends, which strive
to combine the liberation movement against European and American
imperialism with an attempt to strengthen the positions of the khans,
landowners, mullahs, etc.;[\[In the proofs Lenin inserted a brace
opposite points 2 and 3 and wrote "2 and 3 to be
united".*---Editor*.\]]{.inote}

fourth, the need, in backward countries, to give special support to the
peasant movement against the landowners, against landed proprietorship,
and against all manifestations or survivals of feudalism, and to strive
to lend the peasant movement the most revolutionary character by
establishing the closest possible alliance between the West European
communist proletariat and the revolutionary peasant movement in the
East, in the colonies, and in the backward countries generally. It is
particularly necessary to exert every effort to apply the basic
principles of the Soviet system in countries where pre-capitalist
relations predominate---by setting up "working people's Soviets", etc.;

fifth, the need for a determined struggle against attempts to give a
communist colouring to bourgeois-democratic liberation trends in the
backward countries; the Communist International should support
bourgeois-democratic national movements in colonial and backward
countries only on condition that, in these countries, the elements of
future proletarian parties, which will be communist not only in name,
are brought together and trained to understand their special tasks,
i.e., those of the struggle against the bourgeois-democratic movements
within their own nations. The Communist International must enter into a
temporary alliance with bourgeois democracy in the colonial and backward
countries, but should not merge with it, and should under all
circumstances uphold the independence of the proletarian movement even
if it is in its most embryonic form;

sixth, the need constantly to explain and expose among the broadest
working masses of all countries, and particularly of the backward
countries, the deception systematically practised by the imperialist
powers, which, under the guise of politically independent states, set up
states that are wholly dependent upon them economically, financially and
militarily. Under present-day international conditions there is no
salvation for dependent and weak nations except in a union of Soviet
republics.

12\) The age-old oppression of colonial and weak nationalities by the
imperialist powers has not only filled the working masses of the
oppressed countries with animosity towards the oppressor nations, but
has also aroused distrust in these nations in general, even in their
proletariat. The despicable betrayal of socialism by the majority of the
official leaders of this proletariat in 1914-19, when "defence of
country" was used as a social-chauvinist cloak to conceal the defence of
the "right" of their "own" bourgeoisie to oppress colonies and fleece
financially dependent countries, was certain to enhance this perfectly
legitimate distrust. On the other hand, the more backward the country,
the stronger is the hold of small-scale agricultural production,
patriarchalism and isolation, which inevitably lend particular strength
and tenacity to the deepest of petty-bourgeois prejudices, i.e., to
national egoism and national narrow-mindedness. These prejudices are
bound to die out very slowly, for they can disappear only after
imperialism and capitalism have disappeared in the advanced countries,
and after the entire foundation of the backward countries' economic life
has radically changed. It is therefore the duty of the class-conscious
communist proletariat of all countries to regard with particular caution
and attention the survivals of national sentiments in the countries and
among nationalities which have been oppressed the longest; it is equally
necessary to make certain concessions with a view to more rapidly
overcoming this distrust and these prejudices. Complete victory over
capitalism cannot be won unless the proletariat and, following it, the
mass of working people in all countries and nations throughout the world
voluntarily strive for alliance and unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Endnotes

[\[1\]](#bk01){#fw01} Notes to "Preliminary Draft Theses on the National
and the Colonial Questions" were received by Lenin from G. V. Chicherin,
N. N. Krestinsky, J. V. Stalin, M. G. Rafes, Y. A. Preobrazhensky, N. D.
Lapinsky, and I. Nedelkov (N. Shablin), representative of the Bulgarian
Communists, as well as from a number of leaders in Bashkiria, Kirghizia,
and Turkestan. Along with correct ideas, the notes contained certain
grave errors. Thus, Chicherin gave a wrong interpretation to Lenin's
theses on the necessity of support for national liberation movements and
on agreements with the national bourgeoisie, without due regard for
Lenin's distinction between the bourgeoisie and the peasantry. With
regard to this Lenin wrote: "I lay *greater* stress on the alliance with
the peasantry (which does *not quite* mean the bourgeoisie)" (Central
Party Archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C.
C.P.S.U.). Referring to the relations between the future socialist
Europe and the economically underdeveloped and dependent countries,
Preobrazhensky wrote: ". . . if it proves impossible to reach economic
agreement with the leading national groups, the latter will inevitably
be suppressed by force and economically important regions will be
compelled to join a union of European Republics." Lenin decisively
objected to this remark: ". . . it goes too far. It cannot be proved,
and it is wrong to say that *suppression* by force is "inevitable". That
is radically wrong" (see *Voprosy Istorii KPSS* \[*Problems of the
C.P.S.U. History*\] 1958, No. 2, p. 16).

A grave error was made by Stalin, who did not agree with Lenin's
proposition on the difference between federal relations among the Soviet
republics based on autonomy, and federal relations among independent
republics. In a letter to Lenin, dated June 12, 1920, he declared that
in reality "there is no difference between these two types of federal
relations, or else it is so small as to be negligible". Stalin continued
to advocate this later, when, in 1922, he proposed the "autonomisation"
of the independent Soviet republics. These ideas were criticised in
detail by Lenin in his article "The Question of Nationalities or
'Autonomisation'", and in his letter to members of the Political Bureau
"On the Formation of the U.S.S.R" (see present edition, Vol. 36, and
Lenin Miscellany XXXVI; pp. 496-98).

[\[2\]](#bk02){#fw02} As a result of the revolution which commenced in
Finland on January 27, 1918, the bourgeois government of Svinhufvud was
overthrown and the working class assumed power. On January 29, the
revolutionary government of Finland, the Council of People's
Representatives was formed by Edvard Gylling, Yrjö Sirola, Otto
Kuusinen, A. Taimi and others. The following were among the most
important measures taken by the workers' government: the law on the
transfer to landless peasants, without indemnification, of the land they
actually tilled; tax-exemption for the poorest sections of the
population; the expropriation of enterprises whose owners had fled the
country; the establishment of state control over private banks (their
functions being assumed by the State Bank).

On March 1, 1918, a treaty between the Finnish Socialist Workers'
Republic and the R.S.F.S.R. was signed in Petrograd. Based on the
principle of complete equality and respect for the sovereignty of the
two sides, this was the first treaty in world history to be signed
between two socialist countries.

The proletarian revolution, however, was victorious only in the south of
Finland. The Svinhufvud government concentrated all
counter-revolutionary forces in the north of the country, and appealed
to the German Kaiser's government for help. As a result of German armed
intervention, the Finnish revolution was put down in May 1918, after a
desperate civil war. White terror reigned in the country, tens of
thousands of revolutionary workers and peasants were executed or
tortured to death in the prisons.

[\[3\]](#bk03){#fw03}As a result of mass action by the Lettish
proletariat and peasantry against the German invaders and the
counter-revolutionary government of Ulmanis, a provisional Soviet
government was established in Latvia on December 17, 1918, which issued
a Manifesto on the assumption of state power by the Soviets. Soviet
Russia gave fraternal help to the Lettish people in their struggle to
establish Soviet rule and strengthen the Latvian Soviet Socialist
Republic.

Under the leadership of the Latvian Communist Party and the Latvian
Soviet Government, a Red Army was formed, the landed estates were
confiscated, the banks and big commercial and industrial enterprises
were nationalised, social insurance and an eight-hour working day were
introduced, and a system of public catering for working people was
organised.

In March 1919, German troops and the whiteguards, armed and equipped by
the U.S. and the Entente imperialists, attacked Soviet Latvia. In May
they captured Riga, the capital of Soviet Latvia. After fierce fighting
the entire territory of Latvia had been overrun by the interventionists
by the beginning of 1920. The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie
established a regime of bloody terror, thousands of revolutionary
workers and peasants being killed or thrown into prison.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Collected Works Volume 31](../../cw/volume31.htm)\
[Collected Works Table of Contents](../../cw/index.htm)\
[Lenin Works Archive](../../index.htm)

 

 

 
