---
layout: default
title: 
---
[MIA](../../../../index.htm){#top}  \> 
[Archive](../../../index.htm)  \>  [Connolly](../../index.htm)

 

## James Connolly

 

# Ballots, Bullets, Or ---

### (1909)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From **The International Socialist Review**, October, 1909.\
Transcribed by [*The James Connolly
Society*](http://www.wageslave.org/jcs/) in 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Not the least of the services our comrade, Victor Berger, has rendered
to the socialist cause must be accounted the writing and publishing of
that now famous article in which he draws the attention of his readers
to the possibility that the ballot will yet be stricken from the hands
of the socialist party, and raises the question of the action our party
must take in such an emergency.

It must be confessed, however, that the question has not been faced at
all squarely by the majority of the critics who have unburdened
themselves upon the matter. We have had much astonishment expressed, a
great deal of deprecation of the introduction of the question at the
present time, and not a little sly fun poked at our comrade. But one
would have thought that a question of such a character brought up for
discussion by a comrade noted for his moderation -- a moderation by some
thought to be akin to compromise -- would have induced in socialists a
desire to seriously consider the elements of fact and probability behind
and inspiring the question. What are these facts?

Briefly stated, the facts as they are known to us all are that all over
the United States the capitalist class is even now busily devising ways
and means by which the working class can be disfranchised. In California
it is being done by exacting an enormous sum for the right to place a
ticket upon the ballot; in Minnesota the same end is sought by a new
primary law; in the south by an educational (?) test to be imposed only
upon those who possess no property; in some States by imposing a
property qualification upon candidates; and all over by wholesale
counting out of socialist ballots, and wholesale counting in of
fraudulent votes. In addition to this we have had in Colorado and
elsewhere many cases where the hired thugs of the capitalists forcibly
occupied the polling booths, drove away the real voters and themselves
voted in the name of every citizen on the list.

These are a few of the facts. Now what are the probabilities? One is
that the capitalist class will not wait until we get a majority at the
ballot box, but will precipitate a fight upon some fake issue whilst the
mass of the workers are still undecided as to the claims of capitalism
and socialism.

Another is that even if the capitalist class were law-abiding enough, or
had miscalculated public opinion enough, to wait until the socialists
had got a majority at the ballot box in some presidential election, they
would then refuse to vacate their offices, or to recognise the election,
and with the Senate and the military in their hands would calmly proceed
to seat those candidates for President, etc., who had received the
highest votes from the capitalistic electorate. As to the first of these
probabilities, the issue upon which a socialist success at the ballot
box can be averted from the capitalist class is already here, and I
expect at any time to see it quietly but effectually materialise. It is
this: we have often seen the capitalist class invoke the aid of the
Supreme Court in order to save it some petty annoyance by declaring
unconstitutional some so-called labour or other legislation. Now I can
conceive of no reason why this same Supreme Court cannot be invoked to
declare unconstitutional any or all electoral victories of the socialist
party. Some may consider this farfetched. I do not consider it nearly as
far-fetched as the decision which applied the antitrust laws solely to
trade unions, or used the Inter-State Commerce Acts to prevent strikes
upon railways.

I consider that if the capitalist class appealed to the Supreme Court
and interrogated it to declare whether a political party which aimed at
overthrowing the constitution of the United States could legally operate
to that end within the constitution of the United States the answer in
the negative which that Court would undoubtedly give would not only be
entirely logical, but would also be extremely likely to satisfy every
shallow thinker and fanatical ancestor-worshipper in the country.

And if such an eventuality arose, and the ballot was, in comrade
Berger's words, stricken out of our hands, it would be too late then to
propound the query which our comrade propounds now, and ask our friends
and supporters: what are you going to do about it?

But even while admitting, nay, urging all this on behalf of the
pertinency of our comrade's query, it does not follow that I therefore
endorse or recommend his alternative. The rifle is, of course, a useful
weapon under certain circumstances, but these circumstances are little
likely to occur. This is an age of complicated machinery in war as in
industry, and confronted with machine guns, and artillery which kill at
seven miles distance, rifles are not likely to be of much material value
in assisting in the solution of the labour question in a proletarian
manner. It would do comrade Berger good to read a little of the
conquests of his countryman, Count Zeppelin, over the domain of the air,
and thus think of the futility of opposing even an armed working class
to such a power as the airship. Americans have been so enamoured of the
achievements of the Wright brothers that too little attention has been
paid to the development of the balloon by Zeppelin. Yet in his hands it
has evolved into the most perfect and formidable fighting machine ever
dreamt of. The words 'dirigible balloon' seem scarcely applicable to his
creation. It is a balloon, and more. It is a floating ship, divided into
a large number of separate compartments, so that the piercing of one
even by a shell leaves the others intact and the machine still floating.
Nothing less than fire can menace it with immediate destruction. It can
carry seventeen tons and with that weight on board can be guided at
will, perform all sorts of figures and evolutions, rise or descend,
travel fast or remain stationary. It has already been equipped with a
quick-firing Krupp gun and shells made for its own special use, and at
the tests of the German army has proven itself capable of keeping up a
rapid and sustained fire without interfering with its floating or
manoeuvring powers. No army on earth, even of highly trained and
disciplined men, could withstand an attack from ten of those monsters
for as many minutes. It is more than probable that the development of
these machines will eventuate in an armed truce from military conquest
by the international capitalist class, the consecration of the flying
machine to the cold task of holding in check the working class, and the
making safe and profitable all sorts of attacks upon social and
political rights. In facing such a weapon in the hands of our
remorseless and unscrupulous masters the gun of comrade Victor Berger
will be as ineffective as the paper ballot in the hands of a reformer.

Is the outlook, then, hopeless? No! We still have the opportunity to
forge a weapon capable of winning the fight for us against political
usurpation and all the military powers of earth, sea or air. That weapon
is to be forged in the furnace of the struggle in the workshop, mine,
factory or railroad, and its name is industrial unionism.

A working class organised on the lines on which the capitalist class has
built its industrial plants today, regarding every such plant as the
true unit of organisation and society as a whole as the sum total of
those units, and ever patiently indoctrinated with the idea that the
mission of unionism is to take hold of the industrial equipment of
society, and erect itself into the real holding and administrative force
of the world; such a revolutionary working class would have a power at
its command greater than all the achievements of science can put in the
hands of the master class. An injunction forbidding the workers of an
industrial union to do a certain thing in the interest of labour would
be followed by every member of the union doing that thing until jails
became eagerly sought as places of honour, and the fact of having been
in one would be as proudly vaunted as is now service on the field of
Gettysburg; a Supreme Court decision declaring invalid a socialist
victory in a certain district could be met by a general strike of all
the workers in that district, supported by the organisation all over the
country, and by a relentless boycott extending into the private life of
all who supported the fraudulently elected officials. Such a union would
revive and apply to the class war of the workers the methods and
principles so successfully applied by the peasants of Germany in the
Vehmgericht, and by those of the Land League in the land war in Ireland
in the eighties.

And eventually, in case of a Supreme Court decision rendering illegal
the political activities of the socialist party, or instructing the
capitalist officials to refuse to vacate their offices after a national
victory by that party, the industrially organised workers would give the
usurping government a Roland for its Oliver by refusing to recognise its
officers, to transport or feed its troops, to transmit its messages, to
print its notices, or to chronicle its doings by working in any
newspaper which upheld it. Finally, after having thus demonstrated the
helplessness of capitalist officialdom in the face of united action by
the producers (by attacking said officialdom with economic paralysis
instead of rifle bullets) the industrially organised working class could
proceed to take possession of the industries of the country after
informing the military and other coercive forces of capitalism that they
could procure the necessaries of life by surrendering themselves to the
lawfully elected government and renouncing the usurpers at Washington.
Otherwise they would have to try and feed and maintain themselves. In
the face of such organisation the airships would be as helpless as
pirates without a port of call, and military power a broken reed.

The discipline of the military forces before which comrade Berger's
rifles would break like glass would dissolve, and the authority of
officers would be non-effectual if the soldiery were required to turn
into uniformed banditti scouring the country for provisions.

Ireland during the Land League, Paris during the strike of the postmen
and telegraphers, the south of France during the strike of the wine
growers, the strike of the peasants at Parma, Italy, all were miniature
demonstrations of the effectiveness of this method of warfare, all were
so many rehearsals in part for this great drama of social revolution,
all were object lessons teaching the workers how to extract the virtue
from the guns of the political masters.

 

[Top of the page](#top)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 8.8.2003
